
 [pic]
st

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09183/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At  Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
| on 29th October 2015                |On 4th January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   Ms S C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms.L.Hirst, Counsel, instructed by Fadiga and Co,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr C.Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. Although it is the respondent who is appealing I will  continue  to
         refer the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal  for  the
         sake of convenience.

      2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh born on 31 July 1978. She
         was arrested on 14 August 2009 following a complaint. This  led  to
         enquiries  about  her  immigration  status  whereupon  she  claimed
         asylum. She claimed she was from Dhaka where she has five  brothers
         and four sisters, their parents being deceased. In 1993 she married
         a Mr Mustafa Choudhury and lived with his family in  Comilla.  They
         had two children. He was abusive and in 1995 she complained on  two
         occasions to the police. They were unsupportive.

      3. She said on 28 December 2000 she left, taking  their  youngest  son
         and went to live with her brother in Dhaka.  In July 2001 she  flew
         to the United Kingdom accompanied by an agent.  She used a passport
         which did not belong to her. She and the agent stayed in  the  same
         house but they disagreed over money. She moved into a nearby  house
         before moving to London where she had  various  jobs.  She  was  in
         contact  with  her  family  who  told  her  that  her  husband  had
         threatened them.

The first decision

      4. Her claim was refused on 19 August 2009. The respondent  questioned
         her credibility, raising section 8 issues and  the  fact  she  only
         claimed after being apprehended. The respondent did  not  find  the
         Refugee Convention was engaged finding she was not part of a social
         group. In any event, there was sufficiency of protection  available
         and it was reasonable to expect her to relocate  within  Bangladesh
         if there were localised difficulties. She had done  this  when  she
         lived with her brother. Regarding article 8, she had no family life
         in the United Kingdom and any private  life  had  been  established
         when she was here illegally.

      5. The appeal was dealt with under the fast-track  procedure.  It  was
         heard by First-tier Immigration Judge Denson at Yarls  Wood  on  27
         August 2009 and dismissed  on  credibility  grounds.  It  had  been
         argued that the appellant had been  trafficked  but  this  was  not
         accepted. In the alternative, if the  claim  were  true  the  judge
         concluded there was sufficiency of protection. In  RA  and  Other's
         (Particular Social Group- Women) Bangladesh [2005] UK IAT 00070 the
         tribunal  concluded  from  the   objective   evidence   there   was
         discrimination against women but not to the extent in Pakistan  and
         they did not  form  a  particular  social  group.  The  judge  also
         referred to the family support available to the appellant  and  the
         presence of non-government organisations. Regarding article 8 there
         was no family life established. A  private  life  existed  but  her
         removal was proportionate.





The later claim and impugned decision.

      6.  The  appellant  was   not   removed   but   made   various   other
         representations  to  the  respondent  to  remain.  These  were  all
         unsuccessful and a judicial review was brought  by  her.  The  last
         application made was on 26  June  2014  and  again  resulted  in  a
         negative decision of 7 October 2014 and removal directions.

      7. It was the appeal against this decision which  came  before  First-
         tier Judge Beach on  21  April  2015.  The  claim  consisted  of  a
         reassertion of  the  original  index  claim;  the  claim  of  being
         trafficked within the United Kingdom and of the appellant being  in
         abusive  relationships,   including   an   unregistered   religious
         marriage. There was also a reference to her son dying  and  of  her
         having mental illness. The appeal included a  report  from  a  Prof
         Katona who commented on her mental state  and  her  hospitalisation
         from September to October in 2014. There was also medical  evidence
         from a Ms Kralj. There is also  report  from  country  experts,  Dr
         Hoque he gave evidence about societal views in  Bangladesh  and  Dr
         Wilson who had  a  particular  interest  in  domestic  violence  in
         Bangladesh. The appeal was heard by way of submissions only. It was
         contended on behalf of the appellant that in Bangladesh her  family
         no longer supported her. The presenting officer  pointed  out  that
         she had nine siblings in Bangladesh; reliance was placed  upon  the
         previous decision dismissing  her  claim.  It  was  argued  it  was
         sufficiency of protection and medical treatment in Bangladesh.

      8. At paragraph 41 First-tier Judge Beach  pointed  out  the  starting
         point was the previous finding that her account lacked  credibility
         (Para 59 of the first decision). At paragraph 49 Judge Beach  found
         that the medical evidence was not sufficient to show the  appellant
         had been the victim of domestic  violence  in  Bangladesh.  It  was
         pointed out that the report writers had accepted  without  question
         the account given. The judge referred to intervening  events,  such
         as the death of the appellant's son. At paragraph 50 the judge  did
         not accept that the appellant had been  trafficked  to  the  United
         Kingdom. The judge also rejected the claim  of  trafficking  within
         the  United  Kingdom.  The  chronology  provided  referred  to  sex
         exploitation and domestic servitude but  this  was  not  consistent
         with the appellant's own statement. In conclusion the judge adopted
         the findings of the  previous  tribunal  and  found  that  domestic
         violence in Bangladesh did not occur (para 53).

      9. The judge accepted that she had been in an abusive relationship  in
         the United Kingdom but did not find this would  place  her  at  any
         risk on return to Bangladesh (Para 57). The judge  did  not  accept
         that  her  family  would  be  unsupportive  (para  58).  The  judge
         concluded she would not be at risk of persecution as a sufferer  of
         mental health problems. Consequently, the claim under  the  Refugee
         Convention was dismissed.

     10. The judge allowed the appeal on human  rights  grounds.  The  judge
         referred to the appellant having a complex  mental  health  history
         and that she had suffered psychotic episodes. She was described  as
         a vulnerable individual, prone towards abusive relationships  as  a
         consequence. Prof  Katona  provided  a  report  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant in which it was stated there was a significant  and  real
         risk she would self-harm if returned to Bangladesh. At paragraph 69
         the judge states that although objectively she is not  at  risk  in
         Bangladesh she has subjective fears in relation to Bangladesh which
         would affect your well-being. The judge  referred  to  the  medical
         treatment available in the United Kingdom  and  that  she  may  not
         receive effective treatment in Bangladesh. On this basis the appeal
         was allowed, with the judge concluding that article 3 and article 8
         were met.

The Upper Tribunal

     11. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis that the decision  was
         irrational. The judge had found the appellant's claim of events  in
         Bangladesh untrue. She had not established ill-treatment  from  her
         husband; had not been trafficked and was not at risk from  her  own
         family (who were found to be supportive) or from Bangladesh society
         in general. It was perverse therefore for the judge to conclude she
         was at risk because of subjective fears. If the objective claim was
         untrue then there was no basis for a subjective fear.

     12. It was argued  the judge failed to follow the guidance given in J v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629  and
         the high threshold required to satisfy article 3 on a medical basis
         as set out in N v United Kingdom (26565/05) 27/05/20008.

     13. It was also argued  that  the  judge  was  wrong  in  conducting  a
         freestanding article 8 assessment  without  having  regard  to  the
         immigration rules and whether such an assessment was justified. The
         judge failed to  have  regard  to  the  great  weight  due  to  the
         Secretary of State's position in  respect  of  immigration  control
         enshrined in the immigration rules.In carrying out the freestanding
         assessment it was argued the judge failed to have  adequate  regard
         to section 117 and the public interest consideration indicated.

     14. Permission was granted on the basis it  was  arguable  the  judge's
         findings of the risk on return were inconsistent,  having  rejected
         her claim of events in Bangladesh. Permission was also  granted  on
         the basis it was arguable the judge gave inadequate reasons  as  to
         why her removal would breach of article 8 and in particular did not
         engage with section 117.

     15. At hearing the grounds were re argued. Both parties agreed this was
         an error of law found the matter should be  referred  back  to  the
         First-tier tribunal.

Conclusion

     16. Two First-tier judges have disbelieved  the  appellant's  claim  of
         events in Bangladesh. The first issue presented  is  whether  Judge
         Beach's  conclusions  are  inconsistent.  The  judge  found  as  an
         objective fact  the  appellant  has  nothing  to  fear  on  return.
         However, the judge concluded she had a subjective fear which  would
         make  her  return  breach  articles  3  and  8.  The   respondent's
         contention was that there cannot be a genuine subjective fear  from
         something a person has made up.

     17. In considering the challenge I am anxious to consider the reasoning
         as a whole. Paragraph 69 contains the sentence:

             "Although there are findings that the appellant  will  not  be
             objectively at risk in Bangladesh it is clear that her  mental
             state is not such that she would be  able  to  take  on  board
             those findings."

         This is not a consistent statement, given the appellant's claim  of
         events in Bangladesh was not accepted. It only makes sense  if  the
         appellant has now deluded herself into believing what she  made  up
         was  true.   It  may  be  that  the  judge  meant  to  convey  that
         notwithstanding  the  lack  of  credibility  she  is  a  vulnerable
         individual and to return her to Bangladesh would breach  article  3
         and 8.The appellant's representative contends this is not a medical
         case but on the facts found I do not see what else it can be.

     18. The judge accepted she has a complex  mental  health  history;  has
         suffered psychotic episodes and has been an inpatient and  receives
         intensive support from medical professionals. The  judge  found  it
         extremely unlikely she would receive the same level of  support  in
         Bangladesh. She was in abusive relationships in the United  Kingdom
         and the judge concluded that as a vulnerable individual there was a
         risk of her re-entering  abusive  relationships.  Whilst  the  risk
         would be the same in the United Kingdom or in  Bangladesh,  in  the
         United Kingdom there was a backup of State support and safeguarding
          not available in Bangladesh.

     19. Having  regard to what was said in J v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629 I find the judge has failed  to
         set out adequately why her removal would meet the particularly high
         threshold for a breach of article 3 or 8 to occur with a  naturally
         occurring  illness.  The  severity  of  the  risk  and  the  causal
         connection  with  return  are  not  adequately  demonstrated.   The
         decision refers to a complex mental health history and  points  out
         that medical facilities in  the  United  Kingdom  are  most  likely
         better than in Bangladesh but this is not the  test.  The  decision
         refers to Prof Katona being of the opinion there is  a  significant
         and real risk she will self harm. However, the  Professor  has  not
         challenge the truth of the underlying account and  this  must  call
         into question the reliability of this conclusion.

     20. The leave application refers to paragraph 59 of  the  decision  and
         indicates the judge was thereby indicating he was not  at  risk  on
         return simply as a result of her mental  health  problems.  In  the
         context of the decision I take this to mean that he would not  face
         persecution because of societal attitudes towards mental illness in
         Bangladesh.

     21. I find that the decision focuses unduly upon the appellant and does
         not  present  a  balanced  approach  towards  the  need   to   have
         immigration control. There  is  no  reference  to  the  immigration
         rules, particularly to 276 ADE or of section 117. Consideration  of
         the latter cannot be implied from the decision.

     22. In conclusion, I find  that  the  decision  does  contain  material
         errors of law and cannot stand. The reference to a subjective  fear
         is inconsistent with the  finding  that  the  underlying  claim  is
         untrue and objectively.  There  is  no  risk  of  persecution.  The
         decision does not set out adequately the causal link  with  removal
         and the severity of the consequences. Finally, the public  interest
         considerations are not adequately set out.

     23. The decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights
         grounds cannot stand. The findings of the judge in respect  of  the
         Refugee Convention are to be preserved. Those findings were that he
         had not demonstrated she  was  the  victim  of  domestic  abuse  in
         Bangladesh; that he had not been trafficked to or within the United
         Kingdom and that she would not be at  risk  on  return  because  of
         societal attitudes in Bangladesh.

Decision

     24. The decision of the First tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal  on
         human rights grounds is set aside. The appeal is  remitted  to  the
         First tier Tribunal for a rehearing on human rights grounds only.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly


                                                Appeal Number: AA/09183/2014

                                   Between

                                   Ms S C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




                                 DIRECTIONS

      1. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  week
         hearing on human rights grounds only. The findings of Jude Beach in
         respect of the  Refugee  Convention  are  to  be  preserved.  Those
         findings were that she had not demonstrated she was the  victim  of
         domestic abuse in Bangladesh; that she had not been  trafficked  to
         or in the United Kingdom and that she  would  not  be  at  risk  on
         return because of societal attitudes in Bangladesh towards her as a
         single person or someone with mental health needs.

      2. An anonymity Direction is made.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

