

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/09772/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                      |Determination sent          |
|8 April 2013 & 11 June 2013                |11 June 2013                |
|                                           |                            |

                                   Before
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     SK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Pickup, instructed by Legal Rights Partnership
                    (11/6/13 only)
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer (8/4/13
only)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. I continue the anonymity direction made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
      There is evidence before me to the effect  that  the  appellant  is  a
      vulnerable person. Whilst I make  no  findings  in  relation  to  this
      evidence, it is nevertheless appropriate that the appellant be granted
      anonymity unless and  until  a  relevant  Court  or  Tribunal  directs
      otherwise. The appellant is to be referred to as SK  throughout  these
      proceedings.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
      indirectly identify  the  appellant.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
      direction could lead to a contempt of court.


   2. The appellant is a national of Sri  Lanka  born  1  January  1972.  He
      appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State to remove him from the  United  Kingdom,  dated  29
      June 2012. This appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Jhirad
      on 14 January 2013 and dismissed on Refugee  Convention,  Humanitarian
      Protection and Human Rights (articles 2, 3 and 8 ECHR) grounds.


   3. Designated Judge Woodcraft granted the appellant permission to  appeal
      to the Upper Tribunal in a decision dated 11 February 2013. The appeal
      came before me on the 8 April 2013. Neither  the  appellant,  nor  his
      [former] legal representatives, attended the hearing on 8  April.  The
      Tribunal file demonstrated that notices of hearing had  been  sent  by
      first  class  post  both  to  the   appellant   and   to   his   legal
      representatives on the 6 March 2013, at their given addresses. Neither
      notice had been  returned  to  the  Tribunal.  Having  considered  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I concluded  that  the
      hearing ought to proceed despite the appellant's failure to attend.

   4. At the outset of the  hearing  of  8  April  Ms  Isherwood,  properly,
      conceded that the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  contained  an
      error of law such that it ought to be set  aside.  I  agreed  with  Ms
      Isherwood's concession and issued a decision in the following terms on
      the same date:

        5. The First-tier Tribunal's determination is just over 2 pages  in
           length. Whilst brevity is no bad  thing,  a  determination  must
           contain sufficient reasons to enable the losing  party  to  know
           why they have lost.


        6. At paragraph  13  of  her  determination  the  judge  stated  as
           follows: 'My  reasons  for  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
           include those made by the respondent'.


        7. At page 2 of her refusal letter the Secretary  of  State  treats
           the appellant's various representations from 2011  as  a  'fresh
           claim', but concludes that he is not entitled to  leave  in  the
           United Kingdom. The appellant had  a  previous  application  for
           asylum  refused  in  June  2002  and  an  appeal  against   such
           application was dismissed in November 2002.


        8. The appellant produced an eleven page statement, in  large  part
           directly addressing the reasons given by the Secretary of  State
           for refusing his application. Nowhere in her determination  does
           the judge address this evidence. In my conclusion it is an error
           for the judge to  simply  rely  on  the  reasons  given  in  the
           Secretary of  State's  refusal  letter  without  providing  some
           explanation as to why  she  rejected  the  appellant's  evidence
           given in relation to those reasons. Further,  in  my  conclusion
           the judge also failed to take an adequate and lawful approach to
           the two medical reports that had been placed before her  by  the
           appellant.


        9.  I  consequently  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
           Tribunal..."

   5. As a consequence of their being no application for  the  determination
      of the appeal to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  further
      directed in my decision of the 8 April that it  should  remain  before
      the Upper Tribunal.


   6. A further hearing was listed before me for the 11 June 2013. By way of
      a facsimile dated 7 June 2013 the Secretary of State wrote in  support
      of an earlier application made by the appellant seeking an adjournment
      of this hearing, the Secretary of  State  requesting  that  it  should
      instead be 're-scheduled' as a  For  Mention  hearing.  By  way  of  a
      decision communicated to both parties by  facsimile  on  the  10  June
      2013, Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek acceded to the  parties  request;
      'converting' the hearing of the 11 June to a For Mention hearing.


   7. Despite having received a copy of the Judge Kopiezcek's decision,  the
      Secretary of State did not attend the hearing. I was notified  shortly
      before the start of  the  hearing,  via  my  clerk,  that  whilst  the
      Secretary of State had understood that the hearing of 11 June had been
      adjourned, she was not aware that  a  For  Mention  hearing  had  been
      listed in its place. No request was made, however, for the For Mention
      hearing to be adjourned or put back to later in the day to enable  the
      Secretary  of  State  to  be  represented.  In  such  circumstances  I
      proceeded  with  the  For  Mention  hearing  in  the  absence   of   a
      representative from the Secretary of State.

   8. Amongst the matters I was invited to consider at  the  hearing  of  11
      June was an application by the appellant, originally made  in  writing
      on 30 May 2013 [albeit by way of a letter dated 10 May 2013], for  the
      determination of his appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.
      I was informed by Ms Pickup that her solicitors had put the author  of
      the Secretary of State's facsimile of 7 June 2013 on notice, prior  to
      the date of that facsimile, that the appellant had made an application
      to the Tribunal for the hearing of  his  appeal  to  be  remitted.  No
      comment is made by the Secretary of State regarding this issue in  her
      facsimile of 7 June 2013.

   9. The Senior President of the  Tribunals'  Practice  Statement  of  25th
      September 2012 provides as follows:

                 "7.   "Disposal of appeals in Upper Tribunal

             Where under section 12(1) of  the  2007  Act  (proceedings  on
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper  Tribunal  finds  that
             the making of the decision concerned involved the making of an
             error on a point of law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside  the
             decision and, if it does so, must either remit the case to the
             First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2)(b)(i) or  proceed  (in
             accordance with relevant Practice Directions) to  re-make  the
             decision under section 12(2)(b)(ii).


            [7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each occasion  to  proceed
             to re-make the decision instead of remitting the case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that:-


                  (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive  a  party
                      before the First-tier Tribunal  of a fair hearing  or
                      other opportunity for that party's case to be put  to
                      and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
                  (b)  the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding
                      which is necessary in order for the decision  in  the
                      appeal to be re-made is such that, having  regard  to
                      the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate
                      to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."


  10. Given the terms of my decision of 8 April 2013 I  accept  Ms  Pickup's
      submission that the requirements of paragraph 7.2 (b)  of  the  Senior
      President's Practice Statement are fulfilled. In  such  circumstances,
      and given that the hearing of the appeal in the Upper Tribunal has, in
      any event, been adjourned, I conclude that it is appropriate to  remit
      this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for it to be determined  afresh
      and I direct that this be so.


   Decision


      The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  The  Upper
      Tribunal allows the appellant's appeal to the limited extent  that  it
      is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard de novo. To this
      end a Case Management Review Hearing has been fixed for  Taylor  House
      hearing centre on 4 July 2013.






    Signed: M O'Connor
    [pic]
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal                          Dated: 11 June
    2013


































