

                                    [pic]
The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                             Appeal Numbers:
                                             aA/09325/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Determination Promulgated |
|On 3 April 2014                        |                          |
|Prepared 3 April 2014                  |                          |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    U. I.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel instructed by Legal Justice
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. She entered the UK on  9  June
      2011 with a valid grant of entry clearance as the dependent spouse  of
      one with leave to remain as a Tier 4 student. Her husband  is  also  a
      citizen of Pakistan.
   2. On 29 March 2012 the Appellant  was  delivered  of  a  child,  also  a
      citizen of Pakistan. On 31 May 2012 the Appellant's leave to remain in
      the UK expired without any application having been  made  for  further
      leave to remain, and so she became an overstayer. On the same date the
      leave to remain as a Tier 4 student  that  had  been  granted  to  the
      Appellant's spouse also expired. I  am  told,  although  there  is  no
      evidence before me to that effect, that he too became an overstayer at
      that date.
   3. On 22 April 2013 the Appellant made an application  for  discretionary
      leave to remain. On 7 August 2013 the Appellant  made  an  application
      for asylum. The Appellant's case was that she faced  a  risk  of  harm
      from members of both her own family in Pakistan, and the family of her
      husband, as a result of the couple's decision  to  marry  without  the
      permission of their respective families. It  was  said  that  internal
      relocation was not a viable option, and that there  was  no  effective
      state protection against that risk of harm.
   4. On 18 September 2013 the Respondent refused  to  grant  her  leave  to
      remain, and made a decision to remove her to Pakistan, having  decided
      that the account of events upon which her asylum claim was  based  was
      untrue.
   5. The Appellant's appeal against the removal decision was  heard  on  27
      January 2014. It was dismissed in a  Determination  promulgated  on  5
      February 2014 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Duff. In the course of that
      Determination the Judge made a series of adverse findings of fact.  He
      rejected as untrue the Appellant's claim that neither her family,  nor
      her husband's family were aware of their marriage, and her claim  that
      they had not consented to it.
   6. First Tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson granted the Appellant  permission
      to appeal the decision on 25 February 2014.
   7. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice on 11 March 2014.
   8. Thus the matter comes before me.


   The unchallenged findings
   9. Mr Brown accepts that the Judge's findings in paragraphs 24-31 of  the
      Determination are not the subject of any challenge in the  grounds  of
      the application for permission to appeal. Having heard  evidence  from
      the Appellant, her brother in law  (the  brother  of  the  Appellant's
      husband) and her sister in  law  (the  wife  of  the  brother  of  the
      Appellant's husband), the Judge  concluded  that  their  evidence  was
      materially inconsistent with one another, and moreover that it was not
      consistent with the content of the documents in evidence  before  him.
      He rejected the claim that the signatures of  family  members  to  the
      marriage certificate which declared their presence as witnesses to the
      marriage ceremony were forged. As a result the  Judge  rejected  as  a
      complete fabrication the claim that the Appellant had married  against
      the will of her family, and without the knowledge of  either  her  own
      family, or the family of her husband. He found  as  a  fact  that  her
      family did know of the marriage, that members of her family (including
      her mother) did attend the marriage ceremony, and that her family  had
      approved of that marriage. He made the same findings  in  relation  to
      her husband's family. In the circumstances he rejected the claim  that
      she faced any risk of harm from either the members of her own  family,
      or her husband's family, because of marrying without approval.


   The "concession"
  10. Although this does not appear to have  formed  part  of  the  original
      application for asylum, by the hearing  of  the  appeal  it  was  also
      argued that the Appellant had been a victim  in  the  UK  of  domestic
      violence at the hands of her husband, and that as a result she and her
      son faced a risk of future harm  from  him  against  which  there  was
      inadequate state protection in Pakistan. Moreover that she and her son
      faced a risk of future harm both from him, and  from  members  of  his
      family in Pakistan, as a result of the breakdown of the marriage,  and
      in particular her report of violence to the police, which in turn  had
      led to his arrest; by way  of  some  form  of  "revenge"  or  "honour"
      attack.
  11. Before the Judge was evidence  in  the  form  of  a  letter  dated  27
      November 2013 from CAFCASS to the Principal  Registry  of  the  Family
      Division. (There does not appear to have been any  permission  granted
      to the Appellant to disclose this to any third party - but that is  an
      issue for another day.)
  12. The CAFCASS letter reported following enquiries that  the  Appellant's
      husband had been the subject of a police caution  as  a  result  of  a
      report of domestic violence made by the Appellant, that the couple had
      separated as a result of domestic violence, and, that the  Appellant's
      husband was the subject of a domestic violence  injunction  issued  by
      the local County Court.  This  CAFCASS  letter  also  notes  that  the
      Appellant's husband had applied for leave to remain in the UK, but did
      not disclose when  that  application  was  made,  the  basis  of  that
      application, or what (if any) decision had been made upon it.
  13. It is common ground before me that at the start of the hearing of  the
      appeal the Judge attempted to identify the issues with which he had to
      engage. I have been shown the contemporaneous  note  made  by  Counsel
      below (not Mr Brown) which records that there was to be "no  challenge
      that the relationship has broken down  and  dv"  [dv  is  said  to  be
      shorthand for domestic violence] and the contemporaneous note  of  the
      Presenting Officer which records "Violence: as far as Cafcass report -
      Yes". The Judge's record of  proceedings  contains  no  note  of  this
      conversation, and the Determination does not refer to  the  discussion
      at all, or to any concession of fact that was made by the Respondent.
  14. In my judgement there is plainly scope for  dispute  as  to  precisely
      what the Presenting Officer intended, and what precisely he thought he
      was conceding, and indeed what Counsel  had  understood  him  to  have
      conceded. It is possible that the presenting officer  had  not  really
      identified that for himself, but in any event there is in my judgement
      the very real prospect that whatever concession was being made it  was
      inadequately identified to, or by, the Judge,  with  the  result  that
      there was  material  unfairness  in  the  proceedings.  Certainly  the
      Determination contains no passage that suggests the  Judge's  starting
      point was a concession of fact in any terms. In the circumstances I am
      satisfied that the confusion leads to the risk that any concession  of
      fact made by the Respondent was not part of the Judge's evaluation  of
      the evidence as to what, if any, past violence or threats of  violence
      there had been, and what risk there was of future violence.
  15. In paragraph 32 of the Determination the Judge considers the  prospect
      of the Appellant and her spouse having colluded  together  to  make  a
      false claim of violence, and a false admission of violence,  in  order
      that she, and he, might use that claim and that admission in order  to
      acquire an immigration status  in  the  UK  to  which  they  were  not
      entitled. Depending on the terms, such a finding may  well  have  been
      inconsistent  with  what  the  Appellant's  Counsel   understood   the
      Respondent's concession to be.
  16. It is not suggested before me that the Respondent ever advanced such a
      case during the cross-examination of the Appellant, or of any  of  the
      other witnesses, or in closing submissions. Nor is it  suggested  that
      the Judge alerted the parties at any stage during the hearing  to  any
      concern on his part  that  the  evidence  was  inconsistent  with  any
      concession of fact that had been made.
  17. In the circumstances the finding in paragraph 35  that  the  Appellant
      would be returning to Pakistan in circumstances in which  she  enjoyed
      the full support of the  extended  family  of  her  spouse  is  in  my
      judgement unsafe, and it must for that reason be set aside. Before  me
      it is argued that if there was in truth genuine domestic violence  and
      a complaint to the  police  that  led  to  the  husband's  arrest  and
      caution, the Appellant would be highly unlikely to enjoy  the  support
      of members of her husband's family. Indeed she would  be  at  risk  of
      harm from them (and from her husband himself) by way of a  revenge  or
      honour attack for the difficulties that she had caused  by  contacting
      the police. There will  have  to  be  further  consideration  of  that
      argument, and the consideration of the Appellant's own evidence  about
      the practical and financial support she continued to  enjoy  from  her
      husband's brother and wife, once there is clarity over what  (if  any)
      concession of fact the Respondent makes.
  18. To that end the Respondent must reduce to writing the  nature  of  the
      concession (if  any)  that  upon  reflection  she  makes.  It  is  not
      suggested  that  any  unfairness  or  prejudice  will  result  to  the
      Appellant if this is in reality a narrower concession than her  former
      Counsel had understood was made (or indeed that it is  the  withdrawal
      of the concession she  had  understood  was  made),  so  long  as  the
      Appellant has proper notice of the extent of the concession  (if  any)
      and adequate time to prepare for the hearing: CD (Jamaica) [2010] EWCA
      Civ 768. The Tribunal must be put into the position of being  able  to
      decide fairly the real issues of dispute upon their merits.  Thus,  if
      it is conceded only  that  a  report  of  violence  was  made  by  the
      Appellant, resulting in an arrest and a caution of her husband, but it
      is disputed as to whether any genuine domestic violence occurred, then
      the Respondent must say so in terms. If the account of  violence  that
      is relied upon by the Appellant is in dispute because it is not  dealt
      with by way of formal concession  then  the  further  hearing  of  the
      appeal will need to resolve the dispute  between  the  parties  as  to
      whether her account of domestic violence is true. Only then  will  the
      further hearing of the appeal be able to resolve  any  dispute  as  to
      what, if any, risk of harm the Appellant and her son face in the event
      of return to Pakistan, and whether  internal  relocation  would  avoid
      that risk, or whether the authorities  in  Pakistan  provide  adequate
      protection against that risk. Only then will the  further  hearing  of
      the appeal be able to remake the decision upon the Article  8  appeal,
      which at present turns upon the Appellant's claim that she  should  be
      granted DLR in  order  that  she  might  participate  in  the  ongoing
      proceedings in the Gateshead County  Court  between  herself  and  her
      husband over his ability to enjoy contact to their child.
  19. I have in these circumstances considered whether or not to  remit  the
      appeal to the First Tier  Tribunal  for  it  to  be  reheard.  In  the
      circumstances of the appeal I am satisfied that this  is  the  correct
      approach. In circumstances where it would  appear  that  the  relevant
      evidence has not properly been considered by the First Tier  Tribunal,
      the effect of that error of law has been to deprive the  Appellant  of
      the opportunity for his case to be properly considered  by  the  First
      Tier Tribunal; paragraph  7.2(a)  of  the  Practice  Statement  of  25
      September 2012. Moreover the  extent  of  the  judicial  fact  finding
      exercise is such that having regard to the over-riding  objective,  it
      is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to  the  First  Tier
      Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of  25  September
      2012. In any event there is inadequate time  allocated  today  to  the
      hearing to permit me to go on to rehear the appeal.
  20. Having reached that conclusion, with the agreement of  the  parties  I
      make the following directions;
           i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside and the  appeal  is
              remitted to the First Tier Tribunal. The appeal is not to  be
              listed before Judge Duff. The appeal is to be listed  on  the
              first available date allowing  4  hours;  no  interpreter  is
              required. The appeal shall not be listed for any further  CMR
              hearing.
          ii) The unchallenged findings of Judge Duff at  paragraphs  24-31
              of  the  Determination  are  preserved  and  shall  form  the
              starting point for the Tribunal.
         iii) The Respondent shall reduce to writing by  5pm  on  22  April
              2014 what, if any, concession of fact she is prepared to make
              as to the past history of domestic violence  that  is  relied
              upon by the Appellant.
          iv) The Tribunal is likely to be assisted with evidence from  the
              Respondent as  to  the  current  immigration  status  of  the
              Appellant's husband, and whether  there  is  any  outstanding
              application for leave by him, and its nature, or  whether  it
              has been refused (and if so on what basis) and whether  there
              is any current appeal  before  the  Tribunal  that  has  been
              lodged by him. The Respondent shall serve  evidence  on  that
              issue by 5pm on 22 April 2014.
           v) The Anonymity Direction previously made  by  the  First  Tier
              Tribunal is preserved.
  21. It is common ground between the parties that the Upper Tribunal should
      inform the relevant Designated  Judge  of  the  Family  Court  of  the
      preserved findings of fact made by Judge Duff, this decision, and  the
      directions made in relation to  the  Appellant's  ongoing  immigration
      appeal. The relevant Designated Judge is Her Honour Judge Judith Moir,
      and that step shall be taken forthwith. No application is yet made  by
      either party for disclosure of any documents before the Family Court.
  22. I have been shown the Order made on 31 March 2014  by  District  Judge
      Kramer in  current  proceedings  before  the  Gateshead  County  Court
      (FD13P01892) ["the Family Court"]. It is plain that those  proceedings
      are at a very early stage. There is no indication in that  Order  that
      the Family Court has been given  any  further  information  about  the
      immigration status of the Appellant, the  child,  or  the  Appellant's
      husband than that which is  contained  in  the  CAFCASS  letter.  Both
      parties appear to be without representation before the  Family  Court.
      It is likely that the Family Court's case management will be  assisted
      both by being kept informed of the progress of  this  appeal  and  its
      outcome, and by being informed of the progress of any application  for
      immigration status in the UK made by the Appellant's husband.
  23. I have been asked to consider, and I have considered in  the  presence
      of both parties, whether the proper course in these  circumstances  is
      for the Family Court proceedings to be concluded before this appeal is
      listed for further hearing, or whether the proper course is  for  this
      appeal to be determined and for the Family Court to be informed of the
      outcome. I have had regard to the guidance to be found in  RS  (India)
      [2012] UKUT 218 and to the Protocol on  the  exchange  of  information
      between the Family Court and the Tribunal. Since there  is  plainly  a
      very real issue over the  honesty  of  the  Appellant,  and  thus  the
      veracity of the account she relied upon, and since  it  is  now  plain
      that there is a real dispute between  the  parties  over  whether  the
      Family Court proceedings have only been commenced in  order  to  defer
      the removal of the family from the UK, and since  it  is  not  in  the
      interests of either party before the  Family  Court  to  explore  that
      issue, and since I am satisfied that it should  be  possible  for  the
      Tribunal to resolve the issues of fact at the heart of the appeal well
      before the Family Court would be able to list a full hearing; I am not
      satisfied that it would be appropriate to adjourn the further  hearing
      of the appeal to await the outcome of the Family Court proceedings.
  24. In the circumstances, and having  referred  to  the  Protocol  on  the
      exchange of information between the Family Court and  the  Tribunal  I
      make the following directions;
           i) A copy of this Determination, and the Determination of  Judge
              Duff, shall forthwith be provided  by  the  Tribunal  to  the
              relevant Designated Family Judge,  Her  Honour  Judge  Judith
              Moir.
          ii) The Family Court, through Her Honour Judge Judith Moir, shall
              be kept informed of the  progress  of  this  appeal  and  its
              outcome,  and  of  the  progress  of  any   application   for
              immigration status in the UK made by the Appellant's husband.




Decision

  25. The Determination promulgated on  5  February  2014  did  involve  the
      making of an error of law and accordingly the decision upon the appeal
      is set aside. The appeal is remitted to the First Tier  Tribunal  with
      the following directions;
           i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside and the  appeal  is
              remitted to the First Tier Tribunal. The appeal is not to  be
              listed before Judge Duff. The appeal is to be listed  on  the
              first available date allowing  4  hours;  no  interpreter  is
              required. The appeal shall not be listed for any further  CMR
              hearing.
          ii) The unchallenged findings of Judge Duff at  paragraphs  24-31
              of the Determination are preserved.
         iii) The Respondent shall reduce to writing by  5pm  on  22  April
              2014 what, if any, concession of fact she is prepared to make
              as to the past history of domestic violence  that  is  relied
              upon by the Appellant. If that history is not dealt  with  by
              way of concession then the further hearing of the appeal will
              seek to resolve any dispute between the  parties  as  to  the
              true nature and true extent of any  past  domestic  violence.
              The further hearing of  the  appeal  will  then  be  able  to
              resolve any dispute as to what, if  any,  risk  of  harm  the
              Appellant and  her  son  face  in  the  event  of  return  to
              Pakistan, and whether internal relocation  would  avoid  that
              risk, or whether the authorities in Pakistan provide adequate
              protection against that risk.  Only  then  will  the  further
              hearing of the appeal be able to remake the decision upon the
              Article 8 appeal, which at present turns upon the Appellant's
              claim that she should be granted DLR in order that she  might
              participate in  the  ongoing  proceedings  in  the  Gateshead
              County Court between herself and her husband over his ability
              to enjoy contact to their child.
          iv) The Anonymity Direction previously made  by  the  First  Tier
              Tribunal is preserved.
           v) A copy of this Determination, and the Determination of  Judge
              Duff, shall forthwith be provided  by  the  Tribunal  to  the
              relevant Designated Family Judge,  Her  Honour  Judge  Judith
              Moir.
          vi) The Family Court, through Her Honour Judge Judith Moir, shall
              be kept informed of the  progress  of  this  appeal  and  its
              outcome,  and  of  the  progress  of  any   application   for
              immigration status in the UK made by the Appellant's husband.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 3 April 2014


