
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09245/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 March 2015                     |On 15 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                   L.H.K.
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson, instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Presenting Officer


                   DECISION AND REASONS FOR SETTING ASIDE
                   THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL'S DETERMINATION

 1. I make an anonymity order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  As a consequence there is  a  prohibition
    on the disclosure or publication of documents or  information  relating
    to the proceedings or any matter likely to lead members of  the  public
    to identify the appellant.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a national of Iran born in 1982.  She claims  to  have
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 15 January 2011 with  entry  clearance
    as a student.  The appellant claimed asylum on  17  December  2013  and
    that application was refused in a decision  of  22  October  2014,  for
    reasons set out in a detailed letter of the same date.   Also  on  that
    date the Secretary of State made a decision to remove the appellant  to
    Iran pursuant to Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.

 3. The appellant appealed such decision to the First-tier  Tribunal,  that
    appeal being heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Obhi  on  17  December
    2014 and dismissed on all grounds in a determination promulgated  on  2
    January 2015.

 4. Broadly, it is the appellant's case that she was born and brought up in
    the Islamic faith in Iran but that since being in  the  United  Kingdom
    she has rejected that faith and  converted  to  Christianity.  She  was
    baptised into the Christian faith at St Andrew's Church in High Wycombe
    on 20 July 2014.  The appellant asserts that if she practices  her  new
    religion in Iran  she  will  be  subjected  to  persecutory  treatment,
    breaching her Refugee Convention and Article 3 rights.

 5. Judge Obhi concluded, for reasons set out in paragraphs 18 to 20 of her
    determination, that the appellant is not a genuine  Christian  convert.
    In an alternative finding,  Judge  Obhi  concluded  that  even  if  the
    appellant is a genuine convert to Christianity she would not be at risk
    of persecution in Iran because she is likely to practice  her  religion
    in private.

 6. On 27 January 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge E M Simpson  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Thus the  matter
    came before me.

Error of Law

 7. The appellant's grounds of challenge are lengthy but can be  summarised
    succinctly in the following terms:

      i) The First-tier Tribunal erred in  failing  to  provide  sustainable
         reasons for its adverse credibility  finding  in  relation  to  the
         genuineness of the appellant's conversion to Christianity;

     ii) The First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to consider  and  lawfully
         apply the ratio of the decision of the Supreme Court in  HJ  (Iran)
         and HT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.

 8. I take these two strands of challenge in turn.

 9. As to the former, the pleaded grounds seek to identify twelve purported
    errors made by the First-tier Tribunal  in  its  consideration  of  the
    appellant's credibility. I do not set out herein each  of  the  claimed
    errors, many of which overlap and a number of which amount to  no  more
    than disagreement with the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal.  There
    are however a number of features of the reasoning process undertaken by
    the First-tier Tribunal which lead me to conclude, when they are  taken
    together,  that  the  its  findings  as  to  the  genuineness  of   the
    appellant's claimed conversion to Christianity are  vitiated  by  legal
    error.

10.  In paragraph 18 of its determination the First-tier Tribunal states:

        "She speaks in her statement of her ideological opposition to  many
        of the cultural restrictions on women in Iran, such  as  having  to
        wear the Hijab, however  she  does  not  state  that  she  had  any
        particular difficulty in wearing it whilst in Iran"

11. This, in my view, misrepresents the appellant's  evidence.  As  I  read
    this aspect of the First-tier Tribunal's determination it  was  therein
    treating as a matter adverse to the appellant's overall credibility the
    fact that although she now professes an ideological opposition  to  the
    Hijab, this was not her view whilst she was living in Iran.

12. However, in her handwritten statement  of  the  27  December  2013  the
    appellant speaks at length (47 lines) about the problems for  those  in
    Iran who chose not to wear, or appropriately wear, the Hijab and  that,
    as a consequence of these problems, she "preferred staying at home  and
    going out when it was urgent" and "[F]or the very same reason there was
    a 6 year gap between my studies in Iran and UK".

13. In my conclusion it was not open to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  find
    that the appellant had "no particular difficulty in wearing [the Hijab]
    in Iran" without engaging with the detailed evidence given on this very
    issue by the appellant in her statement of 27 December 2013.

14. Moving on, the First-tier Tribunal also stated as follows in  paragraph
    18 of its determination, in relation to the evidence given by  Reverend
    Dust:

         "Having heard from Reverend Dust, it is  more  a  journey  than  an
         overnight change, and only time will tell  whether  her  change  of
         religion is a permanent change or  not. ...   It  is,  as  Reverend
         Dust put so eloquently in his statement, impossible to enter into a
         person's heart and mind and to know for sure  whether  someone  has
         changed  their  religion.   One  has  to  look   at   the   outward
         manifestations.  The reverend sees the appellant at the church on a
         regular basis and he therefore  accepts  her  claim  that  she  has
         changed.  He presented as an honest, credible and reliable witness,
         but also someone who is welcoming of any expression of interest  in
         his faith.  It is his business  to  try  and  encourage  people  to
         believe the gospel and he openly welcome those  who wish to embrace
         his religion to do so.  Whenever he sees her, he  does  so  in  the
         context of the church, as that is the only relationship he has with
         her and therefore, it is not his place to question  or  doubt  what
         someone says but to accept it openly.  He does not have the fullest
         information about individuals  and  is  not  called  upon  to  make
         decisions about credibility  in  a  wider  context.   There  is  no
         mechanism  in  place  for  assessing  whether   someone's   claimed
         conversion is an actual conversion, or something of convenience  to
         that individual. Therefore whilst I accept that the  appellant  was
         baptised as she claims, and as is evidenced by the record from  her
         register at  St  Andrew's  Church,  and  I  accept  the  reverend's
         evidence, it is only a small part of the total evidence before  me.
         In endeavouring to get inside the appellant's 'heart and mind', the
         most important evidence is that of the appellant herself."

15. It is clear from reading this passage  that  despite  finding  Reverend
    Dust to be a credible and  reliable  witness  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    considered his evidence,  on  the  issue  of  the  genuineness  of  the
    appellant's conversion to Christianity, to be of little weight.  Whilst
    issues of weight are entirely a matter for the First-tier Tribunal,  an
    assessment of such has to be underpinned by a rationality of reasoning.
    I find such rationality of reasoning to be lacking  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination.

16. As part of its rationale for attaching little weight to Reverend Dust's
    conclusions, the First-tier Tribunal twice in paragraph  18  allude  to
    the fact that his conclusions were reached without  full  knowledge  or
    information about the appellant's circumstances;  however,  nowhere  in
    its determination does the Tribunal disclose what additional  knowledge
    or information that it had that Reverend Dust did not.

17. Furthermore, the  First-tier  Tribunal  proceeded  on  the  basis  that
    Reverend  Dust's  opinion  was  partially  based  on  an  unquestioning
    acceptance of the appellant's own assertions as to the  genuineness  of
    her conversion. I  can  find  nowhere  in  Revered  Dust's  evidence  a
    statement to this effect, neither can I find record of this  being  put
    to Revered Dust at the hearing for his comment.

18. Reverend Dust sets out in his letter of 12 December 2014 why he  is  of
    the opinion that the appellant is a genuine  convert  to  Christianity,
    stating:

        "Although one cannot conclusively say if someone has come to a real
        and living faith in Jesus Christ, what I can see is the evidence of
        her changed life, her desire to serve others  and  an  inner  peace
        that emanates from her."

19.  There  is  no  indication  in   this   passage   that   the   Reverend
    unquestioningly accepted the appellant's assertions,  or  that  he  was
    required so to do. On the contrary, if anything can be  discerned  from
    this passage, it is that the Reverend's  opinion  was  derived  from  a
    rounded view of the appellant's actions and behaviour over a period  of
    time.

20. This error is compounded  in  my  view  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    consideration of  Revered  Dust's  evidence  in  paragraph  19  of  its
    determination, where it is said:

        "I asked the Reverend whether he had visited the appellant at home.
        He said that he had but he had only been to the front room  of  the
        house that she shares  with  her  relatives.  He  did  not  mention
        anything about her living circumstances to suggest that  there  was
        anything to indicate that she  had  conveyed  her  beliefs  to  her
        lifestyle."

21. I am troubled by this passage for a number of reasons. First, there  is
    nothing in the determination or the Record of Proceedings that suggests
    that the Reverend was asked about whether there  was  anything  in  the
    appellant's living circumstances that indicated that she  had  conveyed
    her beliefs to  her  lifestyle.  Furthermore,  the  Tribunal  fails  to
    identify  what  change  to  the  appellant's  living  circumstances  it
    anticipated or expected the Reverend to be able to comment upon, from a
    visit to the front room of a house that she shares with her relatives.

22. The first sentence of paragraph 19 of the determination also  discloses
    a matter of some curiosity, the Tribunal stating therein that it  found
    the appellant's evidence "considerably less persuasive" than that given
    by Reverend Dust. It may be  that  this  is  simply  an  infelicity  of
    phrasing but, if read literally,  it  is  suggestive  of  the  Tribunal
    finding Reverend Dust's evidence to be persuasive, a  conclusion  which
    on its face contradicts what is clearly intended to be conveyed by  the
    penultimate sentence in paragraph 18 of the determination.

23.  Whilst  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  clearly  entitled  to   place
    significant weight on the appellant's  inability  answer  a  number  of
    questions relating to events 'recorded' in the  bible,  and  indeed  to
    other aspects of the appellant's evidence referred to in  paragraph  19
    of the determination, in  my  conclusion  it  failed  to  engage  in  a
    rational and reasoned manner with the evidence given by  Reverend  Dust
    as to the genuineness of the appellant's conversion. For this reason  I
    find that the First-tier  Tribunal's  conclusions  on  this  issue  are
    flawed by legal error.

24. I must also consider the second limb  of  the  appellant's  grounds  of
    challenge i.e. that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  lawfully  apply
    the decision of the  Supreme  Court  in  HJ  (Iran).  In  her  Rule  24
    response, the Secretary of State submitted in relation  to  this  issue
    that given the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion that the appellant  was
    not a genuine convert its failure to apply "the HJ Iran test"  did  not
    disclose a material error of law.  At the hearing Ms  Brocklesby-Weller
    did  not  seek  to  persuade  me   that   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination in this respect was lawful.

25. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  cite,  consider  or
    apply the Supreme Court's decision in HJ (Iran), but rather  purported,
    in error, to apply an earlier decision of the  Tribunal  in  that  same
    case. Whilst, as the Secretary  of  State  submitted  in  her  Rule  24
    response, such error would not be material in circumstances  where  the
    appellant had been found not to be a genuine convert, for  the  reasons
    given above I have found that the First-tier Tribunal's conclusions  in
    this latter regard to be themselves flawed by legal error.

26. For all the reasons given above I set aside the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and direct that the appeal be determined de novo.

27. The parties agreed, and I accept having considered paragraph 7  of  the
    Senior President's Practice Direction of 25 September  2012,  that  the
    nature and extent of the judicial fact finding which is  necessary  for
    the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that it is appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

For the reasons given above, the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
is set aside. The decision in the  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal to be determined de novo.



Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 26 March 2015
