
IAC-AH-co-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/09268/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated|
|On 15 September and 10 December 2014      |On 22 December 2014      |
|                                          |                         |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                            MK (Egypt/gaza strip)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Harvey (15 September) and Ms J. Elliot-Kelly
                    (10 December), Counsel instructed by Blavo & Co
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  a  decision  by  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to recognise him as a Palestinian  refugee
    from  the  Gaza  Strip.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity
    direction, and I consider that it is appropriate that the appellant  is
    accorded anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The respondent maintains that the appellant is a national of Egypt, and
    that his entire asylum claim has been fabricated.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant's appeal against the refusal of asylum came before  Judge
    N M K Lawrence sitting in the First-tier Tribunal at  Hatton  Cross  on
    4th June 2014.  In his  subsequent  determination,  he  summarised  the
    appellant's case at paragraphs 14 onwards.

 4. The appellant had been born and brought up in the  Gaza  Strip.   After
    completing his studies  there,  he  had  gone  to  Egypt  to  study  at
    university.  He then returned to the Gaza Strip.  He  had  difficulties
    in finding employment.  He started in the  construction  industry,  but
    eventually found employment as a teacher.  In 2006 he  was  stopped  by
    two men whilst travelling to work, and forced into their car.   He  was
    interrogated about a friend of his called Adel (aka "Adil").   The  men
    claimed that Adil was a member of Hamas.  The men demanded  information
    about  Adil's  activities.   The  appellant  could  not   provide   any
    information because he knew nothing about Adil's activities.

 5. The appellant was again stopped by the same two men.  The men asked the
    appellant to spy  for  them,  but  he  refused.   The  men  warned  the
    appellant that if he refused, they would abduct his family.

 6. The appellant claims that he was then abducted, blindfolded  and  taken
    to an unknown location.  When his blindfold was  removed,  he  saw  his
    family there.  They were all being held in a small room.  The appellant
    said  he  was  tortured,  including  sexually.   He  was   continuously
    interrogated about Adil.  His family  was  also  subjected  to  similar
    torture during their captivity.  The appellant was released, but warned
    that if he did not comply with their request he would be  subjected  to
    the same treatment again.  He  was  given  one  month  to  comply.   He
    returned home, and administered self-medication for his injuries.   His
    family raised funds to help the appellant  flee  from  the  Gaza  Strip
    before one month had elapsed.

 7. The respondent disputed the appellant's claimed nationality, relying on
    a linguistic analysis by Sprakab.  The Sprakab Report of September 2013
    concluded that the appellant's linguistic background was  with  a  very
    high degree of certainty assessed to be Egyptian.  While he claimed  to
    be a Palestinian  from  the  Gaza  Strip,  his  language  use  was  not
    congruent with Palestinian Arabic.

 8. The appellant relied on a linguistic report  from  his  own  expert  in
    opposition to the two Sprakab Reports relied on by the respondent.   At
    paragraphs 21 to 39, the judge gave detailed consideration to all three
    reports,  and  gave  extensive  reasons  for  reaching  the   following
    conclusion at the end of paragraph 39: "It is more than  likely  [that]
    the appellant is Egyptian [rather] than someone from the Gaza Strip."

 9. The judge then went on to consider the appellant's  asylum  claim.   He
    began at paragraph 40, with the following observation:

         If the appellant is from Egypt his asylum  account  must  be,  ipso
         facto, false.  However, I go on to anxiously scrutinise the  merits
         of his asylum case as though he is from the  Gaza  Strip.   I  have
         considered the appellant's  interview  accounts  from  the  witness
         statements, the other written accounts and  the  oral  evidence  to
         ascertain the basis of his claim.

10.  At  paragraphs  41  to  55,  the  judge   identified   a   number   of
    inconsistencies and discrepancies in the  appellant's  account  of  his
    alleged experiences in the Gaza Strip, so as  to  reach  the  following
    conclusion at paragraph 56:

         In short, this appellant's account changes with each  recital.   It
         takes a different permutation and new form of tortures and  weapons
         of torture feature.  I find these variations of permutations are as
         a result of the appellant manufacturing [a] false basis on which to
         build an  asylum  claim.   The  appellant  is  not  a  creditworthy
         witness.  I reject his entire asylum account.  It is a  figment  of
         his imagination and has no basis in reality.

11. The judge then went on  to  consider,  under  the  heading  of  Medical
    Issues, a psychiatric report prepared by Dr Nimmagadda and  a  scarring
    report prepared by Dr Payne-James.  With  regard  to  the  latter,  the
    judge said at paragraph 62 it was not disputed that the  appellant  had
    scars.  The appellant had the legal burden to prove their  attribution.
    He found the appellant was not a truthful witness.  The  appellant  had
    not discharged the burden of proving, on balance, that the  account  of
    torture, that he had put forward, resulted in those scars.   The  judge
    did not accept the scars were  attributable  to  the  alleged  acts  of
    violent torture allegedly sustained in the Gaza Strip.  The judge  went
    on to dismiss the appeal on all grounds raised.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

12. Mr Paul Harvey of Counsel, who did not appear below, settled  extensive
    grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal on behalf of the appellant.  He
    submitted  that,  as  with  all  cases  involving  independent  medical
    evidence, the appropriate course would have been to consider all of the
    evidence adduced in support of the appellant's account,  including  the
    independent  medical  evidence,  and  then,  having   considered   that
    evidence, to reach conclusions upon the credibility of the  appellant's
    account.  By not proceeding in  that  manner,  the  learned  judge  had
    failed to give due and appropriate weight  to  the  fact  that  medical
    evidence  was  independent  evidence  corroborating   the   appellant's
    account, rather than evidence which fell to  be  rejected  because  the
    account had been rejected on other grounds.



The Grant for Permission to Appeal

13.  On 16 July 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge White granted the  appellant
    permission to appeal, as he was satisfied that in reaching his decision
    the judge had argued made an error of law by failing  to  consider  the
    medical evidence produced "in the round"  in  judging  the  appellant's
    credibility.  The judge had already found  at  paragraph  56  that  the
    appellant was not credible in his account before proceeding to consider
    the medical evidence at paragraph 57 onwards.

The Error of Law Hearing on 15 September 2014

14. Mr Harvey developed the argument  raised  by  him  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, and referred me to a number of  authorities  including  Mibanga
    [2005] EWCA Civ 367, SA (Somalia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1302 and JL  (medical
    reports - credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC).

15. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Melvin submitted there was no error  in
    the judge's approach.  Alternatively, if there was, the error  was  not
    material, as there  was  no  flaw  in  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant was Egyptian, whereas the appellant only related his fear  of
    return to the Gaza Strip.

16. I found that there was an error of law, and my extended reasons for  so
    finding are set out below. While the error  required  the  decision  on
    asylum to be set aside and remade, it did not require a de novo hearing
    in the First-tier Tribunal. So a continuation hearing was fixed  before
    me in the Upper Tribunal.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

17. Once the judge reached the medical reports,  he  did  not  reject  them
    solely on the basis that he had already found the appellant not to be a
    credible witness.  However, his consideration of the probative value of
    Dr Payne-James'  scarring  report  is  very  brief,  and  he  does  not
    acknowledge that in Dr Payne-James' opinion some of the scars  observed
    on  the  appellant's  body  are  "highly  consistent"  with  the  cause
    attributed to them by the appellant.

18. In SA (Somalia), the Court of Appeal found at paragraph [33]  that  the
    Adjudicator's decision was open  to  the  criticism  in  the  light  of
    Mibanga that, as a matter of form, the content of  the  medical  report
    was dealt with as an add on, following  the  section  in  which,  as  a
    result of examination of the evidence of the appellant, the Adjudicator
    found him to lack credibility and to have fabricated his case:

         [O]n that narrow basis there appears to have been a breach  of  the
         approach  prescribed  in  Mibanga,  namely  that  medical  evidence
         corroborative  or  potentially  corroborative  of  the  appellant's
         account of torture and/or fear of persecution should be  considered
         as part of the entire package of evidence to be taken into  account
         on the issue of credibility.

19. In that particular case,  the  Court  of  Appeal  found  there  was  no
    material error because there was a lack of any positive opinion  by  Dr
    Madan as to the cause of the lesions observed.  This is not a criticism
    that can be levelled against Dr Payne-James.

20. While there is no discernable error in the judge's discrete analysis of
    the linguistic reports, before  reaching  a  final  conclusion  on  the
    credibility of the appellant's core claim  the  judge  needed  to  take
    account of the independent evidence supporting the appellant's  account
    of torture.  The weight which he gave to such evidence was a matter for
    him, but it was an error of law  not  to  consider  it  at  all  before
    reaching a conclusion on credibility.  The appellant was thus  deprived
    of the possibility of the judge finding the medical evidence to  be  so
    persuasive as to outweigh the other evidence pointing to the  appellant
    as originating from Egypt, not from the Gaza Strip.

The Forum for, and Scope of, the Remaking of the Decision

21. My ruling at the error of law hearing was that the  judge's  error  did
    not engender a requirement for a de novo hearing, or for the receipt of
    further oral evidence from the appellant.

22. Mr Harvey also confirmed that there was no appeal against the dismissal
    of the Article 8 claim, and that no claim was being pursued on  Article
    3 (suicide risk) grounds.

23. Accordingly, I was  of  the  view  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  the
    appropriate forum in  which  to  remake  the  decision;  and  that  the
    continuation hearing should proceed by way of submissions only  on  the
    evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal, with one exception.

24. In the course of oral argument, it became  clear  that  there  was  one
    evidential issue that needed to be explored, and hence the need for  an
    adjournment.  The basis of the appellant's asylum claim was that he was
    ill-treated because he was suspected of being a  member  of  Hamas,  or
    suspected of being associated with Hamas through a friend.   But  Hamas
    have since taken control of the Gaza Strip, as Mr Harvey  acknowledged.
    So the question which arose was whether, even if it was true  that  the
    appellant suffered persecution in the past as  a  suspected  member  of
    Hamas, he would still be at  risk  of  such  mistreatment  now  on  his
    hypothetical return to the Gaza  Strip.   As  this  was  not  canvassed
    below, it was  only  fair  that  the  appellant  should  be  given  the
    opportunity to address  this  question  by  reference  to  the  current
    country material.

The  Grant  of  Permission  on  5   November   2014   to   the   Appellant's
representatives to adduce additional oral evidence from the Appellant

25. The resumed hearing was initially listed before me on 5 November  2014.
    On that occasion, Ms Elliot-Kelly  applied  for  permission  to  adduce
    further oral evidence from the appellant, contained in a third  witness
    statement.   After  some  debate,  I  was  persuaded  that  it  was  in
    accordance with the overriding objective  to  grant  Ms  Elliot-Kelly's
    application, which meant that  the  hearing  had  to  be  adjourned  to
    another date so that an Arabic interpreter could be booked.

The Resumed Hearing on 10 December 2014

26. At the outset of the hearing on 10th December 2014, Mr  Melvin  applied
    for permission to rely on the appellant's initial  screening  interview
    which he had discovered when going through an old file.

    The initial screening interview

27. The appellant had made his claim for asylum on 19  December  2007,  and
    the screening interview took place two days later.  The  appellant  was
    asked whether he was in general good health, and he said  that  he  had
    high blood pressure, a condition for which he had taken  medication  in
    the past, but was not currently taking medication.  His family in  Gaza
    consisted of his mother, aged 55, a sister aged 29, and a brother  aged
    33.  All of them were alive.  He had last seen his mother and  siblings
    in Gaza three years ago.  He had gone from Gaza  to  Amman  in  Jordan.
    After spending one month there, sleeping rough,  he  had  travelled  to
    Aleppo in Syria, where he had slept rough for two months.  He had  then
    travelled to Turkey, where he had spent a  month  sleeping  rough.   He
    could not remember precisely when he had reached Milan, in Italy.   But
    he had worked there occasionally for one year.  He had arrived  a  week
    ago in the UK, but did not know which port.  He had boarded a lorry  at
    Calais, having paid a Sudanese  agent  the  sum  of  E500.   His  birth
    certificate was in Gaza.  He had not claimed asylum en  route,  because
    his intention was always to reach England.  The reason  for  coming  to
    the UK was to  claim  asylum  as  he  feared  for  his  life  from  the
    occupation.  He later explained that, having left Italy, he  had  spent
    one and a half years in Paris, where he had  worked  occasionally.   He
    had last worked as a general labourer in Paris about four months ago.

    The reasons for allowing its late introduction

28.  The  principal  significance  of  the  screening  interview  from  the
    respondent's perspective was that the appellant had since claimed  that
    he had not left the Gaza Strip until 2006, which was the year  when  he
    claimed that he and his family had  been  ill-treated  because  of  his
    friendship with Adil.  Ms Elliot-Kelly opposed the introduction of  the
    new evidence, as it had  only  been  served  the  day  before  and  the
    solicitors had not had enough time  to  take  instructions  from  their
    client about its contents.

29. I was satisfied it was in accordance with the overriding objective that
    the screening interview should be admitted into evidence.   The  reason
    for Ms Elliot-Kelly seeking to adduce further oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant was to bolster his credibility  and  to  address  afresh  the
    adverse  credibility  findings  made  by   the   First-tier   Tribunal.
    Accordingly, it was  fair  and  just  that  the  respondent  should  be
    permitted to bring  forward  new  evidence  which  was  potentially  of
    pivotal  significance  on  the  question  of  the  appellant's  general
    credibility.   I  was  satisfied   that   the   procedural   unfairness
    consequential upon the evidence being introduced  very  late  could  be
    cured without the need for the appeal to be adjourned to  another  day.
    With Mr Melvin's consent, I gave permission to Ms Elliot-Kelly to  take
    instructions on the screening interview from her lay  client  with  the
    assistance of the court interpreter (who  was  agreeable  to  providing
    such assistance); and to use  the  information  gleaned  from  her  lay
    client to prepare a fourth witness statement in manuscript.

    The appellant's additional oral evidence

30. After an adjournment of about an  hour,  the  hearing  continued.   The
    appellant gave his evidence  through  an  Arabic  interpreter  whom  he
    clearly understood.  He adopted as  his  evidence-in-chief  his  fourth
    witness statement, and also his previous witness statements,  with  one
    exception.  What was nominally his first witness statement was in  fact
    an amended version of the first witness statement which he had  adopted
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Ms  Elliot-Kelly  explained  that  the
    original first witness  statement  had  been  amended  to  reflect  the
    evidence which the appellant had given in cross-examination.

31. In his original  first  witness  statement,  the  appellant  had  given
    largely the same account as summarised by Judge Lawrence in  paragraphs
    14 onwards of his determination (see paragraphs 4 to 6 above).   It  is
    helpful at this stage to note the differences.  In the original version
    of the first witness statement it was not suggested that the  appellant
    had refused to give information about Adil, or that his persecutors had
    threatened to abduct his family if he continued to  be  unco-operative.
    Also, whereas (according to Judge Lawrence) the  appellant's  case  was
    that he returned home  after  the  detention,  and  administered  self-
    medication for his injuries, at  paragraph  10  of  the  first  witness
    statement the appellant said that after reaching home, he  noticed  his
    hand was hurting and therefore went to Al-Shifa Hospital walk-in to get
    it seen to.  The key difference between the  original  version  of  the
    first witness statement and the new version adopted before me was  that
    in the original version the appellant claimed at paragraph 6 that  when
    he was first  stopped,  he  was  told  that  he  was  believed  by  the
    authorities to be part of  the  Hamas  group  "a  rebel  group  to  the
    political party of the government".  But in the new version, this claim
    was deleted.  So the new claim was only that the persecutors  suspected
    Adil of being a member of Hamas, not that they suspected the  appellant
    of being a member of Hamas as well.

32. The appellant's second witness statement was taken in manuscript by  Ms
    Elliot-Kelly on the day of the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.   In
    this statement, the appellant said that his friend used  to  work  with
    Hamas.  When they let him go, he did not try  to  get  any  information
    about Adil and Hamas.  He did not like to spy on his friend, and he did
    not want to harm him.  Anyway, he  did  not  know  anything  about  his
    involvement with Hamas.  His family did not attend hospital  after  the
    detention, because while they had injuries and bruises, they  were  not
    serious enough for hospital treatment.  He had not been in  touch  with
    his family since leaving Gaza, because he feared for  their  lives  and
    their safety if he made contact with them.

33. In his third witness statement made on 24 October 2014,  the  appellant
    said that he had been suffering from mental health problems  throughout
    2013.  He had tried to commit suicide  on  three  occasions,  including
    outside the mental care hospital health centre on 16 January 2013,  and
    trying to strangle himself in the mental  care  centre  on  21  January
    2013.  His asylum interview in August 2013 had taken place  during  the
    period of Ramadan, meaning that he was fasting.  In  addition  he  felt
    alone, mentally drained and physically unwell.  Both his  concentration
    and focus was thus adversely affected.

34. In his fourth witness statement the appellant said he  was  very  tired
    and had been in a cell for a few days at  the  time  of  his  screening
    interview.  He was very scared because someone at  the  police  station
    had told him that they would return him to Gaza.  He also found it very
    difficult to understand the interpreter, and he sometimes just gave the
    answer that he thought the interviewing officer was looking  for,  even
    though he did not understand the question.

35. He often got confused about dates and past events because of  what  had
    happened to him in Gaza.  He could not remember why he had said that he
    left Gaza three years ago, but that was incorrect.  He  had  only  been
    gone from Gaza for approximately one year at the time of the  screening
    interview.  The reason why he had said in his screening interview  that
    he had received no education, and did not say that he  was  a  teacher,
    was because he thought he needed to hide information in case they  sent
    him back to Gaza.  He was also worried that if he mentioned his studies
    in Egypt, they would try and send him back to Egypt.

36. It was true that he had spent periods of  time  in  Jordan,  Syria  and
    Turkey.  But it was not true that he had spent a year in Italy, and one
    and a half years in France.  He had only spent a few months  in  Italy,
    and approximately five months in France.

37. In cross-examination, the appellant said he could not recall  how  long
    he had lived and worked in Italy.  He had worked in Italy to get  money
    to finance his trip to the United Kingdom via France.  He had not spent
    one and a half years in France,  and  he  had  not  said  that  in  the
    screening interview.  He would not have given a specific time.  He  had
    actually spent approximately five months there.  He had  left  Gaza  in
    maybe October or November 2006.  He could not be more exact.

38. The appellant agreed that after making his asylum claim,  he  had  been
    housed in Glasgow, from where he had absconded in the middle of January
    2008.  The appellant's explanation was that he was scared,  so  he  had
    gone to hide in London.  He spent  a  number  of  years  in  hiding  in
    London, living rough and  getting  assistance  from  a  mosque  in  the
    Edgware Road.  Finally, he had met a guy  called  Ali  in  November  or
    December 2012 at the Finsbury Park mosque,  and  it  was  Ali  who  had
    persuaded him to  renew  his  claim  for  asylum.   His  mental  health
    problems had started in 2012.

39. His friend Adil had been accused of links with Hamas.  But he  did  not
    know whether Adil was linked with Hamas or not.  Adil had not told  him
    about his links with Hamas.  He had not discussed the approach made  by
    his persecutors with Adil, as Adil had already disappeared at the  time
    of the first approach.  He had not gone to Hamas for help as Hamas were
    in hiding.

40. In  answer  to  questions  for  clarification  purposes  from  me,  the
    appellant explained that Adil lived seven minutes walk away in the same
    district.  He lived with his family, which included his father,  mother
    and sisters.  They did not disappear at the same time  as  Adil.   They
    did not know how to make contact with Adil.

41. Mr Melvin asked whether the persecutors had visited  Adil's  family  to
    enquire about his whereabouts.  The appellant replied that they had put
    pressure on Adil's family, and eventually they had abducted  them.   He
    did not know what had happened to them after that.

42. It was put to the appellant that some of the details which he had given
    of his torture in his first witness statement had not been mentioned in
    his asylum interview.   The  appellant  answered  that  it  was  during
    Ramadan, and he did  not  have  his  medication.   He  agreed  that  in
    interview he had said that he  had  not  attended  hospital  after  the
    detention.  He was questioned as to why his  family  had  not  gone  to
    hospital, given that he said that his brothers had been castrated,  and
    his mother and sister raped.  He said that his mother  and  sister  had
    not gone for treatment in the hospital as in their culture the shame of
    rape was such that they would have to commit suicide if  they  did  not
    hide the fact that they had been raped.  He  had  not  said  that  both
    brothers were castrated.  His youngest brother was left  alone  because
    he was young.  The other brother was "cut".

43.  After  an  adjournment  for  lunch,  Mr  Melvin  resumed  his   cross-
    examination.  He asked the appellant why he had left Gaza, but not  the
    rest of his family, especially given his account of the fate of  Adil's
    family.  He answered that they had only  abducted  his  family  to  put
    pressure on him.  He had not tried to contact them  out  of  fear.   He
    also had not tried to contact the schools in Gaza where he said he  had
    taught maths.  Again this was because of his fear, and also he had  not
    got contact details for the schools.  He  was  asked  why  he  had  not
    contacted the university in Egypt where he  had  studied  in  order  to
    obtain their records of his identity and nationality.  He said  he  had
    made enquiries on the internet.  They had said that he  had  to  be  in
    Egypt to get the evidence.  There was no re-examination.

44. In his closing submissions on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  Mr  Melvin
    invited  me  to  make  an  adverse  credibility  finding  against   the
    appellant.  Apart from numerous internal discrepancies in his  account,
    which had multiplied,  his  account  was  contrary  to  the  background
    evidence.  At page C30 in the appellant's  bundle,  the  following  was
    stated in the Occupied Territories 2012 Human Rights Report:

         Although PA laws apply  in  the  Gaza  Strip,  the  PA  had  little
         authority in the Gaza Strip and none over Israeli residents of  the
         West Bank.  In  the  2006  Palestinian  Legislative  Council  (PLC)
         elections, candidates backed by Hamas,  a  terrorist  organisation,
         won 74 of the 132 seats  and  elections  generally  met  democratic
         standards.   In  2007  Hamas  staged  a  violent  takeover  of   PA
         government installations in the Gaza Strip.

45. In reply, Ms Elliot-Kelly submitted that it was  not  until  2007  that
    Hamas was in total control, and thus the appellant's  account  did  not
    run counter to the background evidence.  The information  at  page  C98
    showed that the appellant would be at risk from non-Hamas  factions  on
    return to Gaza, as he had been at risk from non-Hamas factions in 2006.
     She referred me to her detailed skeleton argument, and submitted that,
    having regard to the highly persuasive medical evidence, the  appellant
    had discharged the burden of proving that the core  of  his  claim  was
    true.

Discussion and Findings

The Burden and Standard of Proof

46. In international protection claims, the standard of proof  is  that  of
    real risk or reasonable  degree  of  likelihood.  Evidence  of  matters
    occurring after the date of decision can be taken into account.

Past Persecution or Serious Harm

47. Under Paragraph 339K, the fact that a person has already  been  subject
    to  persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
    persecution or serious harm, will be regarded as a serious indicator of
    the person's well-founded fear of persecution or serious  harm,  unless
    there are good reasons to consider that  such  persecution  or  serious
    harm will not be repeated.

Duty to Substantiate Claim for International Protection

48. Paragraph 339L of the immigration rules provides that it is the duty of
    the person to substantiate his claim. Where aspects of  his  claim  are
    not supported by documentary or other evidence, those aspects will  not
    need confirmation when all of the following conditions are met:

      i) The person has made a genuine effort to substantiate his claim;

     ii) All material factors at the person's disposal have been  submitted,
         and a satisfactory explanation regarding any lack of other relevant
         material has been given;

    iii) The person's statements are found to be coherent and plausible  and
         do not run counter to available specific  and  general  information
         relevant to the person's case;

     iv) The person has made his claim at the earliest possible time, unless
         the person can demonstrate good reasons for not doing so;

      v) The general credibility of the person is established.

    The medical evidence

49. The appellant's GP medical records go back  to  November  2011.   On  1
    December 2011  the  appellant  presented  at  surgery  with  a  housing
    problem.  He had been in the UK for four years, and stayed with friends
    in Manor House or in the Edgware Road, and he  was  sometimes  sleeping
    rough on the street in Camden.  He was not on benefits, and family were
    helping him with money.  He had been suffering  from  constipation  for
    the past two years.  Over the coming months, he had a number of  visits
    to the surgery with respect to this condition, and also with a view  to
    treating his hypertension.

50. The appellant first sought treatment for depression  in  October  2012,
    which the  doctor  understood  to  be  linked  to  issues  with  sexual
    intercourse and his wife.  In November 2012, the  appellant  said  that
    his depressive symptoms were returning.  In December 2012, he consulted
    a doctor at the surgery about a  problem  of  sexual  dysfunction.  The
    appellant first made a torture claim to his GP on 14 January 2013.   He
    said he had been tortured in Gaza nine to ten years ago.  He  had  been
    beaten and had Kalashnikovs pointed at him.  There were smacking sounds
    and also voices speaking to him.  These had started  as  memories,  but
    now the new voices were saying things.  The voices had told him to  die
    and leave this life.  He contemplated  jumping  in  front  of  a  train
    approximately one month ago, but had been  stopped  by  people  on  the
    platform.

51. The appellant received in-patient treatment at Highgate  Mental  Health
    Centre from 16 January 2013 to 26 April  2013.   On  20  May  2013  the
    records note a diagnosis of acute fear  of  depression  with  psychotic
    features and high suicide risk.  The appellant was likely to have  PTSD
    "worsened by inter action with  Home  Office  Nov  2012".   His  asylum
    application  was  ongoing,  and  a  solicitor  was  investigating   the
    provision of accommodation under Section 21 of the National  Assistance
    Act.  The appellant has been discharged into the care of Crisis House.

52. The appellant was seen by Dr Jason Payne-James on 13 December 2013.  He
    explained in his subsequent report that the appellant had complained of
    injuries from an assault in the past, and he had been asked  to  assess
    any residual marks and scars in the light of the history  he  provided.
    The appellant told Dr Payne-James he worked on a building site in  Gaza
    in order to survive, and he also tutored children  at  home  privately.
    He was believed to be part of the Hamas group by the  authorities.   He
    was forced into a car, and whilst being in the car, he was interrogated
    and beaten by being slapped around and asked for information.  He  said
    he was approached by the same men about a month later at his home.   At
    this point they arrested him, his  mother  and  two  brothers  and  one
    sister.  They were all detained at a police station.  He  was  tortured
    whilst being detained.  The men took each  member  of  his  family  and
    abused them in front of him.  They raped his mother and sister in front
    of him, while also beating and castrating his brothers in front of him.
     They beat him with wood on the back and legs and arms  and  raped  him
    with instruments, including an iron bar and  a  bottle.   He  was  also
    struck on the head and neck, and his left buttock  was  cut  by  broken
    glass from a bottle, and lighted cigarettes (plural)  were  applied  to
    his penis.  Pliers were applied to his left chest and he was threatened
    with a Kalashnikov.  He managed to  escape  through  bribery.   He  was
    better now though, although sometimes he heard voices and  had  trouble
    sleeping.  He  had  gone  to  university  in  Egypt  where  he  took  a
    mathematics degree, and he taught for a while.

53. The doctor went on to refer to the Istanbul Protocol.  Consistent  with
    meant that the lesion could have been caused by  the  trauma  described
    but it was non-specific and there  were  many  other  possible  causes.
    Highly consistent meant the lesion could have been caused by the trauma
    described, and there are a few other possible causes.  With  regard  to
    the  appellant's   account   of   events,   he   made   the   following
    interpretations with regard to the various  marks  and  scars  observed
    upon a physical examination of the appellant: the left  wrist  scaphoid
    fracture was highly consistent with his account; his  left  chest  scar
    was highly consistent with his account; the  scars  to  the  head  were
    consistent with his  account;  the  scar  to  the  buttock  was  highly
    consistent  with  his  account;  the  scar  to  the  penis  was  highly
    consistent with his account; the scar to the left  leg  and  left  foot
    were consistent with his account; and the scar to his  right  neck  was
    highly consistent with his account.

54.  There  are  discrepancies  between  the  doctor's   summary   of   his
    conclusions, and the findings actually made earlier in the report.  For
    instance, with regard to the penis, he found at paragraph 49  that  the
    glands of the penis had a hypo-pigmented scar about  0.7  in  diameter,
    which was consistent (not highly consistent) with the appearance  of  a
    healed burn caused by a cigarette.

55. In fact, none of the scars or marks  observed  is  described  as  being
    anything other than merely consistent  with  the  appellant's  account,
    with one exception.  At paragraph 46,  the  doctor  observed  that  the
    appellant's left buttock had an irregular healed pitted scar, which was
    "typical" of skin that  had  been  penetrated,  becoming  infected  and
    healing without suture.

56. Nonetheless, I accept that the doctors'  report  has  some  independent
    probative value in supporting the appellant's account of torture.

57. In Dr Croxford's discharge summary of 12 May 2013, which is alluded  to
    in the GP medical  notes,  she  described  the  appellant's  presenting
    symptoms and circumstances on admission.  He had been admitted to Topaz
    Ward after trying to jump under a train.  He had been feeling depressed
    and suicidal for some weeks, with auditory hallucinations  telling  him
    to end his life.  He had been of no fixed abode after a  failed  asylum
    seeking request made some years ago.  He had come to the UK  from  Gaza
    five years ago after being tortured  approximately  ten  years  ago  by
    Israeli secret police as he was acquainted with individuals involved in
    anti-Israeli activities. He had moved to  London  two  years  ago  from
    Glasgow and had been of no fixed abode since due to  concerns  that  he
    would be deported.  He sometimes slept at the local mosque,  which  had
    been supportive.  On 16 January 2013 on Sapphire Ward he had wanted  to
    kill himself by throwing himself at the window, but had not done so due
    to hearing an angry voice telling him it was forbidden.  On 21  January
    2013 he had attempted to strangle himself with bed linen, and was  then
    put on close observation.  His mental state on discharge was  improved.
    He had a good  insight  into  his  condition,  and  was  consenting  to
    treatment.

58.  The  appellant  was  seen  by  Dr  Nimmagadda,   consultant   forensic
    psychiatrist on 17 May 2014.   In  his  subsequent  psychiatric  report
    dated 31 May 2014, he said he had been instructed to assess his  mental
    health and to give his diagnosis.   He  had  also  been  instructed  to
    establish whether his condition was as a result of the  trauma  he  had
    suffered and whether his mental health could result  in  him  having  a
    loss of memory.

59. The appellant told the doctor  that  his  mother  was  a  68  year  old
    housewife, and he had two younger brothers aged 40 and 27 respectively,
    and a younger sister  aged  34.   He  described  himself  as  a  bright
    student: he did well at school and earned  a  place  at  university  in
    Egypt, where he obtained a Bachelors degree in mathematics.  After that
    he came back to Gaza, and secured a job as a mathematics teacher  in  a
    secondary  school  where  he  worked  for  five  to  six   years.    On
    examination, the appellant was  well  orientated  in  time,  place  and
    person.  There was some impairment in his intention and  concentration,
    but there were no immediate problems in his immediate, short  term  and
    long term memories.  Based on his own account, there  was  evidence  to
    suggest that the appellant's symptoms of PTSD were  raised  within  six
    months after the traumatic incident and had been  present  for  a  long
    period of time.  These symptoms caused clinically significant  distress
    and impairment in all areas of his functioning.  But he did not pick up
    any evidence of a significant memory loss.  In his opinion, given  that
    he was suffering depression and post-traumatic stress  disorder  for  a
    considerable period of  time,  it  was  likely  that  his  deficits  in
    attention and concentration were likely to explain his poor memory.  He
    concluded that if it was established that he suffered  from  the  self-
    reported traumatic incidents in Gaza, it was highly  likely  that  they
    were the cause for his PTSD and subsequent depressive illness.  It  was
    also likely that the separation  from  his  family  and  the  continued
    threat of being persecuted if he was returned to Gaza, coupled with his
    ongoing circumstances in the UK, were likely to be perpetuating factors
    for his depression.

60. As I pointed out in the course of oral argument, there is a big "if" in
    Dr Nimmagadda's conclusion.   The  diagnosis  of  PTSD  is  of  limited
    probative value because it is largely based on  the  appellant's  self-
    reporting of both his symptoms and the alleged cause of  his  symptoms,
    albeit that the alleged cause is supported to a degree by the report of
    Dr Payne-James.  Of particular significance is the fact that  there  is
    no independent  documentary  record  of  the  appellant  suffering  the
    symptoms of PTSD, or indeed depression, before the latter part of 2012.
     Accordingly, I find that the report of Dr Nimmagadda has very  limited
    utility in supporting the appellant's claim of being tortured  in  Gaza
    in 2006 (or in 2003).  For the same reason, I find  the  report  is  of
    limited utility in so far as  it  is  relied  upon  to  neutralise  the
    adverse credibility concerns arising  from  the  discrepancies  in  the
    appellant's narrative.  If he is suffering from PTSD  as  a  result  of
    being tortured in Gaza as claimed by him, this might reasonably account
    for the internal discrepancies and inconsistencies noted by Mr  Melvin.
    But the psychiatrist's diagnosis of PTSD as  a  result  of  torture  is
    dependent on the account of torture being  true,  as  the  psychiatrist
    himself acknowledges.  Moreover, the appellant claims to  have  a  firm
    and reliable memory of some aspects of his  core  claim,  such  as  the
    length of time he spent in Italy, and the year in which he was tortured
    in Gaza.




    Internal Inconsistencies

61. In my judgment, it is beyond  argument  that  the  appellant's  account
    discloses significant internal discrepancies and  inconsistencies,  and
    each time the appellant  is  questioned,  his  credibility  is  further
    undermined rather than salvaged.  There is a major inconsistency in the
    appellant asserting on the one hand that he left Gaza in 2003  or  2004
    (according to the screening interview) as against his case  by  way  of
    appeal that he left Gaza at the end of 2006.  What the  appellant  said
    in his screening interview is  entirely  consistent  with  what  he  is
    recorded  as  having  told  healthcare  professionals,   including   Dr
    Nimmagadda.  For if he had suffered ill-treatment nine to ten years ago
    as of 2013 or 2014, he would, on his own  case,  have  left  Gaza  well
    before 2006.  Moreover, in the screening interview  the  appellant  did
    not claim to  be  suffering  from  any  ill-health  beyond  high  blood
    pressure.   If  he  had  been  brutally  tortured  in  Gaza  relatively
    recently, it is very likely that he would have been suffering from  the
    symptoms of PTSD at the time of his screening interview,  according  to
    Dr Nimmagadda.  So the absence of a claim by the appellant of suffering
    any PTSD symptoms at the time of the screening interview, despite being
    given the opportunity to report such  symptoms,  severely  damages  the
    appellant's general credibility.

62.  The  appellant's  account  of  his  alleged  experiences  in  2006  is
    internally inconsistent and lacking in credibility.  At one  point  the
    appellant has claimed that he knew that his friend Adil was a member of
    Hamas, but at other points he has insisted that he did not know whether
    he was involved with Hamas or not.  At  one  point  the  appellant  has
    claimed that he was himself accused of  being  in  Hamas,  which  would
    explain why a rival faction  or  Israeli  intelligence  would  want  to
    recruit him as a spy.  The appellant has changed his  evidence  to  say
    that he was not accused of being in  Hamas.   This  weakens  his  claim
    objectively, as if  his  persecutors  did  not  suspect  him  of  being
    involved in Hamas, it is inherently unlikely that they  would  seek  to
    recruit him as a spy.  Another inconsistency is  over  the  appellant's
    response to the alleged  approach.   He  has  variously  said  that  he
    refused to co-operate; or that he simply told them that he did not have
    any information.  In one version of events, he was threatened  for  his
    non-co-operation following a refusal,  on  another  version  of  events
    there was no threat made as to what would happen to his  family  if  he
    did not co-operate.  In his oral evidence, the appellant  introduced  a
    new detail, which only served to damage his  general  credibility  even
    further.  This was that Adil had disappeared at the same time as he had
    been first approached to spy on Adil.   But  it  is  not  part  of  the
    appellant's narrative that, on the second approach, he was asked  about
    Adil's disappearance; or that when requested to give information  about
    Adil, the appellant gave them the obvious answer that he could not  spy
    on Adil as Adil had disappeared.

63. The appellant has also not been consistent on the question  of  whether
    he received hospital treatment or not, and as to why his family members
    did not receive hospital treatment.  The appellant  has  said  on  more
    than one occasion that  both  his  brothers  were  castrated,  and  his
    explanation before me that his youngest  brother  was  not  ill-treated
    because he was too young does not fit with the fact that  his  youngest
    brother was already an adult by 2006.  Clearly, having been  castrated,
    the brothers' need for hospital treatment would  have  been  much  more
    acute than the appellant's  need  for  hospital  treatment.   Moreover,
    given what had allegedly happened to Adil's family, it is not  credible
    that the entire family would not have sought to flee  the  Gaza  Strip,
    and not just the appellant.

64. Finally, although Hamas did not take control of the  Gaza  Strip  until
    2007, the appellant's account runs counter to the  background  evidence
    insofar as his explanation for not seeking their  assistance  was  that
    Hamas were  in  hiding.   This  is  clearly  untrue,  as  Hamas  backed
    candidates had won the majority  of  the  seats  in  the  January  2006
    elections.  So Hamas had come out of the  shadows,  and  were  powerful
    actors in the Gaza Strip in 2006.

    The linguistic evidence

65. Ms Elliot-Kelly asked me to look again at the Sprakab Reports relied on
    by the respondent, and the  expert  evidence  in  rebuttal  from  Samia
    Adnan.  I have done so, and  I  find  no  reason  to  depart  from  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge on this aspect  of  the  case
    which is not challenged  by  way  of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Essentially,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  preferred  the   expert
    evidence provided in the first Sprakab Report to  the  expert  evidence
    provided by Ms Adnan.  As with the  medical  evidence,  the  linguistic
    evidence  has  independent  probative  value.   It  is  not  of  course
    determinative of the case against the  appellant,  any  more  than  the
    medical evidence is determinative of the case for the appellant.

    The factual conclusions

66. Having taken into account the totality of the  evidence  before  me,  I
    find that the respondent has discharged the burden of  proving  on  the
    balance of probabilities that the appellant is  an  Egyptian  national,
    and that the appellant has not discharged the burden of proving to  the
    lower standard of proof that he is a Palestinian national from the Gaza
    Strip, and that his claim of past persecution and future  risk  in  the
    Gaza Strip is true.

67. Accordingly, the appellant  does  not  qualify  for  recognition  as  a
    refugee from the Gaza Strip.  As it is not proposed to  remove  him  to
    the Gaza Strip, but to Egypt, the appellant's alternative  claim  under
    Article 3 ECHR necessarily falls away.  But for the avoidance of doubt,
    even if I had accepted the  appellant's  core  claim  (contrary  to  my
    primary findings of  fact),  there  are  not  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that the appellant would face a real risk of  persecution  or
    ill-treatment of such severity as to cross the threshold of  Article  3
    ECHR on a hypothetical return to Gaza.  This is because of  the  length
    of time which has elapsed since the appellant's departure from Gaza.

Decision

68. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law,  and
    accordingly the decision is set aside and  the  following  decision  is
    substituted: this appeal  is  dismissed  on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds.

Anonymity


The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed        Date 22 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

