
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09367/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 July 2016                               |On 28 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O Manley instructed by Crowley & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  respondent  (SR).   This
    direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to Contempt  of  Court
    proceedings.

Introduction

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing SR's appeal, for convenience I will
    refer to the parties as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq.  He is Kurdish.  His  precise  date
    of birth is a matter of  dispute.   On  arrival  he  claimed  that  his
    birthday was 1 January 1997 but thereafter that his date of birth was 2
    April 1998.  He was, therefore, at the date of the hearing on 21  March
    2016 on the basis of these dates either 19 years of  age  or  a  little
    over a week short of his 18th birthday.

 4. The appellant claimed that he left Iraq on 14 November 2014 and, having
    passed through a number of countries, arrived in the UK on  3  February
    2015 in a lorry.  On that date, he claimed asylum.

 5. The basis of the appellant's claim was that ISIS had sought to  recruit
    him in his home area of Jalawla.  He refused to do so and  was  beaten.
    He and his family left Jalawla to live  with  his  uncle  in  Khanqeen.
    After a few months, he was told by his uncle that he must leave  as  he
    was putting the rest of the family at risk.  As a consequence, he  left
    Iraq and came to the UK.  The appellant claimed that  he  would  be  at
    risk on return to Iraq because of his history and  that  he  could  not
    internally relocate within Iraq.

 6. On 12 July 2015, the Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  claim
    for asylum.  The Secretary of State did not accept the  credibility  of
    the appellant's account and that therefore he had established he was at
    risk in his home area.  In addition, the Secretary of  State  concluded
    that,  in  any  event,  the  appellant  could  safely  and   reasonably
    internally relocate to Baghdad or the KRG.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  refusal
    of  his  protection  claim.   Judge   Suffield-Thompson   allowed   the
    appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.  First,  she  accepted  that  the
    appellant's account was credible and that he was at risk  in  his  home
    area from ISIS.  Further, the judge found that the appellant could  not
    safely and reasonably be expected  to  internally  relocate  either  to
    Khanqeen where his uncle lived or to Baghdad.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  First, the Secretary of State  argued  that  the  judge  had
    failed properly to consider the  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's
    age, in particular a report produced by  Social  Workers  from  Bedford
    Borough Council.  That evidence stated that the appellant  was  in  his
    "late twenties".  The grounds argue that  this  was  relevant  for  two
    reasons:

         (1)  in assessing the appellant's credibility and  whether  he  had
             lied about his age whether he was born in 1997 or 1998; and

         (2)  in assessing the internal relocation option.

    Secondly, the grounds argue that the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons why the appellant could not internally relocate by returning to
    live with his uncle given the evidence that ISIS were no longer present
    in that area.

 9. On 19 April 2016, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (DJ  Murray)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.

10. On 20 May 2016, the appellant filed a rule 24 notice seeking to  uphold
    the judge's decision in his favour.

11. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

    The Submissions

12. In his submissions, Mr  Richards  (who  represented  the  Secretary  of
    State) focused  on  the  issue  of  the  age  assessment  as  the  most
    significant part of the grounds.  He submitted that the judge's reasons
    for not giving any weight to the social worker's assessment in para  35
    of her determination were flawed.

13. At para 35 the judge said this:

         "The Respondent wishes me to give weight to three documents  handed
         in at the hearing that are from Bedford Borough Council.  These are
         not a full age assessment and contain simply an observation from  a
         Social Worker that the Appellant is in his late twenties.  I do not
         give any weight to  these  documents  for  two  reasons.   Firstly,
         having seen the Appellant in court and having  heard  his  evidence
         the Appellant appeared to be in his  early  twenties  so  somewhere
         between the nearly 18 he claims to be and the late twenties that  a
         Social Worker says.  Secondly, and more significantly, I find  that
         as these documents were served at court  just  before  the  hearing
         this has denied the Appellant the opportunity to obtain his own age
         assessment report and therefore in the interests  of  fairness  and
         reliability I do not give any weight to this evidence."

14. Mr Richards accepted that the  document  had  been  handed  in  by  the
    Secretary  of  State's  representative  at  the  hearing.    That,   he
    acknowledged, was part of the judge's reasons for giving  the  evidence
    no weight.  However, Mr Richards submitted that  the  judge  could  not
    simply disregard the evidence on that basis and always had  the  option
    of permitting an adjournment in order that the appellant could seek  to
    deal with the evidence.

15. Mr Richards accepted that the document  was  not  a  'Merton  compliant
    assessment' but that was unnecessary as it was  a  case  where  it  was
    "very obvious that a person is under or over 18" and such an assessment
    was not required (see [27] of the judgment in R (B) v London Borough of
    Merton [2003] EWHC 1689 (Admin)).

16.  Mr  Richards  submitted  that  as  a  result,  the  judge's   positive
    credibility finding in paras 36-40 was flawed as the judge  had  failed
    to deal with the argument that, if the social workers were correct that
    the appellant was in his late twenties, he had lied by giving his  date
    of birth as being in 1997 or 1998.  Further, the  appellant's  age  was
    relevant to the issue of internal relocation which the judge  found  in
    favour of the appellant at para 49 of her determination.

17. Mr Richards made no explicit reference in his oral submissions to  that
    part of the grounds dealing with the judge's finding that the appellant
    could not internally relocate to live again with his  uncle.   However,
    he relied on the grounds as drafted and so I understood him to continue
    to rely on that point.

18. On behalf of the  appellant,  Mr  Manley  submitted  that  the  grounds
    misunderstood  what  the  judge  had  decided  in  para   35   of   her
    determination.  The judge had simply said that she placed no weight  on
    the social worker report as it was not reasoned.  Although she had made
    reference to the late production of the  document,  that  was  not  the
    basis upon which she declined to give any  weight  to  it.   Mr  Manley
    submitted that in effect, the judge found that  there  was  no  'Merton
    compliant' report when there should have been.

19. As regard internal relocation, Mr Manley indicated that at the  hearing
    the  Presenting  Officer,  although  he  initially  relied   upon   the
    possibility of relocation  to  Khanqeen  where  the  appellant's  uncle
    lived, had focused  instead  upon  Baghdad  as  a  place  for  internal
    relocation when the judge had raised with the  Presenting  Officer  the
    fact that  the  situation  with  ISIS  in  his  uncle's  area  remained
    volatile.  Mr Manley submitted that it was, therefore, proper  for  the
    judge to focus on Baghdad and in accordance with the  country  guidance
    case of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544  (IAC)  to  conclude
    that internal relocation for the appellant as a  "young  man"  (as  the
    judge referred to the appellant) was neither safe  nor  reasonable  for
    the reasons she gave in para 49.

    Analysis

20. As regards the issue concerning  the  appellant's  age,  I  prefer  the
    submissions of Mr Manley.

21. The social workers' report stated that:

         "[The appellant] presented physically  significantly  over  -  late
         twenties.  Demeanour that of an adult".

22. This was, of course, self-evidently not a 'Merton compliant' report.  I
    accept that Stanley Burnton J (as he then was)  stated  in  the  Merton
    case at [27] that "... there may be cases where it is very obvious that
    a person is under or over 18.  In such cases there is normally no  need
    for prolonged enquiry", but that, of course, was said in the context of
    a case where the important demarcation line  in  relation  to  age  was
    drawn at 18.  The issue there was whether the individual was  under  or
    over 18.  Clearly, if the individual is 'very obviously' under or  over
    that age there may be no need for a Merton  compliant  report  drilling
    down into the particularity of  the  individual's  age.   All  that  is
    needed to be known, is which side of the demarcation line of 18  he  is
    on  and  that  may  be  capable  of  determination  without  "prolonged
    enquiry".

23. That, however, does not  deal  with  the  issue  whether  demeanour  or
    physical  appearance  can  properly  found  a  factual  finding  on  an
    individual's age, particularly when a more specific factual finding  is
    called for.  Clearly, in extreme cases it can.  It would  be  difficult
    to confuse a 3 year old child or a 65 year old adult with a person  who
    claims to be 18 or 19 years  old.   But,  outside  of  those  extremes,
    reliance upon demeanour and physical appearance may be problematic  and
    the very reason why the more nuanced and  interdisciplinary  assessment
    of a Merton compliant assessment is desirable.  The point is well  made
    in R (GE) (Eritrea) v SSHD [2015] EWHC 1406 (Admin) by Alexandra  Marks
    QC (sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge) at [73]-[74]:

         "73. ... I am unconvinced of the value of observations of demeanour
         made during a short interview between  an  individual  and  strange
         adults.  People can behave in a formal interview in a way  that  is
         very different from their normal behaviour,  perhaps  because  they
         are nervous, afraid, intimidated or simply want the  experience  to
         end.  Despite the purported expertise of the social worker  leading
         the interview in this case, there seems to me to have been  lacking
         an appropriate level  of  insight,  sensitivity  and  judgment,  as
         illustrated by events at the abortive September assessment when the
         same assessors consulted with  the  UKBA,  and  then  expelled  the
         appropriate adult.  In my view, it  would  normally  be  unsafe  to
         reach an age assessment largely based on an interviewee's behaviour
         (including  a  purported  reluctance  to  share  information)   but
         particularly so in this case.

         74. The same applies to physical appearance.  The Merton guidelines
         (as refined by FZ, and summarised in AS) make clear that  assessors
         should take a history from the interviewee, and  make  an  holistic
         assessment, taking all relevant  factors  into  account.   Physical
         appearance should never form a major reason for an  age  assessment
         yet GE's appearance seems to have weighed heavily with  the  second
         age assessors, as evidenced by the summary of reasons they gave the
         Council." (emphasis added)

24. The Deputy Judge went on  to  identify  the  very  real  difficulty  in
    assessing an individual's age based upon appearance  and  demeanour  at
    [75]:

         "Mr Greatorex concedes the court's difficulty  in  making  its  own
         judgment of GE's age on the basis of her  physical  appearance  and
         demeanour now that she is, by any reckoning, at least 20 years old.
          I am no expert in this area, but having two daughters  myself  who
         are now aged 20 and 22,  I  have  experienced  considerable  recent
         exposure to young women of this age group.  However, that  exposure
         has revealed to me the  wide  range  of  maturity,  appearance  and
         demeanour which applies even to a homogenous group of young  women,
         let alone those from hugely different backgrounds and cultures, and
         dramatically  different  experiences  of  life  and  trauma.    Any
         assessment that I could make of  GE's  age  on  the  basis  of  her
         physical appearance and demeanour would therefore be no more than a
         guess - and that has no place in a fact-finding exercise."

25. In my judgment what Judge Suffield-Thompson was saying in  para  35  of
    her determination (set out above  at  para  13)  was  that  the  social
    workers' assessment based simply on an interview  and  the  appellant's
    physical appearance and demeanour was not sufficient to make any proper
    finding as to his age.  Her own assessment based upon  the  appellant's
    physical appearance and demeanour would have differed from that of  the
    social workers.  Wisely, the judge did not seek to prefer her own  view
    to that of the social workers.  That too would, in my view,  fall  into
    the  trap  which  the  Deputy  Judge  in   GE   (Eritrea)   identified.
    Nevertheless, as  a  result,  the  social  workers'  evidence  was  not
    sufficiently robust to support any finding as to the appellant's age.

26. Whilst the judge does also point out the lateness of the evidence,  her
    first reason is,  in  my  judgment,  wholly  adequate  to  justify  her
    decision not to place weight upon the  rudimentary  assessment  of  age
    contained in the social  workers'  report.   In  truth,  there  was  no
    reliable evidence before the judge  that  would  have  allowed  her  to
    determine the appellant's true age beyond that given by  the  appellant
    himself.  In my judgment, the judge did not err in law  by  failing  to
    rely upon the briefly stated  and  undeveloped  assessed  view  of  the
    social workers.  There was, therefore, no proper basis upon  which  the
    judge can be said to have failed to determine whether the appellant was
    lying about his age and, therefore, a matter which was relevant to  his
    credibility.

27. But, there is a further point.  Mr Richards did not seek  in  his  oral
    submissions (and there is nothing in  the  grounds)  to  challenge  the
    judge's detailed and careful reasoning in  paras  36-40  in  which  she
    ultimately found the appellant to be a  credible  witness.   The  judge
    dealt seriatim with the respondent's reasons in the refusal letter  and
    effectively  countered  each  reason  as  a  basis  for  doubting   the
    appellant's credibility.  It does not seem  to  me  that  even  if  the
    appellant could be shown to have  given  a  false  age  on  arrival  or
    thereafter that that would, in any  event,  have  been  a  sufficiently
    significant matter so as to lead the judge to a different conclusion on
    the appellant's credibility.  However, given my conclusion above,  that
    point does not in fact arise.

28. Finally, I see no conceivable error, therefore, in the  judge  treating
    the  appellant  as  a  "young  man"  in  para  49  when  assessing  the
    possibility of internal relocation to Baghdad.  He was that on any view
    of the evidence.  The judge was entitled to take that as  part  of  the
    factual matrix in determining whether the  appellant  could  internally
    relocate to Baghdad.

29. Turning now to the issue of internal relocation, Mr  Richards  did  not
    seek to counter Mr Manley's  submission  that  the  Presenting  Officer
    'backtracked' from  his  initial  argument  that  the  appellant  could
    internally relocate back to the area where his uncle lived in Khanqeen.
     Whether or not the Presenting Officer ultimately placed reliance  upon
    this  possibility,  the  judge  dealt  with  it  in  para  48  of   her
    determination as follows:

         "The Respondent has submitted that the Appellant  could  either  go
         back to Khanaqin or live with his uncle and  parents  again  or  he
         could go and relocate to Baghdad.  I do not find that the Appellant
         could return to his Uncle's home.  He lived there  for  3-4  months
         and his uncle told him he could no longer remain there  as  he  was
         putting the family at risk due to his encounters  with  ISIS.   The
         Appellant would not be offered a home with his uncle."

30. The point made by Mr Manley  is  that  the  judge  addressed  with  the
    Presenting Officer the background material which showed that the Diyala
    Governorate was in disarray and a state  of  internal  armed  conflict.
    The appellant's uncle lived in that Governorate.  In AA at [101]-[106],
    the Upper Tribunal noted the "volatility of the situation" in contested
    areas including the Governorate of Diyala.  The conclusion in [106]  of
    the UT's decision was that a civilian merely by their presence  in  one
    of the contested areas such as Diyala was at  real  risk  of  suffering
    harm contrary  to  Art  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive.   The
    "volatility"  of  the  situation  no  doubt  explained  the  Presenting
    Officer's stance at the hearing.  At para 46, the judge referred to  an
    Amnesty International  document  which  noted  that  Jalawla  (also  in
    Diyala) and surroundings had been recaptured  from  ISIS  fighters  but
    that went on to note that residents had not been allowed to go home and
    looting and damage to property was ongoing.

31. There was also the appellant's evidence that his uncle would  not  take
    him back because of the danger.

    In my judgment, there was ample evidence before the  judge  to  justify
    her finding that, given in particular the "volatility" of the area  and
    the shifting control of the fighting parties, the appellant  could  not
    safely and reasonably be expected to internally relocate to  live  with
    his uncle in Khanqeen in the Diyala Governorate.

32. Turning now to the issue of relocation to Baghdad the judge dealt  with
    this at para 49 as follows:

         "It has been suggested by the Respondent's representative that  the
         Appellant could return to Baghdad.  I do not find that  this  is  a
         realistic alternative for this Appellant.  Although I have made  no
         definitive finding in relations to his age I do find he is a  young
         man, with no family support in Baghdad.  He has no home,  no  means
         of financial independence and no paperwork or ID.  On the basis  of
         all of this I find it highly likely  that  if  he  were  to  go  to
         Baghdad he would be placed in an IDP camp.  As he is a  Kurd  there
         are only certain areas that this Appellant would be able to  go  to
         and I find that due to the  appalling  internal  conflict  that  is
         raging in Iraq it is not reasonable to expect  this  young  man  to
         relocate.  I am assisted in this decision by  the  case  of  E  and
         another v SSHD [2003] EWCA 1032, [2004] QB 531.  In this  case  the
         test was established that relocation would be reasonable and  safe.
         I do not find that there is anywhere in Iraq where  this  Appellant
         would be safe.  I allow the appeal on asylum grounds."

33. I have already dealt with the issue of the  judge's  premise  that  the
    appellant, on return, should be treated as a "young man".  That was the
    sole basis upon which  the  ground  sought  to  challenge  the  judge's
    finding that the appellant could not reasonably and safely relocate  to
    Baghdad.

34. The issue of relocation to Baghdad was dealt with by the Upper Tribunal
    in the country guidance case of AA.  At para 14 of the  head  note  the
    Upper Tribunal summarised the general position as follows:

         "As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or  unduly  harsh
         for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad  City  or
         the Baghdad Belts."

35. However, at para 15 of the head note the  UT  recognised  that  a  fact
    sensitive  approach  to   the   issue   of   whether   relocation   was
    "unreasonable/unduly harsh" having regard to a  number  of  factors  as
    follows:

         "15. In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for
         P to relocate to  Baghdad,  the  following  factors  are,  however,
         likely to be relevant:

             (a)  whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain  one  (see
                  Part C above);

             (b)  whether P can speak Arabic (those  who  cannot  are  less
                  likely to find employment);

             (c)  whether P has family members or friends in  Baghdad  able
                  to accommodate him;

             (d)   whether  P  is  a  lone  female  (women   face   greater
                  difficulties than men in finding employment);

             (e)  whether P can find a sponsor to access a  hotel  room  or
                  rent accommodation;

             (f)  whether there is support available for P bearing in  mind
                  there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers
                  are provided with the support generally given to IDPs."

36. Here, the judge found that the appellant, a young man,  would  have  no
    family support in Baghdad, no home, no means of financial  support  and
    no documentation.  Those findings are  not  challenged  in  the  ground
    although the appellant would, in fact, not be returned to Iraq  without
    proper documentation (see head note 6 of AA).

37. Whilst the judge's reasoning in para  49  is  relatively  brief,  I  am
    unable to conclude that her finding was irrational or was not otherwise
    open to her applying the approach in the country guidance case  of  AA.
    It was properly open to the judge to find that, given the lack  of  any
    support or connection with Baghdad, that the appellant was likely to be
    placed in an IDP camp and that it was unreasonable  to  expect  him  to
    relocate to Baghdad in those circumstances.

38. For these reasons, I reject the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.



Decision

39. The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law in allowing the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds.  That decision stands.

40. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.





                                      Signed


                                      A Grubb
                                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                                      Date: 28 July 2016
