
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09338/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 24 July 2013                                 |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                           Muhammad Junaid Kayani

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Marshall, Barry Clark, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Spence, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Muhammad Junaid Kayani, was born on 8 January  1978  and
    is a male citizen of Pakistan.  The appellant appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State  dated  28
    September 2012 to remove him from the United Kingdom.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Kelly) in a determination promulgated  on  23  November
    2012, dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  The appellant now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant's case is set out at paragraphs 6 - 10 of  Judge  Kelly's
    determination. At [18],  Judge  Kelly  found  that  there  was  "cogent
    evidence to substantiate [the appellant's] claim that he was not only a
    UKPNP member but  also  that  he  held  the  position  of  local  party
    president whilst residing in Pakistan."  However, at  [19  -  20],  the
    judge went on to attach little weight to documentary  evidence  adduced
    by the appellant regarding specific problems which the appellant claims
    to have suffered whilst in Pakistan on account of his political  views.
    Likewise, a medical report which the judge discusses at [21] was  given
    little weight "as independent verification of either the  injuries  the
    appellant claims to have sustained or how he came by them."  The  judge
    also attached little  weight  to  a  First  Incident  Report  (FIR)  of
    November 2011 and he gave detailed reasons for so doing.  At [23],  the
    judge discusses  a  document  purporting  to  be  from  Laskar-e-Taibah
    warning "a person of the appellant's name" to refrain  from  un-Islamic
    activities.  The judge found that this  document  seemed  "to  have  no
    connection to any of the matters raised by the appellant in  his  claim
    for asylum or in his appeal from its refusal and  the  purpose  of  its
    inclusion in the appellant's evidence thus remains obscure."   At  [24]
    the judge gave detailed reasons for  rejecting  evidence  contained  in
    newspaper reports concerning  the  appellant's  alleged  activities  in
    Pakistan.  He found some of the evidence  to  be  "wholly  inconsistent
    with [the appellant's] case"  and  considered  that  the  evidence  was
    "fateful to the credibility of the account as a whole."

 3. Permission was granted in respect of all grounds of appeal.  First, the
    grounds assert that the judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  evidence
    "holistically" and should  not  have  attached  little  weight  to  the
    evidence of the appellant's political activities simply because "it did
    not independently verify the appellant's account".  The grounds contend
    that the judge gave contradictory findings attaching at [18] weight  to
    a letter from the secretary general of the organisation  of  which  the
    appellant was a member in Kashmir  "because  the  author  has  personal
    knowledge of the appellant and access to party  records"  but  at  [22]
    rejecting evidence in that letter of the appellant's  arrest  and  ill-
    treatment.

 4. I do  not  consider  this  ground  has  merit.   I  find  there  is  no
    inconsistency in the judge's  finding  that  the  documentary  evidence
    indicated that the appellant was a  UKPNP  member  but,  for  the  very
    reasons which he gives in the determination, rejecting the  documentary
    evidence as corroborating the appellant's claim to have  been  arrested
    and tortured.  The judge stated at [15] that he had taken "all  matters
    into account in arriving at my conclusion".  I have no reason to  doubt
    that statement.  The submission that the judge has not dealt  with  the
    evidence holistically simply cannot survive a thorough reading  of  the
    determination.  It was open to the judge to find that the  contents  of
    the letter from the president of the Kashmir Human Rights Movement  was
    "nebulous" and also open to him to attach little weight to that  letter
    because of its lack of detail.  I do not find that the judge  erred  in
    law at [20] by attaching little weight to  documentary  evidence  which
    failed to identify the source of the information contained  within  it.
    The judge was not bound to accept Mr  Marshall's  submission  that  the
    authors of the documents "must have made local enquiries  in  order  to
    verify the appellant's account".  Likewise, the reasons  given  by  the
    judge for attaching little weight to the medical report,  FIR  and  the
    letter of Laskar-e-Taibah  are,  in  my  opinion,  entirely  clear  and
    cogent.  The submission made in the grounds that the judge  should  not
    have  rejected  evidence  which  was  consistent  with  the  background
    material is misguided; just because  an  appellant's  evidence  may  be
    consistent with such background material it does not excuse  the  judge
    for making an assessment of the evidence  in  the  round  nor  does  it
    oblige the judge to accept the evidence as true.  I also have no reason
    at all to suppose  that  the  judge  has  not  considered  all  of  the
    appellant's oral and written evidence in reaching  his  findings.   The
    judge is not obliged to deal with each and every explanation which  the
    appellant may have given for apparent inconsistencies in his  evidence.
    It is clear from the contents of the determination that the  judge  has
    considered all  the  evidence  (including  the  explanations)  and  has
    reached findings which  were  open  him  which  included  the  implicit
    rejection of the appellant's explanations.

 5. The grounds assert that the judge failed to consider a significant part
    of the appellant's case [8].  The appellant claimed that he was  scared
    of  Islamic  militants.   The  only  reference  to  this  part  of  the
    appellant's case appears at [23]  of  the  determination.  The  grounds
    assert that the evidence before the judge confirmed  the  hostility  of
    Islamic groups to Kashmiri separatists.  That assertion appears  to  be
    at odds with the judge's statement at [23] that "my attention  was  not
    drawn to any background country information to suggest that the Kashmir
    separatist movement has attracted a religious antipathy."  The  grounds
    at [11] state that country material referred to by the judge  confirmed
    that "a coalition of Kashmiri separatist parties have found  themselves
    in the 'crosshairs' of militant gunmen".

 6. What Judge  Kelly  says  regarding  the  appellant's  fear  of  Islamic
    militants is not entirely accurate.  At  question  173  of  the  asylum
    interview, the appellant had stated  that  he  was  afraid  of  Islamic
    extremists who "think we are against Jihad.  They think we are  against
    the religion and against Jihad.  We are not against the religion we are
    against  extremism  we  want  to  negotiate  and  solve   the   problem
    peacefully."  However, I find that the judge was  right  to  find  that
    little evidence had been put before him which would indicate that  this
    appellant would be at risk  from  Islamic  extremists  because  of  his
    political opinion.  Once again, I find that the judge  has  dealt  with
    all the evidence as he claims to have done in reaching his  finding  at
    [25] that "the appellant was a member of the UKPNP and that he held the
    position of president of one  of  its  local  branches  whilst  he  was
    residing in Pakistan.  I find that  nothing  else  of  his  account  is
    true."  It is also clear to me that very little, if anything,  is  made
    of the appellant's claimed fear of Islamic  militants  in  the  hearing
    before Judge Kelly.  Reading the determination as a whole,  considering
    the evidence which  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  do  not
    consider it likely that, had he been referred to that  passage  of  the
    asylum interview which I have quoted above or to the brief reference in
    the  country  material,  the  judge  would  have  concluded  that  this
    appellant faced a real risk from Islamic militants in his home area  of
    Pakistan.  Best practice might indicate  that  the  judge  should  have
    dealt with that aspect of the appellant's claim in greater detail  but,
    insofar as he may have erred in law, I do not consider it necessary  to
    set aside the determination in consequence.

 7. In conclusion, the judge has reached findings following a detailed  and
    careful consideration of all the evidence. The findings  were  open  to
    him.  He has not taken account of evidence which he should have ignored
    nor has he failed to take account of evidence which was  of  relevance.
    His handling of that part of the appellant's claim relating to  a  fear
    of Islamic militants is arguably  inadequate  but,  as  I  have  stated
    above, I decline to set aside the determination for error of law.

DECISION

This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 10 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
