





Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09940/2013

                                                            AA/04638/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |                        Decision and       |
|                                  |Reasons Promulgated                        |
|On: 24 June 2015                  |                        On 26 June 2015    |
|                                  |                                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                            Mansa Cowar (kurana)
                                 atum singh
                       (no anonymity directions made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellants:    Ms A Jones, counsel instructed by Simman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are nationals of Afghanistan, born  in  1939  and  1941
      respectively. Their appeals against the  decision  of  the  respondent
      refusing their asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights claims
      were dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge KSH Miller in  a  decision
      promulgated on 30 December 2014.


   2. On 20 January 2015, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Frankish  granted  the
      appellants  applications  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the   Upper
      Tribunal. The grounds asserted inter alia, that  he  should  not  have
      dismissed the concerns raised by the appellants about the interpreter.
       There were further criticisms regarding alleged inappropriate conduct
      by the Judge during the hearing.


   3. I have had a full report and statement  from  counsel,  Ms  Jones  who
      represented the appellants before both  Tribunals.  She  has  set  out
      various complaints regarding the alleged conduct.


   4. However, as a result of the acceptance by Mr. Walker that concerns had
      been raised about the interpreter by the appellants and their grandson
      during the proceedings, and that the Judge  had  somewhat  impatiently
      brushed  aside  these  concerns,   there   has   been   a   procedural
      irregularity.  Both appellants had stated that Farsi and Dari were not
      the same and that the Farsi language used by the interpreter  had  not
      been entirely clear.


   5. In the circumstances Mr Walker accepted that there had been a material
      error of law and that the decision should be  set  aside  and  remade.
      Both representatives submitted that  in  the  circumstances  the  case
      should be remitted to Taylor House for a fresh decision to be made.


      Assessment


   6. It is evident from the decision itself that concerns had  been  raised
      as  to  the  interpreter.   The  appellant's  grandson   had   himself
      intervened and expressed his concerns.   Both  wished  to  have  their
      evidence interpreted by a Dari (Afghan) interpreter and not in  Farsi.
      Although I have been informed that they are similar, they are not  the
      same.


   7. I find that Mr Walker's concession was therefore entirely  appropriate
      in the circumstances.


   8. I find that the appellants were deprived of the opportunity of  giving
      their evidence effectively in a language they fully understood.   That
      opportunity had not been afforded them.  Their credibility was a  core
      issue in the appeal.


   9. I thus find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      involved the making of a material error of  law.   I  accordingly  set
      aside the decision.


  10. As noted, the parties were agreed that in these circumstances,  having
      regard to the fact that the appellants have been denied an opportunity
      of presenting their 'full case' to the Tribunal, it is appropriate for
      the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


  11. I have considered the Presidential guidance in this  respect.  I  find
      that there has been a procedural irregularity  such  that  there  will
      have to be a complete re-hearing. In the circumstances, I accept  that
      this is an appropriate case for the appeal to be remitted to the First-
      tier Tribunal at Taylor House.


  12. The agreed hearing date has been fixed by agreement. The case will  be
      heard on the 18 December 2015 at Taylor House.  Directions  have  been
      given.  There will be four witnesses called to give evidence.  A  half
      a day has been allocated to the hearing of their appeals.


  13. I have also directed that  a  Dari  (Afghan  dialect)  interpreter  is
      required.


            Notice of Decision


      The appeal is allowed.


      The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, Taylor House for  the
      re-hearing of the appellants' appeals.


            No anonymity direction made.


            Signed                                       Date 24 June 2015


            Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer




