
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09444/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham, Sheldon Court              |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th May 2014                                 |On 13th June 2014          |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                  mr m.B.A.
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Azmi (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Birk promulgated on 27th February 2014, following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 10th February 2014.  In the  determination,
    the judge allowed the appeal of the Appellant.  The Secretary of  State
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria, who  was  born  on  19th
    April 1980.  He arrived in the UK on 1st  October  2005  on  a  student
    visa.  When his application for leave to remain  was  refused  on  28th
    April 2011 outside the Immigration Rules, he claimed for asylum on 17th
    August 2011.  That claim for asylum was dismissed by the Respondent  on
    26th September 2013.  The Appellant has five dependants, consisting  of
    his partner, and their four children.  It is a  feature  of  this  case
    that on 17th April 2013, the Appellant's partner was  accepted  by  the
    Respondent as being a victim of sexual exploitation by virtue of  human
    trafficking (paragraph 3).

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that his father is an imam in Nigeria.  He has
    married seven wives.  He has many children.  Many of his  children  are
    not even known to the Appellant.  In 2004, the Appellant went to  study
    in the UK.  He had a relationship with M A, who was  a  Christian,  and
    they had two sets of twins.  When the  father  found  out  he  used  to
    support them because he  had  promised  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    married to another woman in Nigeria.  The Appellant is from the  Yoruba
    tribe and women from this tribe undergo FGM and his family members have
    tribal markings (paragraph 6).  The Appellant's claim now  is  that  he
    fears that his father will beat or kill him on return  because  of  his
    relationship with a Christian woman  and  the  family  will  force  his
    daughters to undergo scarring and FGM as well as forced  marriage  (see
    paragraph 7).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge accepted that  the  Appellant  has  a  sister  who  has  been
    subjected to tribal markings and FGM.  His daughters on return will  be
    expected to undergo the same.  There  was  a  risk  from  the  father's
    extensive influence (paragraph 26).   Accordingly,  the  Appellant  had
    established a well-founded fear of persecution upon  return  (paragraph
    28).  The appeal was allowed on the basis that he was a  refugee  under
    the  Refugee  Convention.   Consideration  was  also   given   to   the
    Appellant's Article 8 claims (paragraph 31) and the appeal was  allowed
    on that basis also.  The judge in particular pointed out that  "due  to
    the findings that I have made with regards to the  daughter's  risk  of
    FGM I find that they could not  enjoy  family  life  with  the  serious
    threat being ever present" (paragraph 36).

Grounds of Application

 5. The Grounds of Application state that the judge erred in  allowing  the
    appeal because the findings at paragraphs 23 to 27  are  insufficiently
    reasoned (together with paragraph 36).  No proper weight is accorded to
    the fact that the Appellant's evidence  was  rejected  in  the  refusal
    letter (at paragraph 23).  There were negative credibility findings (at
    paragraph 22).  The judge did not deal with the issue of sufficiency of
    protection in Nigeria in the proper manner.

 6. On 10th March 2014 permission to appeal was granted.   However,  it  is
    significant that it was limited on the basis that "permission to appeal
    is  granted,  limited  to  the  issue  of  risk  on  return,  naturally
    incorporating sufficiency of protection and  internal  relocation,  and
    also their implications for the Article 8 proportionality  assessment".
    Significantly, it was stated that "the judicial findings  of  fact  are
    sound and are to stand" (paragraph 4).

 7. The Secretary of State did not appeal the restricted basis of the grant
    of permission.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing  before  me,  Mr  Smart,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent,  submitted  that  on  the  question  of   "sufficiency   of
    protection" and "internal relocation" the plain fact was  that  Nigeria
    was a "white list country" such that there would be no risk of lack  of
    protection.  Mr Smart drew to my attention three cases  in  particular.
    First, there was Obasi [2007]  EWHC  381  which  established  that  the
    Nigerian authorities and the police do make  efforts  to  tackle  crime
    even now there is corruption.  The judge did not consider this  in  the
    instant case.  Second, there was Maryam Umar  [2008]  EWHC  2385  which
    considered domestic violence, and the Appellant's contention  that  the
    police do not intervene to protect  women  as  they  are  poorly  paid,
    poorly resourced, and ill-equipped to deal with violent crime, but  the
    court held that this did not support the  contention  that  the  police
    would not intervene.  Third, there was BL (Ogboni Cult) Nigeria  [2002]
    UKIAT 01708 which also established that there is no  basis  for  saying
    that the police or  the  authorities  will  not,  or  cannot,  exercise
    control, or refuse to investigate  or  deal,  with  Satanic/ritualistic
    ceremonies (at paragraph 20).  Accordingly, even  if  the  country  was
    known for corruption, this did not mean  that  this  was  the  same  as
    saying that there was no availability of sufficiency of protection.

 9. For his part, Mr Azmi relied upon his Rule 24  response  of  7th  April
    2014.  He submitted that the judge did not  simply  look  at  a  single
    issue, such as police activity or inactivity, but focused firmly on the
    risk that came from a overbearing and oppressive  father,  who  was  an
    imam.  The nub of the judge's conclusions lay at paragraph  26  of  the
    determination.  This consisted of three essential elements.  First, the
    judge referred to the fact that tribal markings and FGM were a  feature
    of the practice of the Yuroba tribe  and  had  been  followed  by  this
    family.  Second, the judge emphasised that "this risk is compounded  by
    his father's influence and position and  the  practice  of  the  Yuroba
    tribe to engage in such practices".  Third, the judge  referred  to  "a
    very high risk  that  his  father's  network  of  family,  friends  and
    associates that he will be  located  in  Nigeria  and  brought  to  the
    attention of his father".  It was only after  all  of  this,  that  the
    judge then  referred  to  the  COI  Report  to  the  effect  that  "the
    government lack effective mechanism to investigate and punish abuse and
    corruption" (paragraph 26).  Therefore, this  was  a  well-rounded  and
    careful finding of relevant facts.  In any event, the judge  also  then
    considered the Article 8 position and allowed the appeal on  the  basis
    that the children, who consisted of girls, would not be able to enjoy a
    family life given the risk of FGM that was clearly prevalent and  stood
    to be applied to them if they returned (paragraph 36).

10. There was no reply from Mr Smart, who adopted his primary submissions.



No Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside this  decision.   It  is  well-
    established that for this Tribunal to intervene there must be  a  clear
    case of the Tribunal below having reached a decision that can  properly
    be categorised as "perverse" or "irrational" and that this is  "a  high
    hurdle" (see R (Iran) [2005]).

12. In this case, the judge does not simply say that on the  basis  of  the
    COI Report the government lack effective mechanism to  investigate  and
    punish abuse and corruption.  Nor, does the judge  refer  to  the  fact
    that the corruption in itself prevents  the  effective  prosecution  of
    crimes.  What the judge does say is  that,  it  is  clear  that  tribal
    markings and FGM are practised by the Yoruba tribe, to which tribe  the
    appellant and his family belong.

13. But more importantly, the judge  also  refers  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's sister had been subjected to the same practices  of  tribal
    markings and FGM (paragraph 26).  In addition, it was the judge's clear
    finding, that given the circumstances of this family, which contained a
    father who was a strict follower of his religion, and indeed  an  imam,
    this was a practice that was indeed  likely  to  be  visited  upon  the
    children when they returned.

14. The chances of the Appellant avoiding that was limited  because  of  "a
    very high risk  that  his  father's  network  of  family,  friends  and
    associates" would be able to carry out the wishes of the father.   Such
    a case is different from that of  pure  domestic  violence  or  of  the
    practice of Satanic rituals, both of  which  are  contrary  to  law  in
    Nigeria.

15. The use of tribal markings and of FGM, even if also contrary to the law
    in Nigeria, is a practice that is deeply embedded in  such  a  society,
    and it was open to  the  judge,  on  the  basis  of  the  analysis  and
    evaluation carried out of the facts, to conclude in the  way  that  she
    did.  This Tribunal can only intervene if there was no  rational  basis
    for such a conclusion.  Accordingly, there is no error of law.

Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.  An anonymity Order is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 9th May 2014

