


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09734/2013
                                                               AA/07935/2013
                                                               AA/09736/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Sent           |
|on 23rd May 2014                              |on 6th June 2014             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                   N S D E
                                   E A A G
                                   C N S E
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Paxton instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Richards Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Britton  promulgated  on  12th  December  2013  in  which  he
        dismissed the appeals of this  family unit against a direction  for
        their removal to Egypt  which  accompanied  the  refusal  of  their
        applications for asylum, on all grounds.


     2. The first appellant was born on a date in 1945. Although they  have
        been allocated separate appeal numbers the  second  appellant,  his
        wife, and the third appellant (their minor  son),  are  in  reality
        dependents upon his appeal.


     3.  Having  considered   the   immigration   history,   evidence   and
        submissions, the Judge sets out his findings from paragraph  52  of
        the determination. The basis of the claim  relates  to  a  fear  on
        return as Coptic Christians.


     4. Permission to appeal was refused  by  a  judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal but granted on a renewed  application  by  Upper  Tribunal
        Judge Lane on the following grounds:


     "The country guidance case of MS [2013] UKUT 611 was  published  before
   the First-tier Tribunal judge signed off his determination  and  arguably
   ought to have been taken into account in considering the  appeal.  It  is
   arguable that the judge failed to make a finding on the main  appellant's
   assertion in his statement that he would, in effect, wish to  proselytise
   (a     risk factor according to the country guidance) and that the  judge
   also failed    to make findings regarding the appellants claimed position
   as a deacon    and as to other elements of the case, as asserted  in  the
   grounds."


     5. The observations by Judge Lane are factually correct as  a  reading
        of the determination and the evidence relied  upon  shows  and  are
        material elements upon which the First-tier Tribunal  was  required
        to make specific findings to enable a proper assessment of any risk
        this family face on return to  be  undertaken.   The  situation  in
        Egypt is ongoing and the country guidance case of MS is  especially
        relevant as it refers to the risk to Coptic Christians.


     6. The challenge was not actively opposed by Mr Richards regarding the
        finding there is a material error of law although he submitted that
        if the Judge had  realised  the  country  guidance  case  had  been
        published prior to  promulgation  he  may  have  made  findings  on
        relevant issues.  I agree with this as a  general  observation  but
        the fact of the matter  is  that  the  Judge  failed  to  make  the
        required findings or  to  refer  to  the  most  up-to-date  country
        guidance case.


     7. The errors of law can be summarised as (a) a  failure  to  consider
        relevant evidence, (b) inadequate  findings,  and  (c)  failure  to
        apply the required degree of anxious scrutiny. It  is  accepted  by
        both advocates that in the circumstances, as  the  appellants  have
        not had a proper hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  at  which
        relevant issues can be canvassed and findings made by reference  to
        the country guidance case and general situation in Egypt  following
        recent elections, the appeal should be remitted to be heard afresh.
         Accordingly the following directions applied to the future conduct
        of this case:


     i.   The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Britton  shall  be
   set aside. There shall be no preserved findings.


     ii.  The appeal shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal centre  at
      Newport  be  heard  by  a  salaried  judge   nominated   by   Resident
   Judge  Poole  on  20th  August  2014  with  a  time  estimate  of   three
   hours.


     iii. Consolidated,  indexed,  and  paginated  bundles  shall  be  filed
   with  the  Tribunal,  and  served,  no  later  than  4  PM   8th   August
   2014.  Witness  statements   in   the   bundle   shall   stand   as   the
   evidence  in  chief  of  the  maker.  Skeleton  arguments   are   to   be
   included  in  any  bundles  filed.  The  parties  must  not  assume  that
   documents previously submitted to the Tribunal remain           available
   to it.


     iv.  An Egyptian Arabic interpreter is required.


   Anonymity.


     8. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  I
        continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 6th June 2014.












