
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09179/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 February 2018                            |On 16 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     B M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding, Counsel, instructed by A Seelhoff
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision posted on 4 October 2017 Judge Parker of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of  the  appellant,  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh, against the decision of the respondent made on  27  October
    2015 refusing to grant international protection.  The judge found  that
    the appellant had not given a credible account of being  kidnapped  and
    raped by a neighbour called [A] who was a member of  the  Awami  League
    and a known criminal.  Her allegations included a claim that in January
    2014, on the second occasion this man and his associates kidnapped her,
    she was raped and physically abused several times.

2.   The grounds of appeal were twofold.  It was contended  that  the  judge
    erred in law firstly by conducting the hearing in a procedurally unfair
    manner giving rise to the appearance of bias and secondly by failure to
    have regard to relevant evidence, in particular the appellant's witness
    statement.

3.    I  heard  evidence  from  Mr  Adam  Seelhoff,  the  principal  of  the
    solicitors' firm who represented the appellant at the hearing.  He  was
    asked questions about his witness statement in which he  reported  that
    the judge questioned the appellant in significantly greater detail than
    the Home Office Presenting Officer and for approximately twice as  long
    and only ceased her questioning of the appellant when he  pointed  this
    out to her.  Mr Seelhoff had a particular  concern  about  the  judge's
    response to an intervention by him at one point,  she  suggesting  that
    his client (who was  using  an  interpreter)  could  not  understand  a
    question.   The  judge  was  reported  to  have  remarked  "That's  one
    interpretation."

4.   In his oral testimony Mr Seelhoff said he formed the  impression  early
    on that the judge did not believe the appellant.   He  also  considered
    that the judge's lengthy questioning of  the  appellant  regarding  the
    legal proceedings in Bangladesh over her marital status  did  not  take
    account of the legal complexity of the issue.   It  was  not  just  the
    volume of questions asked by the judge (9 as opposed to 8 asked by  the
    HOPO), it was the judge's apparent disregard of the sensitivity of some
    of the issues arising in the case.

5.   Prior to the hearing the Upper Tribunal obtained from  Judge  Parker  a
    statement from her giving her account of the proceedings  in  light  of
    the criticism raised in the grounds.  At the hearing Mr Clarke produced
    the Note made of the hearing by the HOPO.

6.   I heard helpful submissions from Mr Harding and Mr Clarke.  Mr  Harding
    highlighted the point that the  judge  did  not  consider  whether  the
    appellant was a vulnerable witness.  It was not suggested the judge was
    biased, only that the manner in which she conducted  the  hearing  gave
    rise to an appearance of bias.  Mr Clarke submitted  that  the  judge's
    questions were clearly designed to give the appellant an opportunity to
    explain difficulties in her account and none were inappropriate.  There
    were numerous inconsistencies in the appellant's  account.   The  judge
    clearly had taken account of the  appellant's  witness  statement.   Mr
    Clarke pointed out that the grounds had not raised  the  Tanveer  Ahmed
    point.

7.   Having considered the matter in some detail, I have concluded that  the
    evidence as to whether there was an appearance of bias is inconclusive.
     Mr Harding seeks to place great weight on the judge's response  to  Mr
    Seelhoff's suggestion that the  appellant  was  not  understanding  the
    judge's question ("That's one interpretation").   The  difficulty  with
    assessing  whether  that  response  was,  as  alleged,   flippant   and
    indicative of a closed mind, is that  it  is  highly  contextual.   One
    alternative possibility is that the judge was meaning to convey  to  Mr
    Seelhoff that she had to keep her mind open to alternative explanations
    for the appellant's difficulties in  answering  his  question  at  that
    point.  The appearance of bias test, as analysed by the Upper  Tribunal
    in the case of Sivapatham (Appearance and bias) [2017] UKUT 00393 (IAC)
    is directed to the question of how the conduct would be perceived by  a
    fair-minded observer, but that depends very much on precisely  how  the
    judge spoke those words and exactly what was said next - of which there
    is  no  audio-recording.   There  is  more  force  in  the  appellant's
    contention that the judge's cross-examination was unduly  detailed  and
    amounted to her descending into the realm.  The HOPO's Note states:

         "At the end of my cross-examination the judge cross-examined.   She
         did ask a lot of questions and at one point A's reps stated to  the
         judge that she had been questioning for longer than Respondent,  to
         which the Judge stopped questioning and put some of  the  questions
         through  A's  reps  during  re-examination.   The  Judges'   cross-
         examination was regarding A's divorce evidence to which the A  gave
         contradictory answers, at some point stating she had a divorce  and
         other times saying she had an annulment because  the  marriage  was
         never valid."

8.   Whilst this Note supports Mr Seelhoff's account of the judge  asking  a
    lot of questions, it does suggest that  once  this  was  drawn  to  her
    attention she responded by asking the appellant's representative to put
    some remaining questions she had to the  appellant  in  re-examination.
    In the end, I do not need to reach a definitive conclusion on the issue
    of appearance of bias because I am satisfied that the  judge's  conduct
    of the hearing was compromised by a separate error, although  one  that
    interrelates with the extent of her own examination of  the  appellant.
    The appellant's account included a claim that she  had  been  raped  by
    [A].  By virtue of that claim the judge should have given consideration
    to treating her as a vulnerable witness under  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance Note No  2  of  2010  Child  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive
    appellant.  Giving this matter due consideration may also  have  caused
    the judge to approach her own examination of the appellant on the issue
    of  the  divorce  evidence  differently,  since  the  fact   that   the
    relationship had been consummated (albeit by coercion) was likely to be
    treated by the Bangladesh legal system as  complicating  the  issue  of
    whether to treat it as a nullity or as a divorce.

9.   Neither party drew my attention to it but there  are  passages  in  the
    judge's decision which at  first  sight  might  suggest  she  did  give
    consideration to treating the appellant as a  vulnerable  witness.   At
    20.5 the judge said this about the medical evidence:

         "20.5    The appellant provided evidence of hospital  treatment  in
                October  2013,  but  I  am  not  satisfied  that   she   has
                established, even to the lower standard, that any  treatment
                she may have received was required  because  of  an  alleged
                kidnapping  in  January  2013,  nine  months  earlier.   The
                appellant claims to suffer some psychiatric problems but she
                has not established this, even to the lower  standard.   The
                only  medical  evidence  that  she  has  produced  is   from
                Bangladesh and records minor physical ailments and that  she
                has  attempted  to  self-harm.   There  is  no  medical   or
                psychiatric report from an  expert  in  the  United  Kingdom
                concerning the appellant's mental  health  and  no  evidence
                that she has received any treatment since she  has  been  in
                the United Kingdom.  The  appellant  has  not  provided  any
                medical  evidence  in  relation  to   her   second   claimed
                kidnapping which, she claims, lasted for several months."

    At 20.24 she stated:

         "20.24    The  respondent  relied,  at  the   hearing,   upon   the
                appellant's inconsistent evidence about whether and when she
                was raped in detention.  I  would   normally  be  loathe  to
                place weight upon such inconsistencies given  the  sensitive
                nature of the subject matter.  However,  having  found  that
                her account is credible, I  find  it  appropriate  to  place
                weight upon this also."

11.  The judge was entitled perhaps to  attach  significant  weight  to  the
    relative  lack  of  medical  evidence,  although  the   evidence   from
    Bangladesh  doctors  recording  an  attempt  of  self-harm  should  not
    arguably have been so quickly cast aside given her  account  of  kidnap
    and rape.  In any event paragraph 20.24 is exceedingly problematic.  As
    it reads, it is saying the judge found the appellant credible.  That is
    flatly contrary to the rest of the decision and so  must  therefore  be
    regarded as a typing error.  But if regarded as a typing error, which I
    think it must be, then the judge is saying that because she  found  the
    appellant's account not credible, it was appropriate  to  place  weight
    upon the appellant's inconsistent evidence about whether and  when  she
    was  raped  in  detention.   That  is  back  to  front.   The   adverse
    credibility finding in this issue could only have been  based  for  the
    judge on those inconsistent  findings.   Or,  if  they  were  based  on
    anything else, implausibility for example, then the only  reason  given
    by the judge at 20.6 for disbelieving her claim to have been  kidnapped
    and raped in 2014 was that it was implausible she would still have been
    living at home given that [A] had abducted her from there in 2013.  The
    judge nowhere addresses whether she considered the appellant's  account
    of rape at  several  different  locations  as  coherent,  plausible  or
    consistent, aside from the one implausibility mentioned.  Further,  the
    judge does not link her decision not to take account of  the  sensitive
    nature of the issue or rape to the state of the medical  evidence.   In
    short, the judge failed to demonstrate that she had given due attention
    to whether to treat the appellant as a vulnerable witness and  whether,
    to ensure that she kept her mind  open  to  the  possibility  that  the
    appellant was a vulnerable witness, she conducted the entirety  of  the
    hearing with sensitivity, including by avoiding examining the appellant
    herself at some length.

12.  In light of the above it  is  not  necessary  for  me  to  address  the
    appellant's second ground which focused on the judge's treatment of the
    witness evidence.

13.  For the above  reasons,  I  have  decided  to  set  aside  the  judge's
    decision for material error of law.

14.  Given the nature of the judge's error it is not  possible  to  preserve
    any of her findings of fact and the case is remitted to  the  FtT  (not
    before Judge Parker).  That is not ideal since the  appellant's  appeal
    was the subject of a previous appeal decision  by  Judge  O'Malley  set
    aside by UTJ Bruce in February 2017, but I see no real alternative.

Directions

15.  In order to assist the task of the  judge(s)  responsible  for  hearing
    the case next, I direct

    (1)  that within 14 days from this decision being sent to  the  parties
    the appellant's solicitors liaise with the respondent with  a  view  to
    agreeing on the identity of a suitable doctor; and

    (2)  that the agreed doctor, within 6  weeks  of  this  decision  being
    sent, prepare a  medical  report  on  the  appellant,  with  particular
    reference to the issue of whether the appellant's medical diagnosis  is
    consistent with her account of rape and kidnapping.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]                               Date: 15 March 2018

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

