
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09746/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On May 28, 2019                      |On June 12, 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                                  Mr M A I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hyder, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a Pakistani national and is now thirty-six years of age.
On 23 July 2011 he entered the United Kingdom, as a Tier 4 (General)
Student, with leave to remain here until 30 April 2014. His visa was
curtailed on 20 June 2012 as the college's licence was revoked. On 16 May
2014 he applied for a Tier 4 (General) Student visa, but this was refused
by the respondent on 30 June 2014 and his subsequent appeal was dismissed
in December 2015 with the Judge noting he had lodged an asylum claim on the
grounds of his sexuality on 12 February 2015 which had been refused by the
respondent on 20 June 2015.

The appellant appealed this decision under section 82(1) of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and his appeal came before
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chana who, in a decision promulgated on 5
August 2016, dismissed the appeals both of the appellant and his partner.
They appealed those decisions and the Upper Tribunal found there had been
an error in law and remitted both appeals back to the First-tier Tribunal
for de novo hearings. The appellant's partner subsequently withdrew his
appeal.

The appellant's appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dineen
(hereinafter called the Judge) who in a decision promulgated on 13 February
2019 dismissed the appellant's appeal. The appellant has appealed this
decision and Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy granted permission to appeal on
3 May 2019 finding it arguable the Judge had failed to make any findings
about the events in Pakistan.

The respondent filed a Rule 24 response dated 15 May 2019 opposing the
application.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

    SUBMISSIONS ON MATERIAL ERROR

Mr Hyder adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted permission had been
granted on the basis the Judge had failed to make findings on the events
that were said to have occurred in Pakistan and this amounted to an error
in law because the Respondent did not accept the appellant's account of
events in Pakistan or how the appellant discovered he was homosexual. The
Judge had set out the appellant's account of events and the respondent's
response to the events both here and in Pakistan but when making his
findings between paragraphs 48 and 63 of his decision, he failed to make
any substantive findings about his claim in Pakistan save by dealing with
the FIRs. Mr Hyder submitted the events in Pakistan were key to whether he
did behave as claimed before he came here and would impact on the Judge's
assessment of how he would behave were he returned.

Mr Hyder further submitted that the Judge erred by attaching too much
weight to the failure of the appellant's former partner to attend the
original hearing. The Judge overlooked the fact the appellant and his
former partner were no longer together and that attempts by the appellant's
solicitors to contact had failed when letters sent to the former partner
were returned un-opened.

The Judge's approach to the witness evidence of Mr J L was flawed as he was
able to provide a view on the whether he felt the appellant was genuinely a
homosexual especially as photographs of the appellant attending meetings
had been adduced in evidence.

Finally, the Judge failed to attach any weight to the evidence obtained in
relation to the FIRs. The Judge did not properly consider the evidence the
appellant's solicitors obtained from the original police officer who
confirmed the document was genuine. If no weight was to be attached to such
evidence then following the Court of Appeal decision of PJ (Sri Lanka) and
SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1011 the Judge should made findings on the letters
from solicitor advocate and police officer.

Mr Tarlow opposed the application and adopted the content of the Rule 24
letter. The Judge had to decide whether the appellant was homosexual, and
he submitted the findings he has made were open to him. At paragraph 54 the
Judge dealt with the evidence of previous boyfriend and then noted there
was no evidence from his close circle of friends. This undermined his claim
to be homosexual. His findings are paragraphs 56-57 of his decision
evidence identified the only other live evidence was hearsay and the Judge
chose to reject the arguments advanced. His conclusions at paragraph 53
were entirely open to him on the evidence.

With regard to the FIRs, the Judge may not have dealt with them perfectly,
but he did make important findings and any error on them was not material
and therefore did not amount to an error in law.

findings

THE PERMISSION TO APPEAL WAS NOT RESTRICTED BY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
MCGEACHY BUT IDENTIFIED AN AREA THAT POTENTIALLY DISCLOSED AN ERROR IN LAW.


The appellant's claim was that he first became aware of his sexuality when
he lived in Pakistan and the First-tier Judge recorded his account between
paragraphs 15 to 19 of his decision.

Mr Hyder's submission, put simply, is that the Judge failed to engage with
this account or make any findings about this aspect of the claim and Mr
Tarlow's response was the Judge rejected his whole claim of being
homosexual in the United Kingdom and the authenticity of the FIRs and by
implication he rejected the account of events in Pakistan. In considering
this issue, I have also considered the additional argument that the Judge's
assessment of the FIRs was flawed.

In considering whether the Judge has erred, I find that his approach in
paragraph 51 of the decision was correct. The Judge correctly reminded
himself that he was considering the case as a whole and in the round.

In assessing credibility, the Judge was entitled to consider the delayed
nature of the claim given the fact it was the appellant's case that he was
living with a person who had lodged a similar claim for asylum. The Judge
was entitled to reject his explanation for the delay.

The Judge's conclusions at paragraph 54 of the decision, on the witness
evidence of the appellant's former partner, were open to him.

Mr Hyder had submitted that the Judge failed to consider they were no
longer together and that the witness had not responded to letters sent by
the legal representatives but neither of those factors undermined the
Judge's findings in paragraph 54. A letter/statement, unless agreed, cannot
carry the same weight as someone giving live evidence and the criticism of
the Judge on this issue is misplaced.

Between paragraphs 55 and 57 of his decision, the Judge considered the
appellant's current circumstances. The Judge placed significant weight on
the appellant's failure to produce any live evidence of his LGBT lifestyle
except for the oral/written evidence of Mr Lloyd.

Mr Hyder argued that the Judge should have attached further weight to this
evidence as he had seen the appellant at first hand, but the Judge has
addressed this issue in both paragraphs 56 and 57 of his decision. The
Judge noted the involvement Mr Lloyd had in the appellant's life and
concluded that his evidence only amounted to what he had been told rather
than first-hand experience. Mere observance of the appellant at meetings
can provide support for the appellant's claim but as the Judge found in
paragraph 57 these on their own did not prove the appellant was a
homosexual. The Judge was aware of what Mr Lloyd had to say but concluded
that as he had no personal relationship with the appellant his evidence
needed to be considered in that light.

The Judge looked for further evidence such as evidence from his social
group or partners but there was no such evidence submitted. The Judge made
an adverse finding about the appellant's claim to be homosexual noting that
none of his "evidence" predated the date of his application which
undermined his claim to have been homosexual since 2009 especially as he
entered the country in 2011.

The final evidence considered by the Judge concerned the FIR's submitted.
Mr Hyder argued the Judge should have attached more weight to the evidence
provided by the legal representatives about the authenticity of the said
documents. The Judge made clear at paragraph 59 that he did consider the
evidence submitted albeit

Mr Hyder argued that this did not include the evidence from the original
police officer. Whilst the Judge does not set out each piece of evidence
considered by him, he was aware of the claim and gave reasons for rejecting
the representative's evidence. The Judge placed weight on the documents
attached to the verification report and preferred that evidence to that
adduced by the appellant.

Mr Hyder referred me to the decision of PJ (Sri Lanka) and SSHD and argued
the Judge's approach to the lawyer's evidence was flawed. That case was
concerned with court documents as against FIR's. The evidence adduced by
the lawyers should be attributed, in this appeal, no more weight than the
evidence provided by the respondent bearing in mind there was no actual
examination of the records by the lawyers (see paragraph 59). The Judge's
finding was one that was open to him.

The Judge, by rejecting the FIRs, rejected the appellant's account of
events in Pakistan. Whilst it may have been neater for the Judge to
consider the events individually, I find there was no error in view of the
adverse findings made.

I conclude the Judge did not err by failing to specifically deal with those
matters because the remainder of his findings, including those about the
FIRs, were all negative.

Decision

I find no error in law and I uphold the original decision of Judge of the
First-tier Tribunal Dineen.

Signed                              Date         6 June 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made as the appeal was dismissed.


Signed                              Date         6 June 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

