


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: AA/09723/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Determination Promulgated |
|On 21 July 2016                        |On 22 July 2016           |
|Prepared on 21 July 2016               |                          |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    R. M.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
                       Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally  and  claimed
           asylum on 20 December 2014. That application was  refused  on  3
           June 2015, and a decision to remove her from the UK was made  in
           consequence.
        2. The Appellant's appeal to the Tribunal against those immigration
           decisions was heard on 8 March 2016, and it was dismissed on all
           grounds by decision of Judge  Hands,  promulgated  on  30  March
           2016.
        3. The Appellant's application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
           permission to appeal argued that the Judge had accepted that the
           Appellant was married, and that she would be able to  claim  the
           married woman's exemption from  national/military  service,  and
           that she had left  Eritrea  illegally.  In  consequence  it  was
           argued that the Judge had failed to correctly apply the guidance
           contained in the country guidance decision of MO (illegal exit -
           risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 190. That application was
           granted by Judge Pedro on 25 April 2016.
        4. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice dated 11 May 2016 in which
           she argued that the Judge had directed herself appropriately.
        5. Thus the matter comes before me.


      Error of Law?
        6. In making the immigration decisions under appeal the  Respondent
           had formally conceded that the Appellant was an Eritrean citizen
           as claimed, and had not placed in issue the Appellant's  claimed
           identity or date of birth.
        7. As such the Appellant would have attained the age of 18 in  July
           2011.  She   did   not   claim   to   have   been   called   for
           national/military service at that point, or subsequently, and so
           she did not claim to be a draft evader, or a deserter.
        8. The Appellant's case, which the Judge accepted, was that she had
           undertaken a ceremony of marriage in October 2013, at the age of
           20. As the country guidance cases record, she  would  thereafter
           have  been  entitled  to  the  married  woman's  exemption  from
           national/military service in Eritrea, as the  Judge  appears  to
           have accepted. Thus the Judge  concluded  that  upon  return  to
           Eritrea  the  Appellant  would  not   be   required   to   serve
           national/military service because she would be able to establish
           her entitlement to the married woman's exemption.
        9. The Appellant's case was that she had  left  Eritrea  illegally,
           and given her age, this was a claim which  was  consistent  with
           the guidance to be found in the country guidance cases as to the
           position  prevailing  in  Eritrea  up  to  and  including  2011,
           notwithstanding her marriage. The Judge accepted  that  she  had
           done so, and in my judgement the Judge must  be  taken  to  have
           implicitly accepted that upon return to  Eritrea  the  Appellant
           would be perceived as having done so. The Judge made no  finding
           in the light of MO that the Appellant's health history, or level
           of education, meant that an inference could be safely  drawn  to
           the effect that she had been able to obtain a lawful exit visa.
       10. Again, although the Judge did not deal with it expressly,  I  am
           satisfied that it is  an  inescapable  conclusion  of  a  forced
           return from the UK that the Appellant  would  be  likely  to  be
           perceived by the Eritrean authorities upon return  as  a  failed
           asylum seeker.
       11. In the light of the guidance to be found in MO  the  finding  of
           primary  fact  concerning  the  Appellant's  illegal  exit  from
           Eritrea  was  sufficient,  of  itself,  for  the  Appellant   to
           establish that she  was  likely  to  be  regarded  with  serious
           hostility by the Eritrean authorities upon her  return  to  that
           country. The Judge did not engage with this, and nor did she  go
           on to analyse the evidence before her to ascertain  whether  she
           was satisfied that there had been a sufficiently significant and
           durable  change  of  attitude  on  the  part  of  the   Eritrean
           authorities to permit her to depart from that country  guidance.
           Before me both parties were  agreed  that  this  amounted  to  a
           material error of law,  which  required  me  to  set  aside  the
           decision upon the asylum and Article 3 appeals.
       12. Following a discussion about whether the appeal should simply be
           remitted to the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing,  it  was
           confirmed by both parties that there were no relevant issues  of
           primary fact that needed to be mad; the Judge had  indeed  dealt
           with them all expressly, or by implication. Thus,  both  parties
           were agreed that I should proceed to remake  the  decision  upon
           the asylum and Article 3 appeals myself, and that I did not need
           to hear any evidence to do so.


      The decision remade
       13.  Although  this  material  was  placed  before  the  Judge,  the
           Respondent no longer relies upon the Country Information reports
           of September 2015; Illegal Exit, and,  National  (inc  Military)
           Service, which was withdrawn on  20  May  2016.  The  Respondent
           relied before, and continues to rely, upon the Danish FFM report
           of 2014, and thus the Tribunal is  invited  not  to  follow  the
           guidance in MO. No submissions were made to me upon the  content
           of the Independent Advisory Group report of 13 May 2015.
       14. The evidence does not establish  that  the  Appellant  held  any
           political views in Eritrea, or that she has made any attempt  to
           express political views opposed to the  Eritrean  regime  either
           within Eritrea, or, since she has left that country.
       15. I have had regard  to  the  country  guidance  case  of  MO,  in
           assessing the weight to give to the evidence before me.  I  have
           also considered the Danish FFM report of December 2014  "Eritrea
           - drivers and root causes of emigration,  national  service  and
           the possibility of return", and an EASO (European asylum Support
           Office) report of 4 June 2015.  Embassy letters were  considered
           in MO, but plainly the Danish report is  based  upon  much  more
           recent information.
       16. I have considered the bundle of reports that are relied upon  by
           the Appellant offering criticisms of that Danish report  from  a
           wide range of authors. Much (although not all by any  means)  of
           that  criticism  is  dependent  upon  Professor  Kibreab's   own
           criticisms of the way the information he provided to the  Danish
           FFM has been handled.  Thus  I  have  regard  to  the  statement
           published by Professor Kibreab on the internet of 25 March  2015
           which  offers  his  own  criticisms  of   the   former   Country
           Information  reports  of  March  2015.  The  FFM  contains   the
           exchanges between the Danish FFM authors and  Professor  Kibreab
           leading up to publication of the FFM report, the occasions  upon
           which he agreed notes of meetings and  conversations  held  with
           him, and the occasions  upon  which  he  failed  to  respond  to
           requests to do so, culminating in his email of 25 November  2014
           to the Danish authorities congratulating them on a well  written
           informative report, which together evidence their claim that  it
           was only on 28 November 2014  following  its  wider  publication
           that Professor Kibreab sought to distance himself from  the  FFM
           report.
       17. For the avoidance of any doubt, I am not satisfied that there is
           clear and cogent evidence before  me  to  the  effect  that  the
           Danish authorities have withdrawn their own FFM report.
       18. It seems to me clear that there is a wide ranging  dispute  over
           the reliability of the Danish FFM report of December 2014.  That
           dispute has now been taken up by the Report by  the  Independent
           Advisory Group on Country Information Reports dated 13 May 2015.
           The Respondent has not sought to  respond  to  that  dispute  to
           explain why the criticisms of the  Danish  FFM  report  are  ill
           founded.
       19. In the circumstances I am not persuaded that I should  cease  to
           place weight upon the country guidance decision in MO. I am  not
           satisfied that the Respondent has established  with  cogent  and
           reliable evidence that the situation in Eritrea has  shifted  so
           dramatically since its  promulgation  in  May  2011,  that  such
           guidance has been overtaken by subsequent evidence.
       20. In the circumstances of the admissions made in this appeal,  and
           the findings of primary fact made by the Judge, I  am  satisfied
           in the light of MO that there is a real risk that the  Appellant
           will be regarded with serious hostility upon return,  and  as  a
           result a real  risk  that  she  could  face  detention  and  ill
           treatment in circumstances that would amount to  persecution  on
           account of an imputed political  belief  and  a  breach  of  her
           Article 3 rights.

       21.  Given  these  conclusions,  I  find  that  the  Appellant   has
           discharged the burden of proof that lies upon her  to  establish
           substantial grounds for believing that she will face a real risk
           of serious harm in the country of return. As a result I do  find
           that there is a real risk of a breach of her  Article  3  rights
           upon return to Eritrea.



      The decisions remade
       22. In the circumstances I set aside both  the  decisions  upon  the
           asylum and the human rights grounds of appeal and  remake  those
           decisions, so as to allow the appeal on those grounds.



   DECISION


      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  30
      March 2016 contains an error of law in the  decision  to  dismiss  the
      Appellant's appeal which require that decision to  be  set  aside  and
      remade so that the appeal  is  allowed  on  asylum  and  human  rights
      grounds.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.





   Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 21 July 2016



