
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09791/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 23rd April  2015                  |On 18th May 2015                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                               MR ABIBOU GUEYE
                          (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A De Ruano, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Senegal  who  was  born  on  the  11th
    September 1989. He appeals, with permission, against  the  decision  of
    Judge Robson who, on  the  20th  January  2015,  dismissed  his  appeal
    against the respondent's refusal to grant him asylum and her consequent
    decision to remove him from the United Kingdom.

 2. An anonymity direction was not made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    little purpose would therefore be served by making one now.

The appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant's claim for asylum was based upon it being accepted  that
    he was a gay man who had been forced to flee Senegal as the  result  of
    his  homosexual  relationship  with  a  man  called  'Manguang'.   That
    relationship was exposed when,  in  April  2011,  Manguang  kissed  the
    appellant in the street. This was observed by three people, one of whom
    took a photograph of it. The appellant was  stabbed  near  to  his  eye
    during the ensuing argument. This  left  a  small  scar.  Manguang  was
    stabbed to death. The appellant fled to the home  another  gay  friend:
    Diallo. He did not contact the police because  he  believed  that  they
    would not investigate the matter if they knew that  Manguang  was  gay.
    During the following four months, the  appellant  stayed  with  Diallo,
    occasionally leaving his house in order to play music in a band. On the
    30th September 2011, he came to the United Kingdom with  limited  leave
    to remain for a period of  6  months  for  business  purposes.  He  was
    detained  by  Immigration  Officers  on  the  21st  April  2013  as  an
    overstayer. He claimed asylum on the 29th April 2013.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. Judge Robson did not find  the  appellant  credible.  His  reasons  are
    contained within paragraphs 60 to 75 of his  determination,  which  are
    set out below:

         "60. The Appellant was asked in interview when it was that he first
             realised his sexuality.  His initial reaction was "a long time
             ago" and he was unable to say in interview whether or not that
             was whilst he was at school.  In his statement  the  Appellant
             stated categorically at paragraph 5 that he "realised he was a
             homosexual in school" which he went  on  to  say  was  "indeed
             quite a long time ago".  In his oral evidence at a  time  when
             he chose to give his evidence in English rather than Wolof, he
             explained that initially he was "playing kissing/caressing but
             never  slept  with  any  man"  until  he  met  with  Manguang.
             Returning to the interview he did say in fact in  response  to
             question 27 that the first time he had  done  anything  sexual
             with a man was with Manguang.  "I used to  play  with  it  but
             that was my first time."

         61. Whilst the Appellant had said that he  met  Manguang  in  2009
             that was also the year when he was apparently still at school.
              I do not find it credible that given what was a life changing
             experience, the Appellant was unable to initially  state  what
             was a considerable change in his  lifestyle,  namely  when  he
             first met Manguang.

         62. I was also concerned to note that in  his  interview  he  said
             that he had finished his BFEM and other  courses  around  2004
             and 2005 which does not sit well with the claim  that  he  was
             still at school in 2009.

         63. The lack of detailed information in interview as  to  when  he
             first realised he was gay adversely affects  his  credibility.
             I have noted the information contained in the  refusal  letter
             from the "international HIV and Aids  charity  'AVERT'"  which
             describes  the  process  of  "coming  to  terms   with   one's
             sexuality."  None of the matters raised in  that  report  were
             reflected in the claimed behaviour of the Appellant.

         64. I turn to the relationship with Manguang.  The explanation  by
             the Appellant in relation  to  paragraph  30  of  the  refusal
             letter which addressed the lack of information  regarding  the
             description of how the Appellant experienced his feelings  was
             as follows:

                  "In relation to paragraph 30, my only difficulty was  with
                  other people's hostile views about homosexuality but I was
                  inside perfectly comfortable with being gay."

         65. That explanation does not explain why the  Appellant  did  not
             give a detailed explanation that was  understandably  required
             by the Respondent to enable the Respondent to  form  a  proper
             view about the Appellant's sexuality.  Given this claimed fear
             of discovery, I do not find it credible that when asked  about
             how the relationship with Manguang developed, his  explanation
             was "it just came naturally".  I also  find  it  not  credible
             that when asked whether or not the Appellant was  scared  that
             Manguang well might say that he was not gay  the  response  of
             the Appellant was that in Thiossane, "there are generally more
             gay people".  That is  quite  clearly  inconsistent  with  the
             previous statement in  interview  that  "everyone  in  Senegal
             would kill you because you are a homosexual".

         66. The Appellant stated that he had been in a  relationship  with
             Manguang for two years.  Of those two years the Appellant  had
             first started cohabitation with Manguang on 22nd January 2010,
             a year before the claimed fatal attack on Manguang.  I  simply
             do not find it credible that  the  Appellant  would  not  have
             known Manguang's date of birth or his occupation.

         67. Although I have come to that conclusion, I  must  address  the
             question of the attack in April 2011  which  occurred  a  year
             after claimed cohabitation commenced.

         68. If Manguang was killed as claimed in his interview, I  do  not
             find it credible that Manguang sought to kiss the Appellant in
             public and doing so when there were three people watching what
             was going on and taking photographs.

         69. I do not accept the evidence that  the  Appellant's  scar,  if
             that was what it was, to his eye was caused by  a  stab  wound
             and I do not find it  credible  having  managed  to  make  his
             escape on what turned out to be a fatal attack, Diallo  should
             have gone back to learn of the death of Manguang.

         70. The Appellant said that the police  were  not  called  because
             they would not attend. Whilst in the objective evidence it  is
             clear that the police do arrest men who are  perceived  to  be
             gay and charged with "unnatural acts" under the penal code  of
             Senegal, I do not find it credible that a murder  case  should
             not be investigated.  And further I do not accept  the  answer
             in the interview "if the police were  there  they  might  help
             with the killing".  I also find  it  not  credible  that  when
             asked what  Manguang  had  died  of  that  (question  44)  the
             Appellant said he did not know.  He did not see it but he  was
             told by Diallo.  In his witness statement the  Appellant  said
             that he believed that the attack was because  of  the  kissing
             but as I have said before I do not find it credible that given
             the claimed admission  to  homosexuality,  the  Appellant  and
             Manguang would conduct themselves  in  public  in  the  manner
             described.

         71. The Appellant stated that he had remained in Senegal for  four
             months  during  which  time  he  stayed  with   Diallo.    His
             explanation for the delay was that on the  one  hand  he  kept
             himself locked up during that  time  but  on  the  other  hand
             stated that he would go out and play in a  band  with  Diallo.
             In his written statement his clarification at paragraph 13 was
             that "discreetly" he would go out and  play  with  a  band  in
             their studio and there was no  public  performance.   Whatever
             the position, if he was fearful for his life, I do not believe
             that he would have left hiding and gone to play in a band.

         72. The Appellant applied  for  a  visit  visa  as  a  Tier  5  TW
             (Creative and Sporting) Migrant on 27th June  2011.   I  noted
             the inconsistency about the length of time that the  Appellant
             was at the address stated on the visa application when he said
             he had been at that address for over ten years and  his  claim
             to have moved in with Manguang in 2010.

         73. If as was said by the Appellant in  oral  examination  it  was
             Diallo who filled in the form I did not find it credible  that
             the Appellant would  not  have  checked  the  form  given  the
             importance of his  "escaping  from  Senegal"  and  furthermore
             there was  no  explanation  as  to  how  Diallo  obtained  the
             information to fill in the form other than obtaining  it  from
             the Appellant.

         74. The Appellant undoubtedly arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in
             2011 but no claim for asylum was made until nearly  two  years
             later namely April 2013.  This delay  I  find  does  adversely
             affect his credibility taking into account Section  8  of  the
             Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimant's,  etc.)  Act
             2004.  The claim for asylum was only made after the  Appellant
             had been detained on 21st April 2014 by  Immigration  Officers
             on the grounds of being an overstayer.  In his  statement  and
             in oral evidence the Appellant stated that he did not know  he
             was expected to claim asylum on arrival, did not know what  he
             should do about claiming asylum and it was the first time in a
             strange country.  Furthermore he spoke only Wolof and  French.
             He went on to say that after some months after coming  to  the
             United Kingdom he spoke to a person who  did  tell  him  about
             claiming  asylum  but  said  it  was  rather  too  late.   The
             Appellant was then scared of claiming asylum since he might be
             arrested.

         75. However, clearly the Appellant was familiar with  the  concept
             of asylum claims since he stated in oral examination  that  he
             knew that he could claim asylum  in  Belgium  or  France.   He
             however did not know that he could claim asylum in the  United
             Kingdom.  There was no satisfactory explanation as to why  the
             Appellant did not claim asylum in France if he  was  aware  of
             the position there.  If as he claimed in his oral evidence, he
             knew the United Kingdom was "safe for gays" then he must  have
             investigated the  position  in  the  United  Kingdom  to  some
             degree.  I find that the only reason for the asylum claim  was
             because of his detention."

The rival submissions

 5.  Mr  de  Rauno  relied  upon  his  grounds  of  appeal,  which  may  be
    conveniently  summarised   as   follows.   There   were   no   material
    discrepancies in the appellant's evidence. The judge simply  found  the
    appellant's account was implausible without making any reference to the
    detailed  explanations  that  he  had  provided  for  his  actions.  In
    particular,  the judge failed -

      1) to take account of the appellant's "clarification or correction" of
         his earlier statement that "everyone  in  Senegal  would  kill  you
         because you are a homosexual";

      2) to take account of the appellant's explanation that  they  did  not
         realise they were being observed when Manguang kissed  him  in  the
         street;

      3) to explain why it was not credible that Diallo should have gone  to
         the scene of the attack in order to discover what had  happened  to
         Manguang;

      4) to identify the background country information that  supported  its
         finding that the police arrest men who are perceived to be gay  and
         charge them with "unnatural acts" under the penal code of Senegal;

      5) to explain why it  was  not  credible  that  Diallo  completed  the
         appellant's  visa  application  form  without  reference   to   the
         appellant for the necessary information;

      6) to take account of the appellant's explanation that the realisation
         of his sexual orientation had been a gradual process;

      7) to take account of the appellant's explanation that he  had  played
         with his band in a private studio whilst hiding in Senegal.

    Additionally, the grounds draw attention to two claimed factual  errors
    in the determination:

      i) the judge stated that the appellant had been detained in the UK  in
         April 2014 whereas it was in fact 2013;

     ii) the judge also stated that the appellant had not mentioned having a
         boyfriend since he came to the UK whereas the respondent's  refusal
         letter refers to the appellant having  mentioned  this  during  his
         asylum interview.

 6. The respondent served a Notice under Rule  24  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules, and this was elaborated upon  by  Mrs  Pettersen.  The
    respondent's arguments may conveniently be summarised as follows.

 7. The judge's reasoning is not wholly reliant upon what he  found  to  be
    the implausibility of the appellant's account. Amongst other things, he
    also took account of the explanations that the appellant had given  for
    the anomalies in his account during cross-examination, for his delay in
    claiming asylum, the compatibility  or  otherwise  of  the  appellant's
    account  of  his  realisation  that  he  was  gay  with  the  objective
    information, and  the  appellant's  explanation  that  he  only  played
    "discreetly" in his band during the  period  that  he  was  in  hiding.
    Although the judge had at  one  stage  inadvertently  referred  to  the
    appellant being detained in April 2014, he  had  also  correctly  noted
    elsewhere that it was in April 2013.

Analysis

 8. Mr de Ruano's submissions were dependent largely upon the premise  that
    the appellant had given an internally consistent account of his reasons
    for departing Senegal and that, therefore, the  judge's  findings  were
    entirely consequent upon his own subjective view  of  its  plausibility
    [see also, paragraphs 11 to 14 of the grounds of appeal]. I reject that
    premise for the following reasons.

 9. It is clear that the judge measured  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    realisation that he was gay against the objective  evidence  concerning
    the experience of coming to terms with one's sexuality as described  by
    the HIV  and  AIDS  charity,  'Avert'  [paragraph  63].  Moreover,  the
    criticism that the judge failed to appreciate  the  gradual  nature  of
    this process is in my view ill-founded. The point that  was  reasonably
    being made by the judge was that the appellant  had  given  conflicting
    accounts of the stage in his life at which he had  ultimately  realised
    that he was gay [paragraphs 60 and 61]. That  was  not  a  matter  that
    could simply be glossed over by reference to the gradual nature of  the
    process whereby he had reached that stage.  Furthermore,  this  was  an
    issue that was inseparable from  other  conflicts  in  the  appellant's
    chronology of events [paragraph 62].

10. Although the grounds criticise the judge for failing  to  identify  the
    source of the background information that led him to conclude that  gay
    people are  arrested  and  charged  with  committing  "unnatural  acts"
    contrary to the penal code of Senegal, they do not  suggest  that  this
    was a finding that was not open to him upon the  evidence.  It  follows
    that the judge was entitled to view the appellant's account through the
    prism of that particular finding. The  judge  was  thus  entitled,  for
    example, to consider it implausible that Manguang would risk that which
    the evidence suggested would be  the  likely  consequence  of  two  men
    kissing in a public place in  Senegal  -  namely,  being  arrested  and
    charged with committing "unnatural acts" - regardless of  whether  they
    had appreciated that they were being observed doing so  [last  sentence
    of paragraph 70].

11. Upon a fair reading of paragraphs 72 and 73 of the decision,  it  seems
    to me to be implicit that  the  reason  that  the  judge  rejected  the
    appellant's explanation for the anomalies in his visa application (that
    Diallo had completed it without reference to the appellant) was that it
    contained information that only the appellant could have known.

12. The implausibility of Diallo going to the scene of the attack in  order
    to discover what had occurred is  not  perhaps  the  strongest  of  the
    reasons that were given by the  judge  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    account. Nevertheless, the point that is  made  in  the  grounds  (that
    there was no evidence to suggest that the people involved in the attack
    would have known that Diallo was connected  to  the  appellant)  is  in
    reality an attempt to re-argue the merits of  the  appeal.  Much  would
    have   depended   upon   the   evidence   concerning   the   particular
    circumstances,  including  how  quickly  Diallo  came  upon  the  scene
    following the attack, the nature of his enquiries, and the persons with
    whom he was said to have made them. These are  all  matters  that  were
    properly open for discussion at the submissions stage  of  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal. They do not in my judgement fall to  be
    considered by way of an appeal that is brought upon the ground that the
    Tribunal made an error of law in relation thereto.

13. There is in my judgement no basis for the complaint that  the  Tribunal
    misunderstood the appellant's account of playing in his band whilst  he
    was at the same time supposedly hiding  at  the  home  of  his  friend,
    Diallo. The judge made  it  very  plain  that  he  had  considered  the
    appellant's account on the basis that he had  supposedly  been  playing
    "discreetly" - more specifically, that he played in a studio  and  that
    there had been "no public performance" - but he nevertheless refused to
    believe, as he was entitled to do, that the appellant would  have  left
    the relative security of Diallo's house in order  to  play  in  a  band
    [paragraph 71].

14. Mr de Ruano accepted, by way of reply to Mrs  Pettersen's  submissions,
    that  nothing  ultimately  turned  upon  the  judge's  accidental  slip
    concerning the year in which the appellant was detained  following  his
    arrival in the United Kingdom.

15. This brings me to the one possible error that may have been material to
    the judge's reasoning. This occurred at paragraph 78 of the decision:

         "I have considered the letter form Mr Diar but place no  weight  on
         the same. No satisfactory explanation has been given for  his  non-
         attendance. It was however of note that there was  reference  to  a
         "boyfriend" but no such  refe3rence  was  made  by  the  Appellant,
         either orally or in writing".

    However, as Mr de Ruano pointed out, when the appellant  was  asked  in
    his asylum interview whether he had had any relationship  with  men  in
    the UK, he had replied that he had been "getting with someone" but they
    had not "understand one another" due to the  fact  that  this  person's
    English "wasn't  perfect"  [question  69].   Whether  that  description
    accords with that of a "boyfriend" is perhaps debatable.  In any event,
    it is clear that the principle reason  that  the  judge  gave  for  not
    attaching weight to the evidence of the  appellant's  witness  was  the
    absence of any satisfactory explanation for his non-attendance  at  the
    hearing, with the consequence that his testimony had not been subjected
    to the scrutiny  of  cross-examination.   Within  the  context  of  the
    evidence as a whole, therefore, I do not consider this error  (if  such
    it was) was material to the judge's overall assessment of the evidence.

16. In conclusion, I am satisfied that the judge did not make any error  of
    law in the determination of this appeal.

Notice of Decision

17. The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity is not directed



Signed        Date

Judge Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
