

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09491/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Birmingham                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 24 June 2015                             |On : 30 June 2015            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    B B A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes, instructed by D & A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to  appeal  on
2 February 2015.

The appellant is a Kurdish national of Iraq from Sulaimaniya  in  Kurdistan,
born on 12 July 1986. She left Iraq in June  2014  and  entered  the  United
Kingdom illegally on 23 June 2014, having travelled  by  lorry  from  Turkey
with an agent and with her two young children (born in 2005 and  2007).  She
claimed asylum on arrival and, following an interview on 26 September  2014,
her claim was refused on 27 October 2014. A decision was made the  same  day
to remove her from the United Kingdom. The appellant appealed that  decision
and her appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 23 December 2014  and
dismissed in a decision promulgated on 7 January 2015.

The Appellants' claim

The appellant's parents were taken away by  the  Saddam  Hussain  regime  in
1988 and she went into the care of her paternal uncle and  his  family.  She
claims to fear persecution from her uncle as a result of  his  discovery  of
her relationship with a man who worked as a gardener in the house where  she
worked as a cleaner. Her husband, whom she had married in  July  2004  in  a
marriage arranged by her uncle, died in July 2012, and she had  subsequently
entered into the new relationship which was discovered by her uncle  in  May
2014. Her aunt overheard her uncle and cousins talking about  murdering  her
because  she  had  brought  shame  on  the  family  honour  by  having   the
relationship without permission. She therefore fled  Sulaimaniyah  and  went
to Duhok on 10 June 2014 with her partner and  her  two  children  from  her
marriage and from there  travelled  by  car  to  Turkey,  where  she  became
separated from her partner as there was insufficient money to pay the  agent
to bring them all to the United Kingdom. She came to the United  Kingdom  by
lorry together with her children.

The respondent, in refusing the claim in her  letter  of  27  October  2014,
accepted the appellant's account of her  relationship  and  of  her  uncle's
threat  to  kill  her  but  considered  that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
protection available to her from the Iraqi authorities or in a shelter,  and
that she could also relocate to another part of the  KRG  in  Iraq.  It  was
considered that she would not be at risk on return  to  Iraq  and  that  her
removal would not breach her human rights.

The appellant's appeal against the decision to remove her came before  Judge
Asjad in the First-tier Tribunal on 23 December 2014. The judge  noted  that
the appellant's claim was accepted as  credible  and  went  on  to  consider
sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal  relocation.   She   found   that
sufficiency of protection  was  not  available  to  the  appellant  but  she
concluded that internal relocation was a viable option and  she  accordingly
dismissed the appeal on asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
grounds.

Permission to appeal that decision was sought on the grounds that the  judge
had failed to make  specific  findings  as  to  where  the  appellant  could
relocate; that her finding that the appellant's uncle was unlikely  to  find
her was  inconsistent  with  the  background  information;  that  there  was
inadequate consideration of the welfare of  the  appellant's  two  children;
that  there  was  a  failure  to  take  account  of  the  Home  Office  Iraq
Operational Guidance Note (OGN);  and  that  the  appeal  should  have  been
allowed.

Permission to appeal was granted on the grounds that it  was  arguable  that
further reasoning was required in relation  to  internal  relocation,  given
the  vulnerability  of  the  appellant  being  responsible  for  two   young
children.

Appeal hearing

The appeal came before me on 24 June 2015 and I  heard  submissions  on  the
error of law.

Mr Vokes referred to the country guidance in  MK  (documents  -  relocation)
Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 126 in relation to the difficulties for women  heads  of
household. On the basis of  the  patriarchal  nature  of  Iraqi  society  as
identified in the guidance, the judge's finding, that it was  unlikely  that
the appellant's uncle would find her, was inconsistent with  the  background
evidence which suggested that her family would be contacted at  the  airport
in order to locate her male protector. Although the judge  referred  to  the
OGN she did not actually consider it and make findings on  it.  Neither  was
there any  consideration  of  the  impact  of  internal  relocation  on  the
children and the vulnerability of the  family  as  a  whole.  There  was  no
consideration of the  risk  of  sexual  exploitation  in  the  case  of  the
appellant's daughter and no consideration  of  the  best  interests  of  the
children. The  judge's  findings  on  where  the  appellant  could  actually
relocate were vague. The decision was insufficient in its findings.

Mr Mills submitted that it was clear that the judge had considered areas  to
which the appellant could relocate. The OGN confirmed the  guidance  in  MK,
which the judge had considered. There was nothing in the findings in  MK  to
suggest that the appellant's family would be contacted when she  arrived  at
the airport. The appellant's circumstances put her outside  the  finding  in
the OGN of a general risk to lone women and women heads  of  household.  The
judge had made adequate findings  in  that  regard  and  in  regard  to  the
children.

Mr Vokes, in response, reiterated the points previously made.

Consideration and findings.

I am satisfied that the judge's decision discloses a material error  of  law
in her consideration of internal relocation and I find  much  merit  in  the
submissions made by Mr Vokes. Indeed whilst Mr Mills sought  to  defend  the
decision he acknowledged that it was not without its shortcomings.

Mr Vokes accepted that  the  strength  of  his  case  did  not  lie  in  his
submission as regards contact being made with  the  appellant's  uncle  from
the  airport  in  order  to  facilitate   the   appellant's   identification
documentation and he was correct to do so, in light of the findings  in  MK.
However there is merit in his assertion that the judge failed  to  undertake
a proper assessment of the likely conditions to which  the  appellant  would
return  together  with  her  children  when  considering  whether   internal
relocation would be unduly harsh. I agree with Mr  Vokes  that  the  judge's
error lay, in her examination of the  appellant's  particular  circumstances
pursuant to paragraph 4 of the head-note to  MK,  in  placing  undue  weight
upon her living conditions and circumstances prior to her departure  without
considering  how  the  more  recent   country   situation   and   background
information  impacted  upon  future  conditions,  such   as   accommodation,
employment and protection in general. I  agree  with  Mr  Vokes'  submission
that the judge, whilst referring to the OGN  of  22  August  2014,  did  not
actually engage with its findings  and  conclusions  in  that  respect.  She
simply found that, because the appellant had previously been  able  to  find
accommodation and employment and live alone with her  children  without  the
protection of her uncle, and because she had managed to travel alone to  the
United Kingdom with her young  children  and  was  thus  a  resourceful  and
adaptable woman, she would be able to  utilise  such  skills  on  return  to
Iraq.

The skeleton argument before the judge, and the  submissions  made  to  her,
referred in particular to paragraphs 3.13.13, 3.13.14, 3.13.16, 3.15.18  and
3.15.21 of the OGN of 22 August 2014. Paragraph 3.13.13 refers to  women  at
risk of "honour crimes"  at  the  hands  of  their  family  being  extremely
vulnerable since they had  lost  their  primary  source  of  protection  and
support.

Paragraphs  3.13.14  and  3.15.18   refer   to   difficulties   in   finding
accommodation and protection:

    "In relation to shelters and other services, UNHCR notes  that  women's
    options are "very limited".  According  to  UNHCR,  "In  the  Kurdistan
    Region, local authorities and NGOs have  established  several  shelters
    with limited capacity. While these shelters can, for  a  limited  time,
    provide physical protection as well as social, legal and  psychological
    counselling, they generally do not offer a durable solution.  [...]  In
    the central and southern governorates, there are no official  shelters,
    although some women's  organizations  provide  victims  with  temporary
    shelter in hidden locations. Such arrangements are, however, not to  be
    considered an effective form of protection".

    "In the  IKR  four  Ministry  of  Labor  and  Social  Affairs  (KMOLSA)
    -operated women's  shelters  and  one  private  shelter  provided  some
    protection and assistance. Space was limited, and service delivery  was
    poor, with the private shelter providing a  slightly  higher  level  of
    service. In areas outside the IKR, NGOs ran shelters  without  official
    approval. Some NGOs assisted victims  through  community  mental-health
    workers. Other NGOs provided legal assistance to victims. NGOs played a
    key role in providing services to  victims  of  domestic  violence  who
    received  no  assistance  from  the  central  government.  Instead   of
    utilizing legal remedies, authorities frequently attempted  to  mediate
    between women and their families so that  the  women  could  return  to
    their homes. Other than marrying or returning to their families  (which
    often resulted in the  family  or  community  victimizing  the  shelter
    resident again), there were few options for women housed at shelters."

Paragraph 3.13.16 provides the following conclusion  in  relation  to  cases
involving honour crimes:

    "Women fearing 'honour killing' or 'honour crimes' in either central or
    southern Iraq or in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq  are  unlikely  to  be
    able to access effective protection. Each case must  be  considered  on
    its own merits to assess whether internal relocation would be  possible
    for the particular profile of claimant,  but  in  general  an  internal
    relocation alternative is unlikely to be available for lone women."

Paragraph 3.15.21 provides a conclusion on the situation for women:

    "Since the last hearing of MK in February 2012, the evidence shows that
    Iraqi women continue to experience legal and social discrimination  and
    that sexual and gender based violence is widespread. Applicants may  be
    able to escape persecution by internally relocating to another area  of
    Iraq, but it needs to be noted that women, especially single women with
    no support network, are very likely to be subjected to destitution  and
    vulnerable to trafficking for sexual exploitation and prostitution."

I do not accept that the above simply reiterate  the  findings  in  MK,  but
consider that the OGN provides further information that had to  be  properly
assessed by the judge, which she failed to do. Neither do I accept that  the
appellant's previous "resourcefulness" provides an adequate  answer  to  the
concerns  raised  by  this  background  material.  It  is  clear  from   the
background material that there are  real  concerns  as  to  the  appellant's
ability to access accommodation and protection, either in south  or  central
Iraq or the KRG. Those concerns have not been adequately  addressed  by  the
judge.

Furthermore, with regard to the judge's reliance upon the  appellant's  past
resourcefulness, it is relevant also to note, as Mr  Vokes  submitted,  that
she did not travel alone to the United Kingdom and was under the care of  an
agent and that, whilst it was not accepted that she  was  living  under  the
protection of her uncle and his family, she clearly had some form of  family
support from her uncle and his family prior to her problems arising  whereas
that would not exist on return. It is also relevant to  have  regard,  which
the  judge  plainly  failed  to  do,  to  the  fact  that  the   appellant's
circumstances differed to those of MK in that the Tribunal in MK found  that
that appellant retained family ties in Iraq (as paragraph  91  makes  clear)
and, furthermore, that she would be accompanied on her  return  by  her  two
adult sons, who were considered to be able to offer a degree  of  protection
and were of an age to be able to work. This  appellant,  however,  would  be
returning to a situation of no family support, to  very  limited  employment
opportunities,  as  indeed  acknowledged  in  MK,  to  difficulties  finding
accommodation and to no male protection, with two  young  children  to  look
after and support. On the basis of the  background  information,  she  would
undoubtedly be vulnerable and at risk of exploitation, whether she would  be
relocating within the KRI or in central or south Iraq, and I  consider  that
it was not open to the judge to conclude that internal relocation would  not
be unduly harsh.

For all of those  reasons  I  find  that  the  judge's  decision  cannot  be
defended and has to be set aside and re-made.  Mr  Mills  accepted  that  if
that were the case the decision would have to be  re-made  by  allowing  the
appeal and I find that that has to be the case.

Accordingly I find  that  the  appellant  has  demonstrated,  to  the  lower
standard of proof, that she has a well-founded fear of being  persecuted  in
Iraq for one of the reasons set out in paragraph 6 of the  2006  Regulations
and that her removal would breach Article 3 of the  ECHR  and  I  allow  her
appeal.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision and  re-make  it  by
allowing the appellant's appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   I  continue
    that order (pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated:
