
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/09658/2015
     AA/09660/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd July 2016                             |On 5th August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                   WILLIAM KIBET KIMELI (FIRST APPELLANT)
                 SHARON Jepchirchir KIBET (SECOND APPELLANT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Moksud of International Immigration Advisory
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a decision of Judge Anthony of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 2nd February 2016.

 2. The Appellants are father and adult daughter and  are  Kenyan  citizens
    born 21st April 1968 and 21st September 1994 respectively.

 3. The Appellants appealed to the  FTT  following  the  refusal  of  their
    asylum and human rights claim.  The First Appellant's  wife  and  minor
    son are dependants in his claim.

 4. The FTT heard the appeals  together  on  28th  January  2016,  and  the
    appeals were dismissed on all grounds.

 5. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon two grounds which are summarised below.

 6. Firstly it was contended that it  was  not  reasonable  to  remove  the
    Fourth Appellant and his family to Nigeria.  This is an error  made  by
    the representatives  lodging  the  application,  as  the  reference  to
    Nigeria should be a reference  to  Kenya.   The  FTT  had  listed  four
    Appellants in the appeal in error, as  there  were  in  fact  only  two
    Appellants.  The Fourth Appellant referred to is Edgar Kibet born  11th
    December 1999 making him 16 years of age.

 7. It was contended that in considering  whether  it  was  reasonable  for
    Edgar to return to Kenya, the FTT had erred by not taking into  account
    the cases of Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC) and  SC  [2012]  UKUT
    00056 (IAC).  In Azimi-Moayed the Upper  Tribunal  had  given  guidance
    that seven years' residence was  a  relevant  period  when  considering
    lengthy residence, and that seven years from age four is likely  to  be
    of more significance to a child than the first seven years of life.  It
    was contended that SC indicates that if a child had lived in the UK for
    eight years and there were no strong  countervailing  circumstances  it
    would be disproportionate to remove that child.  It was contended  that
    Edgar had been resident in the UK for in excess of seven years  at  the
    date of the FTT hearing.

 8. The second Ground of Appeal was that the FTT erred  in  dismissing  the
    Appellants' appeals on the grounds of  credibility  and  the  delay  in
    claiming asylum.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Brunnen of  the  FTT  in  the
    following terms;

         "1.  In a decision promulgated on 2nd February 2015  Judge  of  the
             First-tier Tribunal Anthony dismissed the Appellants'  appeals
             against the Respondent's decisions to refuse their  protection
             claims.

         2.   It  should  be  noted  that  although  the  judge  named  four
             Appellants, the second and fourth named are the dependants  of
             the  First  Appellant.   Those  dependants  are  not  in  fact
             Appellants, they had no rights of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
             Tribunal and have no right to seek permission to appeal to the
             Upper Tribunal.

         3.   The grounds on which permission to  appeal  is  sought  submit
             that the judge erred in law in finding, for  the  purposes  of
             paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of  the  Immigration  Rules,  that  it
             would be reasonable for the First Appellant's son (referred to
             by the judge as the Fourth Appellant) to return to Kenya.   It
             is submitted that the judge  did  not  consider  the  relevant
             jurisprudence or the Respondent's policies.  This is arguable.
              However, I note that the judge found the son  concerned  fell
             within sub-paragraph (iv) because he had been in the UK for at
             least seven years at the date of hearing.  The time periods in
             paragraph  276ADE  are  to  be  reckoned  from  the  date   of
             application.  Whether  the  son  qualifies  for  consideration
             under  sub-paragraph  (iv)  at   all   may   require   further
             consideration.  Assuming that the son has an arguable right to
             leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE  then  it  is  arguable
             that  other  family  members'  family  life  claims   may   be
             strengthened.

         4.   The grounds submit that the judge in erred in finding that the
             evidence of the two Appellants (referred to by  the  judge  as
             the First and Third Appellants) concerning their asylum claims
             was not credible.  This is not arguable.  The judge gave clear
             and cogent reasons for these findings, which were clearly open
             to him on the evidence.

         5.   The grounds submit that the background evidence  favoured  the
             Appellants.  However this would only be of relevance if  there
             were no sustainable reasons for  their  claims  to  have  been
             rejected as lacking credibility.

         6.   Permission to appeal is granted only on the point in paragraph
             3 above."

10. Following the grant of permission, the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending that the FTT decision disclosed no  material  error  of
    law.  The Respondent pointed out that the First Appellant's son had not
    been living in the  UK  for  at  least  seven  years  at  the  date  of
    application.  The judge erred in finding that the relevant date was the
    date of hearing, but this error was not material as the judge  had  not
    erred in considering whether it was  reasonable  to  expect  the  First
    Appellant's son to be removed from the UK.

11. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FTT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Appellants' Oral Submissions

12. Mr Moksud relied upon the grounds contained within the application  for
    permission to appeal and the skeleton argument submitted on  behalf  of
    the Appellants dated 22nd March 2016.  Mr  Moksud  did  however  accept
    that the FTT had erred in finding that paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  should
    be considered in relation to the First Appellant's son, because it  was
    accepted that he had not acquired seven years' continuous residence  in
    the UK at the date of application.

13. I was however asked to find that the FTT had erred  by  not  adequately
    and properly considering the best interests of the child, and had erred
    in concluding that it was reasonable for the First Appellant's  son  to
    leave the United Kingdom, taking into account his length  of  residence
    and his best interests.





The Respondent's Oral Submissions

14. Mr McVeety relied upon the rule 24 response, and agreed  that  the  FTT
    had erred in considering paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  in  respect  of  the
    First Appellant's son.  Mr McVeety contended that  the  error  was  not
    material because the FTT had considered at paragraphs 66-68 whether  it
    was reasonable for the First Appellant's son to leave the UK,  and  had
    made sustainable findings.  Mr McVeety pointed out  that  the  FTT  had
    considered section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act
    2009 at paragraphs 69-71.  I was referred to MA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705, in which the Court of Appeal gives guidance on how to consider
    the test of whether it is reasonable for a child to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  I was asked to find that although this decision had not  been
    published when the FTT decision was promulgated, the FTT  had  in  fact
    followed  the  correct  approach   when   considering   reasonableness.
    Therefore although it was conceded that the FTT had erred  in  relation
    to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) the error was not material, as the  FTT  had
    correctly assessed the test of reasonableness.

15. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. The FTT erred in recording that  there  were  four  Appellants  in  the
    appeal, but this is not a material error, and it is not contended to be
    material by either party.

17. Permission to appeal was granted on one issue, that being  whether  the
    FTT erred  in  assessing  whether  it  was  reasonable  for  the  First
    Appellant's son, aged 16, to leave the United  Kingdom  and  return  to
    Kenya.

18. In my view the FTT erred at  paragraph  65,  and  this  is  now  common
    ground, having been accepted by both representatives before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The First  Appellant's  son's  case  should  not  have  been
    assessed with reference to paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv).   He  was  not  an
    Appellant, neither had he made an application for leave to remain.  The
    asylum claim was made by the First Appellant on 18th December 2014, and
    his son entered the United Kingdom on 9th June 2008.  It  is  therefore
    clear that he had not acquired seven years' continuous residence at the
    date of application.

19. In my view the correct approach would have been to consider  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules, taking into account the  best  interests
    of the First Appellant's son as a child, as  a  primary  consideration.
    This would have involved a consideration of the  factors  contained  in
    section 117B, including section 117B(6) which I set out below;

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

20. This would involve considering whether it is reasonable to  expect  the
    child to leave the United Kingdom, and the First Appellant's son  would
    be a qualifying child, because he had lived in the United Kingdom for a
    continuous period of seven years or more.  In this case,  the  relevant
    time for calculating the period of  residence  would  be  the  date  of
    hearing rather than the date of application.

21. The correct approach to considering the test of reasonableness  is  now
    made clear by MA (Pakistan) in which it was decided that  the  test  is
    not restricted to what is reasonable for the child, but should  include
    the wider public interest, including the  immigration  history  of  the
    child and parents.  Elias LJ explained at paragraph 45  that  the  only
    significance of section 117B(6) is that where the seven  year  rule  is
    satisfied, it is a factor of some weight leaning in favour of leave  to
    remain being granted.

22. It is correct that the FTT did not refer to the case law relied upon by
    the Appellants, but the FTT did take into account the guidance given by
    the Court of Appeal  in  EV  (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  and
    specifically analysed the factors set  out  in  paragraph  35  of  that
    decision, in considering the best interests of a child.

23. The FTT took into account the length of time that the First Appellant's
    son had been in the UK, and his achievements  in  education.   It  also
    took into account that he had returned to Kenya twice, and  noted  that
    he would be returning to Kenya with his parents.  The FTT noted that he
    would encounter  "no  linguistic,  medical  or  other  difficulties  in
    adapting to life in Kenya."  In my view the FTT has taken into  account
    all   relevant   considerations   when   considering   the   test    of
    reasonableness, and has not omitted to consider  any  material  factor.
    Adequate and sustainable reasons have been given for the findings made.



24. Although the FTT erred, I find that the error of law was  one  of  form
    rather  than  substance,  in  that  reasonableness  should  have   been
    considered outside the Immigration Rules, rather than by  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  But, the correct test  was  applied  and  the
    conclusion reached was open to the FTT on the  evidence,  and  the  FTT
    decision     discloses     no     material      error      of      law.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FTT did not involve the making a  material
error on a point of law.  I do not set aside the decision.  The appeals  are
dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FTT.  There has been  no  request  to
the Upper Tribunal for anonymity and I see no  need  to  make  an  anonymity
order.


Signed                              Date 26th July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the decision of the FTT stands so does the decision not  to  make  a  fee
award.






Signed                              Date 26th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
