
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09475/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 April and 16 June 2015                  |On 26 June 2015               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              FS (AFGHANISTAN)

                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Fijiwala (28.04.15) & Ms Everett (16.06.15),
                      Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr Burrett, Counsel, instructed by Wick &
Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against
    refusal of further leave to remain on asylum and human rights (Articles
    2 and 3 ECHR) grounds.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity
    direction,  and  I  consider  that  the  claimant  should  be  accorded
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a national of Afghanistan, whose assigned date of birth
    is 1 January 1995.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 2 November 2009
    and claimed asylum on 9 November 2009.  His asylum claim  was  refused,
    but he was granted discretionary leave to remain  as  an  unaccompanied
    asylum seeking minor.  On 26 June 2012 he applied for further leave  to
    remain, and the application was refused on 30  October  2014.   He  had
    alleged a fear of return only  to  certain  areas  within  Afghanistan,
    namely Lamya village, Kapisa province.  It was not accepted he  was  at
    risk in that area.  But should he feel uncomfortable  in  returning  to
    his former home, then sufficiency of protection would be  available  to
    him in a place of relocation, such as Kabul.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The claimant's appeal came before  Judge  Morrison  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross in the First-tier Tribunal on 29 January 2015.  The claimant  was
    represented by Mr Burrett of  Counsel,  and  Ms  Fijiwala  appeared  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State.   In  his  subsequent  decision,  the
    judge found that the claimant was credible  in  his  core  claim.   His
    father was a member of the Taliban, and spent much of his time with the
    Taliban fighting for them.  For eighteen months prior to his arrival in
    the UK, there was heavy fighting  between  Government  forces  and  the
    Taliban, as a result of which his father  was  killed.   This  happened
    after Government  forces  attacked  the  family's  guest  house,  which
    adjoined their home and which Taliban members who were in the area used
    as accommodation.  He and his mother were unharmed in the attack by the
    Government forces.  His older brother A was injured,  but  the  Taliban
    took him away and he  returned  about  two  months  later.   After  the
    attack, Government forces would come and search the house, but they had
    never shown any interest in the claimant.  The  Taliban  also  visited.
    They allowed his brother to return from  the  madrasa  occasionally  to
    visit him and his mother.  The Taliban told the claimant they  expected
    him to join them, and they expected him to undergo training in  one  or
    two years' time.  His mother did not want him to join the Taliban.   So
    she sold the family land and arranged for an agent to take the claimant
    and his  older  brother  to  the  United  Kingdom.   The  claimant  had
    travelled with his older brother as far as France, but  they  had  then
    become separated.

 4. Drawing heavily on an expert report prepared by Dr Giustozzi, the judge
    found that the claimant would be at risk on return to Kapisa, both from
    the Taliban and from Government forces, because of his  family's  known
    history with the Taliban.

 5. At paragraphs [44] to [48], the judge addressed the question of whether
    the claimant could safely relocate to Kabul.   He  noted  at  paragraph
    [45] that it was Dr Giustozzi's view that the claimant would be at risk
    from the Taliban in Kabul as the Taliban  was  increasingly  active  in
    Kabul, and eventually the background of individuals  would  be  checked
    and their background would become known.

 6. At paragraph [46] he cited the following passage  from  Dr  Giustozzi's
    report:

         If [FS]  opted  to  place  himself  under  the  protection  of  the
         Authorities, for example denouncing the Taliban, he would then turn
         into a target for the Taliban which as a reluctant  recruit  he  is
         not (my emphasis).  The Taliban have the means to track down  their
         targets.   The  Taliban's  intelligence  operations   are   getting
         increasingly  sophisticated  and  their  ability  to   track   down
         individuals is very sophisticated.

 7. At the end of paragraph [46], he noted Dr Giustozzi's  conclusion  that
    the claimant would still be at risk  from  both  the  Taliban  and  the
    Authorities in Kabul "in view of his family's known connection with the
    Taliban".

 8. At paragraph [47] he indicated that he accepted Mr Burrett's submission
    that the position of the claimant was distinguishable from that of  the
    appellant in AK, as the claimant had a particular risk profile  whereas
    the appellant in AK did not have a particular risk profile in Kabul.

 9. The judge went on to allow the appeal  on  asylum  grounds,  and  under
    Articles  2  and  3  ECHR.   He  dismissed  an  alternative  claim  for
    humanitarian protection, and observed that  the  claimant's  Article  8
    appeal on its own would be unlikely to have met with success given that
    the claimant clearly did not meet the requirements of Rule 276ADE,  and
    that Ms Vaid acknowledged in her evidence there was nothing exceptional
    in relation to the claimant's private life in the UK.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

10. A member of the Specialist Appeals  Team  settled  an  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Ground 1 was the judge had
    failed to provide adequate reasons as to why the claimant would  be  at
    risk in Kabul from the Taliban, as  at  paragraph  40  of  the  judge's
    decision it was recorded  that  "the  Taliban  rarely  practise  forced
    recruitment nowadays", which was consistent with the  country  guidance
    authority of HK and Others (minors - indiscriminate violence  -  forced
    recruitment by Taliban - contact with family  members)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2010] UKUT 378 (IAC).

11. Ground 2 was the judge had failed to provide adequate reasons as to why
    the claimant would be at  risk  in  Kabul  from  the  Authorities.   No
    evidence was referred to in support of the contention that someone  who
    had left their home area to avoid recruitment to the Taliban  would  be
    of any interest to the Authorities resulting  in  any  mistreatment  of
    such severity to qualify for international protection.  A similar issue
    (in the context of Hizb-i-Islami) was addressed in PM and Others (Kabul
    - Hizb-i-Islami) Afghanistan CG [2007] UKAIT 0089 at paragraph [136].

Grant of Permission to Appeal on 3 March 2015

12. First-tier Tribunal Judge Cheales granted permission to appeal for  the
    following reasons: "it  is  arguable  that  the  judge  has  not  given
    adequate or properly reasoned findings for why the [claimant] would  be
    at risk on return to Kabul."



The Error of Law Hearing

13. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Burrett mounted a robust defence of the judge's  decision.   He
    submitted that the claimant had a higher risk  profile  than  a  normal
    returnee, as his family had operated a known Taliban safe  house.   The
    risk was greater for him  because  his  family  had  been  specifically
    targeted by the Authorities.

14. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Ms Fijiwala relied on the passages
    from the country guidance cases cited in the  grounds  of  appeal,  and
    also on some passages in the country guidance case of  AK  [2012]  UKUT
    163 (IAC), including  at  paragraph  [253]  where  the  Upper  Tribunal
    rejected an assessment by Dr  Giustozzi  that  internal  relocation  to
    Kabul for AK would be difficult, if not altogether impossible.

15. I found that an error of law was  made  out,  such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside and remade.  I gave my reasons for  so  finding  in
    short form, and my extended reasons are set out below.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

16. As Dr Giustozzi acknowledged in the  passage  cited  by  the  judge  in
    paragraph [46], the claimant's history did not engender a risk  per  se
    for the claimant in Kabul at the hands of the Taliban.  The  mere  fact
    that he had been spirited away from a Taliban stronghold before he  was
    old enough to undergo combat training for the Taliban did not mean that
    the Taliban were going to pursue him with malign  intent  if  and  when
    they discovered, through spies or informants, that many years later  he
    was living as a civilian in Kabul.  The claimant was only going to make
    himself a target for the Taliban in Kabul if he made some gesture which
    invited retaliation from the Taliban, such as  by  publicly  denouncing
    the Taliban.  Again, this was acknowledged by Dr Giustozzi in the  same
    passage cited by the judge at paragraph [46].  Thus in  order  for  the
    claimant to be at real risk from the Taliban in Kabul there had to be a
    real risk of the claimant engaging in overt  anti-Taliban  activity  in
    Kabul, for which there was absolutely no evidential basis.   There  was
    nothing in the claimant's evidence which  remotely  suggested  that  he
    would publicly denounce the Taliban, and the judge did  not  find  that
    there was a real risk of him doing so.   So  an  essential  finding  is
    missing from the judge's reasoning process to  support  the  conclusion
    that the claimant faces a real risk from the Taliban  in  Kabul.   Thus
    ground 1 is made out.

17. As to ground 2, I find that AK is of no real assistance to the argument
    advanced by Ms Fijiwala, as the principal basis of AK's claim was  that
    he had fled his home area of Ghazni to escape persecution at the  hands
    of the family of a powerful warlord who discovered that he had begun  a
    relationship with his niece.  In his expert report  in  that  case,  Dr
    Giustozzi did not opine that AK faced a real  risk  of  persecution  in
    Kabul from either the Authorities or from the warlord, and so the Upper
    Tribunal's rejection of his opinion on the reasonableness  of  internal
    relocation for AK does not in itself undermine the proposition that the
    Authorities in Kabul would have an adverse interest  in  the  claimant,
    who has a different history from that of AK.

18. Of much greater relevance is the guidance given in  PM  and  Others  CG
    [2007] UKAIT 0089, a country guidance authority which is referred to in
    the refusal letter.  The  headline  guidance  includes  the  following:



         Those returned from the  United  Kingdom  are  not  at  real  risk,
         without more, of being suspected by the Authorities as  insurgents.



         The past of an individual seeking accommodation or work  in  Kabul,
         or elsewhere, may be discovered and mentioned to  the  Authorities.
         Similarly, the  Authorities  may  become  aware  of  someone  newly
         arrived in an area.  That may result in a person being detained for
         questioning but there is no satisfactory evidence such  questioning
         gives rise to a real risk of serious harm.

19. Although the insurgency under consideration in PM was insurgency by the
    Hizb-i-Islami, I consider that the guidance is of  general  application
    and in any event there is no reason to suppose  that  the  Authorities'
    approach to family members of known Taliban  insurgents  would  be  any
    different  than  it  was  to  family  members  of  known  Hizb-i-Islami
    insurgents.  At paragraph [136] of PM the Tribunal said:

         Dr Giustozzi was specifically asked, a number of times,  about  the
         way in which the  security  forces  may  approach  those  who  they
         suspect  could  have  information  of  use   to   them   in   their
         counterinsurgency  activities.   He  initially  described   it   as
         harassment.  He said it may take the form of visits to  their  home
         and  of  the  asking  of  questions.   He  did  not  volunteer  the
         suggestion that people may be seriously mistreated.   When  he  was
         asked about the position of returning failed  asylum  seekers,  the
         only example he could give was of a young man who it was  said  had
         been forced to leave Afghanistan.  He was the son of  a  professor,
         but when pressed it became clear that he was not a returnee, but  a
         young man who had lived in a village in Afghanistan all along.   We
         did not learn anything from that evidence about what may happen  to
         the appellants on return.  In summary, we concluded that it has not
         been demonstrated that returnees such as the appellants would be at
         real risk in Kabul.  It is possible, but no more, that  after  they
         had been here for a period, their existence would become  known  to
         the security forces.  The evidence is they would not  be  suspected
         of directly  knowing  anything  about  what  is  going  on  in  the
         insurgency although after a period, in common with all the  others,
         they may be  asked  questions  about  what  they  know  from  their
         relatives and friends and their own personal networks.  There is no
         satisfactory specific evidence about the  way  in  which  they  are
         likely to  be  treated  such  as  to  establish  that  there  is  a
         reasonable likelihood that  they  would  be  subjected  to  serious
         mistreatment.  We accept that if a person falls into the  hands  of
         the Authorities as a suspect it is possible they may  be  seriously
         mistreated but we do not find there is a real risk of that  on  the
         basis of the facts in these cases.  Clearly,  if  such  a  returnee
         elects to become active for  Hizb-i-Islami  the  situation  may  be
         different, but these appellants are not being returned on the basis
         that that is what they will do.  After all, they came here to avoid
         that.

20. This claimant  was  sent  to  the  United  Kingdom  to  avoid  becoming
    embroiled in fighting for the Taliban against Government  forces.   The
    judge does not attempt to explain in his reasoning what it is about the
    claimant's material history which, once it became known to the security
    forces, would  engender  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  he  would  be
    subjected to serious mistreatment.  The claimant  comes  from  a  known
    Taliban stronghold, but he fled to the west in  order  to  avoid  being
    recruited by the Taliban, as did his older brother.  His father  fought
    for the Taliban, but his father was a follower, not a leader: he fought
    under the command of a senior commander.  Accordingly, contrary  to  Mr
    Burrett's submissions both here and below, it is far from obvious  that
    the claimant would have an enhanced risk profile in Kabul on account of
    his past history.  The  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  country
    guidance authority which undermines Dr  Giustozzi's  opinion  that  the
    claimant would be at risk from  the  Authorities  in  Kabul,  with  the
    result that  he  has  not  given  adequate  reasons  for  accepting  Dr
    Giustozzi's expert opinion on this issue.

Future Disposal

21. It was agreed by the parties that the decision should be remade in  the
    Upper Tribunal at a resumed hearing.  It was agreed that  the  remaking
    of the decision should be postponed to a resumed hearing as  there  had
    been a very recent decision  by  the  President  allowing  the  appeals
    against removal to  Kabul  of  some  failed  asylum  seekers,  who  had
    deployed new evidence of an increased risk for returnees to Kabul.   Mr
    Burrett wished to deploy this new evidence  for  the  purposes  of  the
    remaking of the decision, and I gave him permission to do  so  provided
    that it was served on the Upper Tribunal and on the Specialist  Appeals
    Team in a paginated and indexed bundle not less than seven days  before
    the resumed hearing.

22. It was further agreed the judge's findings of fact on the topic of past
    persecution would be preserved.

23. Although the judge did not formally dismiss the alternative  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds, there is no cross-appeal  by  the  claimant  to  the
    effect that his appeal should be allowed in the alternative on  Article
    8 grounds, as Mr Burrett acknowledged.  There is also  no  cross-appeal
    against the dismissal of the claim for humanitarian protection. So  the
    issues to be addressed at the  resumed  hearing  are  confined  to  the
    question of whether the claimant is entitled to relief on international
    protection grounds (including Articles 2  and  3  ECHR,  but  excluding
    humanitarian protection) in  respect  of  his  prospective  removal  to
    Kabul.

The Hearing to Remake the Decision

24. Pursuant to the directions which I made at the error  of  law  hearing,
    the claimant's solicitors served  a  supplementary  bundle  containing,
    inter alia: written submissions, an addendum to Dr Giustozzi's original
    report dated 7 June 2015, an expert report from Dr Liza Schuster  dated
    5 June 2015 and a  letter  dated  6  March  2015  from  Dr  Daud  Yaar,
    Ambassador at the Afghan Embassy in London.

The letter

25. In his letter of 6 March 2015, the  Ambassador  announced  the  current
    stance of the Ministry of  Migration  and  Repatriation  Affairs.   The
    Ministry  had  decided  to  reconsider  the  terms  of   the   existing
    memorandums  of  understanding  through  diplomatic  channels  and  had
    requested partner  countries  to  suspend  the  deportation  of  Afghan
    migrants, "until decided otherwise, where the  Ministry  could  provide
    the necessary services to returning Afghans".   Until  that  time,  the
    Ministry could not accept responsibility regarding any Afghan deportee.





The report of Dr Schuster

26. In her report Dr Schuster, who is a guest researcher  and  lecturer  at
    Kabul University, gives an account of a meeting with  Minister  Balkhi,
    the Minister for Refugees and Repatriation,  on  28  February  2015  in
    Kabul.  According  to  the  minister,  he  was  unwilling  to  continue
    operating the current MOUs until new ones were negotiated  because  the
    removing countries were breaching conditions: women  and  children  and
    people who were mentally and physically unwell were being  removed,  as
    well as those who could not be returned to their provinces  of  origin.
    The minister argued that only of those who could be safely returned  to
    their provinces of origin should be removed.  According to him, it  was
    not reasonable to expect Kabul to be able to receive all those who were
    forcibly returned (especially when  they  were  from  other  provinces,
    and/or had been born outside Afghanistan).   In  the  minister's  view,
    only Bamiyan and Panjshir were safe, but the roads to Bamiyan were not.
     Before leaving, Mr Balkhi asked the four people present to  use  their
    contacts to pressurise the  Norwegian  Government  to  stop  a  charter
    flight due on 15 March and another March flight from the UK.

27.  Dr  Schuster  had  since  seen  documents  showing  that  the  British
    Government had put considerable pressure on the  Afghan  Government  to
    allow forced removals to continue.  There had  not  however,  been  any
    improvements in the security (or employment) situation in Kabul.

28. In her report Dr Schuster goes on to consider the security situation in
    Kabul.  2014  saw  a  sharp  increase  in  the  frequency  of  attacks,
    particularly in Kabul.  Aside from the  22  people  killed  in  the  17
    January 2014 attack on the Lebanese restaurant, including eight  Afghan
    civilians, there had been at least one attack per week, up to including
    this week when a BBIED exploded in PD2 killing seven  and  injuring  36
    civilians (TLO News 25 March 2015).  The assassination of the chief  of
    staff to the Afghan Chief of Police in Kabul on 9 November 2014  inside
    the Kabul Police HQ was certainly seen as  evidence  of  the  Taliban's
    capacity to strike at even one of the most secure and  fortified  sites
    in Afghanistan, and the inability of the forces to protect  themselves,
    let alone ordinary civilians.

29.  Many  of  Kabul's  districts,  especially  outside  the  centre,   are
    ethnically segregated, including Pule Charki and Karte Nau, which  were
    both Pashtu districts.  Residents of Kabul with whom she has spoken  in
    the last three years have told her that they feel nervous outside their
    own areas, and taxi drivers driving around the city would express fears
    for her when dropping her in districts of ethnic  groups  different  to
    their own.

30. In the last part of the report Dr Schuster addresses the  viability  of
    relocating to Kabul for those from outside the city  who  do  not  have
    family in the  city.   She  begins  by  citing  the  UNHCR  Eligibility
    Guidelines dated 6 August 2013 as offering guidance  on  assessing  the
    reasonableness of internal relocation, noting the particular  attention
    must be given to:

      i) the availability of traditional  support  mechanisms,  provided  by
         members of the applicant's extended family or members of his or her
         ethnic group (my emphasis);

     ii) access to shelter in the proposed area of relocation;

    iii) the availability of basic infrastructure and  access  to  essential
         services in the proposed area of relocation,  such  as  sanitation,
         healthcare and education;

     iv) the presence of livelihood opportunities, including access to  land
         for Afghans originating from rural areas; and

      v) the  scale  of  internal  displacement  in  the  proposed  area  of
         relocation.

31. With regard to sub-paragraph (iii), she says  that  Kabul's  population
    has exploded from 500,000 to 5,000,000+ in  the  space  of  ten  years.
    Many of the  5.7  million  people  who  have  returned  from  Iran  and
    Pakistan,  and  the  6,000,000  IDPs   have   been   displaced   inside
    Afghanistan, have been unable to return to their original homes  and  a
    significant  number  of  these  have  settled  around   Kabul.    Basic
    infrastructure, including sanitation, education  and  health,  has  not
    kept pace.

32. With  regard  to  sub-paragraph  (iv),  interaction  between  strangers
    meeting for the  first  meeting  inevitably  begins  with  establishing
    identity and trying to find common  acquaintances  or  family  members.
    Trust in the Afghanistan has been severely  tested  through  more  than
    three decades of war, and unless and until someone's identity had  been
    established, they will be unable to find somewhere to stay, or  someone
    to give them employment or support.  Unless they have access to support
    networks, they will find it  difficult,  perhaps  impossible,  to  find
    livelihood opportunities.  While Afghan asylum seekers will undoubtedly
    have gained valuable skills and experience during their time in the UK,
    which should qualify them for employment in Kabul, it is  unfortunately
    the case that jobs are mostly given to  members  of  a  social  network
    rather than the most qualified person.

33. A further concern is those returned after spending years in Europe,  in
    particular during formative teenage  years,  would  stand  out.   Those
    returned may  still  speak  Dari  or  Pashtu,  but  their  accents  and
    comportment are different, and they do not have the local knowledge and
    experience necessary to assess and deal with risk. If they do not  have
    family or friends in Kabul, they will not have the  necessary  guidance
    and advice on where to go and how to behave.  Those returning as  young
    men without social networks  are  also  vulnerable  to  recruitment  by
    insurgents. Quoting from a previous article she co-wrote in  2013,  for
    the most part re-integration packages provide something to do until the
    person in question can  leave  again.   From  the  research  which  she
    conducted, there were two main  reasons  why  those  who  are  forcibly
    returned to Kabul return to their provinces of origin.   The  first  is
    where people have absolutely no links to Kabul, and they  do  not  know
    where to begin looking for accommodation or employment so even if  they
    feel threatened in their home province, they hope to find shelter there
    until they can find somewhere else to go.  The second reason is that it
    is likely some years have passed since most have seen their families.





The addendum report of Dr Guistozzi

34. In his addendum report, Dr Giustozzi  says  that  whether  or  not  the
    appellant is from Kabul is immaterial to question  whether  the  Afghan
    authorities will accept him as a returnee.  He  is  not  aware  of  any
    particular attempt to return Afghans to Kabul being  rejected,  but  he
    says there are rumours that some  returning  Afghans  from  continental
    Europe have not been accepted by the immigration authorities  at  Kabul
    Airport.

35. The intensity of terrorist attacks in Kabul  varies  according  to  the
    dynamics of the conflict.  The  peak  in  the  number  of  attacks  was
    reached in October last year.  There  was  then  a  lull  in  November,
    January.  Attacks have since resumed, and occur at a pace of  a  couple
    per week.   The  authorities  have  tightened  security  in  Kabul  and
    searches for infiltrators and suspect terrorists have intensified.  The
    chances of the claimant being viewed as a suspect are thus now  greater
    than ever.  If he was just arrested for questioning, the chance of  him
    being abused or even tortured would  be  very  high.   The  authorities
    would expect him to provide information about his family members, their
    activities  and  whereabouts.   Failure  to  do  so  could  itself   be
    considered a crime by the authorities.

36. The claimant is still not likely to be at  risk  from  the  Taliban  in
    Kabul.  The greatest risk to the claimant was  going  to  be  from  the
    authorities.  A recent UNAMA Report confirmed that arbitrary  detention
    had continued unabated in more recent years.  The report confirmed that
    about 35% of detainees had been tortured.

37. The ability of the authorities to  provide  protection  to  individuals
    like the claimant, assuming they did not arrest him in the first  place
    as a suspect, remained limited.  Apart from senior government officials
    who enjoyed the protection of the police, everybody else  had  to  fend
    for himself.

Submissions on remaking

38. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Ms Everett submitted that the  new
    evidence relied on by the claimant did not demonstrate that he would be
    at a real risk of persecution or serious harm on return to Kabul either
    at the hands of the Taliban or at the hands  of  the  authorities.   In
    reply, Mr Burrett submitted that the country  guidance  in  PM  was  no
    longer operative.  There was a general degree of optimism in 2006,  and
    it was envisaged that  international  oversight  would  continue.   The
    deterioration  of  the  security  position  in  Kabul  meant  that   Dr
    Giustozzi's apprehension of the risk faced by the claimant at the hands
    of  the  authorities,  given  his  particular  profile,  had  a   solid
    evidential foundation.




Discussion and Findings on Remaking

39. In international protection claims, the standard of proof  is  that  of
    real risk or reasonable  degree  of  likelihood.  Evidence  of  matters
    occurring after the date of decision can be taken into account.

40. Under Paragraph 339K, the fact that a person has already  been  subject
    to  persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
    persecution or serious harm, will be regarded as a serious indicator of
    the person's well-founded fear of persecution or serious  harm,  unless
    there are good reasons to consider that  such  persecution  or  serious
    harm will not be repeated.

41. Under Paragraph 339O, the Secretary of State will not grant  asylum  if
    in part of the country of origin a person would not have a well-founded
    fear of being persecuted, and the person can reasonably be expected  to
    stay in that part of the country. In examining whether a  part  of  the
    country meets this requirement, the Secretary of State will have regard
    to the general circumstances prevailing in that part of the country and
    to the personal circumstances of the person.

42. According to Mr Burrett, an earlier report by Dr Schuster, to which she
    makes reference in her June 2015 report, was part of the evidence which
    underpinned the decision by the President referred to in  paragraph  21
    above. Mr Burrett clarified that the President on that occasion granted
    an interim injunction prohibiting the SSHD from effecting a removal  to
    Kabul of some failed asylum seekers, and that a reported  decision  was
    not yet available.

43. In the light of the evidence contained in the supplementary  bundle,  I
    infer that the central  reason  for  granting  an  injunction  was  the
    announcement by the Ministry for Refugees  and  Repatriation  that  the
    following categories of person would not be  allowed  to  disembark  at
    Kabul Airport: unaccompanied women and children, those with mental  and
    physical problems, those that are  particularly  vulnerable  and  (most
    controversially from the standpoint of the UK  government)  "those  who
    come from dangerous  provinces":  see  paragraphs  52  and  53  of  the
    supplementary bundle.

44. Although Kapisa Province is not one of the provinces  discussed  by  Dr
    Schuster in her report, it is clearly not  one  of  the  two  provinces
    which the Afghan Government has pronounced as safe.   Accordingly,  the
    claimant prima facie falls into the category of a person in respect  of
    whom there is a technical obstacle to an enforced return to his country
    of origin.  Thus, as was agreed by Mr Burrett  and  Ms  Everett,  I  am
    being asked to assess the risk on return on a hypothetical basis only.

45. While I accept the security situation in Kabul has  deteriorated  since
    PM was decided, I am nonetheless not persuaded that the  reasons  given
    in PM for in effect rejecting Dr Giustozzi's opinion are any less valid
    today than they were in 2006.

46. Although Dr Giustozzi characterises the recent change  of  position  by
    the Afghan Government as arising  from  a  perception  that  the  Kabul
    internal flight alternative is not viable as a safe  alternative,  this
    is not in fact correct.  This is apparent from the contents of the blog
    on which Dr Giustozzi bases his claim. Minister Balkhi did not in terms
    state that Kabul was no longer safe for returnees.  What  he  said  was
    that the security situation in Afghanistan as a whole was  not  stable,
    commenting that currently 80% of the country was insecure  and  unsafe.
    The implication of Dr Schuster's report is that the 20% of the  country
    which continues to be relatively safe and secure in the  estimation  of
    the Minister (and in her own estimation) comprises major cities such as
    Kabul (where IDPs from rural areas  continue  to  congregate)  and  two
    named  provinces.  For,  despite  the  deterioration  in  the  security
    situation in Kabul city, she does not  identify  this  as  one  of  the
    reasons why internal relocation to Kabul city may not be sustainable in
    the long-term.

47. The report of Dr Schuster does not lend any support to the  proposition
    that the intensification  of  Taliban  attacks  in  Kabul  has  led  to
    increased suspicion of returnees as being Taliban infiltrators.   There
    is passing reference to abuses committed by Afghan local police in  the
    provinces, presumably in one or more of the dangerous provinces, but  I
    can find no mention of any similar abuses in the context of Kabul.

48. The claimant's profile is that he is an ethnic Pashtun who  comes  from
    an area of the country which is a known Taliban stronghold. But he fled
    to the west in order to avoid being recruited by the  Taliban,  as  did
    his older brother.  His father fought for the  Taliban  and  the  guest
    house  adjacent  to  the  family  home  was  used  by  the  Taliban  as
    accommodation. The authorities in Kapisa knew about him as a  potential
    Taliban recruit (by virtue of his association with his father, who they
    killed in an attack on the guest-house), but  they  did  not  take  any
    action against him at the time, presumably because of his youth.

49. Mr Burrett submits that there is an undisturbed finding  by  the  judge
    below that the claimant would be at risk of ill-treatment on return  to
    his home area in Kapisa province from the authorities, as well as  from
    the Taliban, on account of his  family's  known  association  with  the
    Taliban. I formally preserved the judge's findings on past persecution.
    I did not formally preserve the judge's finding that the claimant would
    be at risk on return from the authorities in  Kapisa  province.  But  I
    accept that the finding was open to the judge for the reasons he  gave,
    and it was not challenged by the SSHD.

50. Nonetheless, it does not thereby follow that the claimant would face  a
    similar risk from the authorities in Kabul. The level of  threat  posed
    by the Taliban in Kabul relative to that posed by the Taliban in Kapisa
    Province is of a different order of magnitude. Another  key  difference
    is that the claimant would not  be  perceived  by  the  authorities  as
    returning to his home area to carry on where his father had  left  off.
    The very fact that he had fled to the West and had then chosen  not  to
    return to his former home area is more consistent with  him  continuing
    to shun the Taliban rather than being a potential recruit. So there  is
    not a solid evidential platform on which to draw  the  inference  that,
    because Taliban infiltration of Kabul has increased  and  the  security
    situation in Kabul has deteriorated, greater suspicion would  now  fall
    on the claimant on account of his profile or that the  questioning  and
    treatment of the claimant by the authorities  in  Kabul  would  violate
    Article  3  ECHR.  Accordingly,  I  find  that  the  claimant  has  not
    discharged the burden of proving to the lower standard of proof that he
    is at a real risk of suffering persecutory ill-treatment or  Article  3
    ECHR harm on return to Kabul on account of his accepted profile.

51. I have also given consideration to  the  proposition  whether,  in  the
    light of the latest evidence, the claimant's relocation to Kabul  could
    be said to be unreasonable and unduly harsh, even if he will  be  safe.
    The claimant is now aged 20�, based on his assigned date of birth,  and
    so he is a long way past his assumed age of majority.  The fact that he
    is still under the supervision of Hounslow Social Services pursuant  to
    Section 24 of the Children (Leaving Care) Act 2000 does not  give  rise
    to an inference that he is too immature to cope with having to forge an
    independent life in Kabul without the  assistance  of  extended  family
    members in Kabul.  As the judge  recorded  at  paragraph  [36]  of  his
    decision,  the  claimant's  personal  advisor  says  there  is  nothing
    exceptional  about  his  circumstances.   He  is   living   in   shared
    accommodation with other young men.

52. As stated in the refusal letter, the claimant  will  be  able  to  take
    advantage of the financial assistance which is  attached  to  voluntary
    returns, so that he can either continue his education in Kabul or start
    a business with the assistance of the Refugee Action Choices Scheme.

53. In conclusion, I find that the claimant has not discharged  the  burden
    of proving that, having regard to the general circumstances  prevailing
    in Kabul and his personal circumstances, he has a well-founded fear  of
    persecution in Kabul or that he cannot reasonably be expected  to  stay
    there. So he does not qualify for recognition as a refugee and, by  the
    same token, he does not qualify for human  rights  (Articles  2  and  3
    ECHR) protection.

Conclusion

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted:

The claimant's appeal is dismissed on all grounds raised.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the claimant.  Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson



