

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number AA/09348/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
             Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 14th November 2016
          On 12th December 2016


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                    I A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms A Nizami (counsel, instructed by E A law
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant had claimed asylum on the basis of his activities as a
   journalist in the UK and Pakistan. The claim was rejected for the reasons
   given in the Refusal Letter of the 4th of June 2015. His appeal was heard
   by Judge Maxwell on the 14th of July 2016 and dismissed in a decision
   dated the 20th of July 2016. The Judge did not accept that the evidence
   of activity in Pakistan was particularly good and did not show that he
   would be at risk on return, the reasons were given in paragraphs 20 to 45
   of the decision.

2. The grounds of application for permission to appeal raised 3 grounds.
   The first is that relevant evidence had not been considered in relation
   to threats made to the Appellant's source in Pakistan which included news
   reports, phone transcripts and FIR evidence. There were no findings with
   regard to the attack on the source's home in Pakistan. Secondly it was
   argued that the Judge had erred in relation to the Appellant's work in
   Pakistan. Thirdly it is asserted that the hearing was unfair as findings
   were made without the Appellant having been given the opportunity to
   address the Judge's concerns.

3. The submissions are set out in the Record of Proceedings. Both parties
   maintained their position with regard to the decision with the Home
   Office going through the decision and submitting that the Judge had
   considered all relevant matters. At the end of the hearing I indicated
   that if there was an error it was in respect of the transcript of the
   telephone conversation between Mudassar and Aamir Salman. Further
   submissions were made with regard to whether the decision should be
   remade and, if so, how I should decide the case.


4. With regard to the observations made in paragraph 32 about the
   reliability of the news articles submitted the complaint relates to only
   a small part of the Judge's reasoning. Other aspects of the Judge's
   approach are found in paragraphs 29, 30, 31 and 35 and these paragraphs
   have not attracted criticism. The decision has to be read as a whole and
   to single out paragraph 32 is to take it out of context, if that
   paragraph is excised from the decision the other findings remain and are
   sustainable.

5. It is not necessary for a decision to address each and every point that
   has been made in an Appellant's case. It is necessary that sufficient
   reasons are given for the decision made and that those reasons are
   justified on the evidence presented. With the exception of the transcript
   of the phone conversation I am satisfied that that is the case for the
   reasons that follow.


6. The Judge noted the Refusal Letter and was clearly aware of the
   Appellant's case and that his journalistic activities took place in the
   UK and Pakistan. Having accepted the Appellant's journalist activities in
   the UK the Judge gave reasons for not accepting that events in Pakistan
   would place him at risk there. The Judge noted, rightly, that the
   evidence did not show that being a journalist was by itself a source of
   danger in Pakistan. The Judge gave a number of reasons for not accepting
   the evidence of investigative work in Pakistan in paragraphs 28 to 37.


7. The findings amount to an overall rejection of the Appellant's case and
   the reasons given were justified. The Judge was also entitled to have
   regard to section 8 and the delay in the Appellant's making his claim and
   clearly did not treat the delay as determinative but considered it in
   context.


8. The Judge does not appear to have considered the telephone transcript of
   the conversation and that is where he appears to have erred. To that end
   I have considered the transcript that has now been provided to assess
   whether that makes a material difference to the decision.


9. There has been a delay in considering this appeal as the transcript of
   the phone conversation did not find its way to Birmingham following the
   hearing which I did not appreciate until I started this decision. There
   was then a further delay before the Appellant's representatives were able
   to furnish me with a copy of it.


10. In paragraph 36 of the decision the Judge referred to Tanveer Ahmed and
   the guidance given in relation to the assessment of documentation. The
   transcript is undated and not typed. It is not clear whether the
   conversation, which is typed in English, was actually conducted in that
   language or whether it is a translation from another language. If it is a
   translation then there is nothing from the translator and the recording
   of the conversation has not been made available.


11. In addition to the observations made above the Appellant is not named
   in the conversation although there are references to a person living in
   "Barmingham" (sic). The conversation was not solely concerned with any
   threats made but started off with a conversation about the rejection of a
   visa application. There is a reference to going to the Police if threats
   were received but no suggestion that specific threats had been made.


12. The conversation set out is not that easy to follow, it cannot be said
   that it probably relates to the Appellant and the contents do not show
   that threats have actually been made or to whom they relate. Given the
   lack of supporting evidence with regard to the provenance of the
   conversation, the timing and language used there would be ample
   justification for rejecting the reliability of the document, even without
   that point it does not add to the Appellant's case.


13. Having considered that document in the context of the decision of Judge
   Maxwell although he ought to have addressed it in his decision I am
   satisfied that his failure to do so was not material as it would have
   made no difference to the findings that the Judge made or the conclusions
   that he reached based upon them. Accordingly the decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a material error of law and
   the decision stands as the disposal of the Appellant's appeal in this
   case.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 9th December 2016



