
[pic]
|Upper Tribunal                        |Appeal Number AA.09917.2013    |
|Immigration and Asylum Chamber        |Promulgated on 16th May 2014   |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:   North Shields
On:         Friday 11th April 2014
                                   Before

                                Judge Aitken
                       Deputy Chamber President (HESC)


                                   Between


                              Mr W N S Fernando


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
For the Appellant:           Ms S Rogers
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                                  Decision

   1. This matter appears before me permission to appeal having  been  given
      by Tribunal Judge Rolles on 20th February 2014 in the following terms:


      "1. This is an in-time application by the appellant, a citizen of  Sri
      Lanka, for permission to appeal against the determination of Judge  of
      the First-Tier Tribunal Henderson dismissing his  appeal  against  the
      respondent's decision to refuse him asylum and to remove him.

      2. The appellant is and was unrepresented so  I  have  considered  the
      determination carefully as well as the grounds and I consider that  an
      arguable error of law is disclosed.

      3. The respondent had accepted that the appellant went into hiding  in
      Sri Lanka because he had received threats from the  police  acting  on
      behalf of the  powerful  Lansa  family.  The  judge  found  it  to  be
      plausible that this family exerted control over the police at a  local
      level because of their money and position (paragraph 35 determination)
      and in the context of the connection between the Lansa family and  the
      President she found that there was no sufficiency  of  protection  for
      the appellant and  that  if  the  Lansa  family  intended  to  do  the
      appellant harm they  had  the  means  and  connections  to  put  their
      intentions  into  action  (paragraph  42  determination).  The   judge
      concluded however that it would be reasonable  for  the  appellant  to
      relocate on return to Sri Lanka (paragraph 47 determination).

      4. I consider there is force overall in the appellant's argument  that
      the judge erred in law  in  her  approach  to  relocation.  I  do  not
      consider that she erred in her approach to his ability  to  leave  Sri
      Lanka; her comments at paragraph 43  are  not  as  one  sided  as  the
      appellant suggests as she  explains  that  the  appellant's  departure
      might mean that the Lansa family did not feel the need to bother about
      him. Nevertheless it is arguable that she gave inadequate reasons  for
      her conclusion at paragraphs 46 and 47 that the Lansa family would not
      now be interested in harming the appellant outside his home area.  She
      repeatedly referred in those paragraphs to  there  being  no  evidence
      other than that of the  appellant  that  the  family  had  an  ongoing
      interest in harming  him.  It  is  arguable  given  the  evidence  the
      appellant refers to at paragraph 2 of his grounds that the  judge  did
      not give adequate reasons for rejecting the evidence of the  appellant
      that the Lanza family had an ongoing interest in harming him. She  did
      not make any express adverse findings against the appellant so far  as
      credibility was concerned and she had accepted the main  part  of  his
      account. It is right that the judge's conclusions  were  that  if  the
      Lansa family had such a wide reach then they would have been  able  to
      find the appellant but it is arguable that the judge did not take into
      account/alternatively  give  reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
      evidence that they had looked for him whilst he was  hiding  and  that
      was why he had to move.

      5.   If the appellant is credible and  his  evidence  that  the  Lansa
      family have ongoing  interest  in  harming  him  is  therefore  to  be
      believed it is also arguable (as says in paragraph 3 of  the  grounds)
      that it would not be reasonable for him  to  relocate  given  that  it
      would  mean  his  living  and  hiding  and  giving  his  profession  a
      photographer."



   2. Ms Rogers relied upon the grounds of appeal and that it appeared  from
      paragraph 47 of the Determination that the judge had rejected at least
      some of the appellant's account, i.e. those parts  relating  to  being
      pursued outside his area by his enemies and  failed  to  indicate  why
      this should be having accepted other parts of his account.


   3. Mr  Kingham  responded  that  the  judge  had  properly  set  out  her
      conclusions relating to threats if he  continued  his  business  three
      years ago, and his ability to move elsewhere to avoid difficulties.


   4. I am satisfied that paragraph 47 of the Determination is clear  as  to
      what the judge found, that was that the appellant had given a credible
      account, but that his difficulties were historic and his evidence also
      showed that his enemies were putting only limited effort into  finding
      him, putting the two together she assessed the  threat  as  now  being
      limited to his home area. That is the meaning of paragraph 47 when she
      explains:

       "47. It has now been nearly three years since the events described by
      the appellant occurred. I have no evidence aside from the  appellant's
      to show that this family are intent on harming  him  now.  I  conclude
      that it is most likely that they are satisfied that they  have  driven
      from their locality with the help of the Police. He has  skills  as  a
      professional photographer and his wife is well educated having studied
      in this country. I conclude that it is reasonable to suggest that they
      could relocate their family  and  business  to  another  area  of  Sri
      Lanka."


   5. It is clear that in context the reference to the evidence coming  only
      from the appellant was not given as a reason to reject it,  rather  it
      fixed the evidence in time as being historic, rather than there  being
      any current evidence. In paragraph 45 the judge made it clear that she
      was considering the questions of the risk posed to the appellant  now,
      rather than what it had been when he  left.  The  judge  in  the  next
      paragraph had dealt with how the  appellant  was  able  to  evade  his
      enemies and came to the conclusion that it was because they  were  not
      bothered to put the effort in to look for him outside Negombo.


   6. There is no conflict  with  accepting  the  appellant's  evidence  and
      rejecting the suggestions that his enemies looked outside  of  Negombo
      for him in paragraph 46, where she relates  "I  conclude  that  it  is
      unlikely that the family would bother to look for him outside Negombo.
      This is borne out by the fact that they did not do so  in  the  past."
      The suggestion is made that  when  the  appellant  indicated  he  fled
      Jaliyagoda at question 39 of his interview that  should  be  taken  as
      evidence that he was pursued away from Negombo. In fact the  appellant
      said at question 35 of his  interview  that  he  had  no  problems  in
      Jaliyagoda, then said he still had problems from his enemies, there is
      no conflict in this, the problems he had were threats to his wife  who
      was still in Negombo at his home, and threats at the  Hotel  which  Mr
      Dilsiri told him of. The threats were made in Negombo,  although  they
      were to the effect that they could find him  anywhere.  As  the  judge
      pointed out, threats may have been made, but no action seems  to  have
      been taken to pursue this outside of  Negombo.  Thus  it  is  entirely
      logical to accept the appellant's account of what  was  happening  and
      still regard the matter as localised, even if the appellant  did  feel
      intimidated enough to move from Jaliyagoda as a precaution.


   7. I find therefore that the Tribunal judge has properly  considered  all
      of the evidence  and  come  to  a  reasonable  conclusion  as  regards
      relocation and the determination does not contain an error of law.



                                  Decision

The appeals in respect of all appellant's are dismissed

                                                                       [pic]
                                                                Judge Aitken
                                             Deputy Chamber President (HESC)
                                                         Friday, 16 May 2014
