
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09046/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 October 2016                            |On 20 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                              Mr Yidnekchew [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Johnrose, instructed by Broudie Jackson Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. It is the appellant's case that he is an Eritrean national  born  on  2
    January 1990, who is  at  risk  of  being  persecuted  if  returned  to
    Eritrea.

 2. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 6 December 2014 and made an  asylum
    claim on the same date.  This application was refused in a decision  of
    28 May 2015.  Under the heading "Nationality" the  Secretary  of  State
    concluded the appellant to be a national of Ethiopia.

 3. The appellant appealed this decision to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicol on 4  February  2016
    and was dismissed in  a  decision  promulgated  on  19  February  2016.
    Broadly speaking the First-tier Tribunal  rejected  the  truth  of  the
    appellant's evidence and,  in  particular,  his  assertion  not  to  be
    Ethiopian.

 4. Permission to appeal was subsequently granted,  and  the  appeal  first
    came before me on 26 July 2016 at which time I set the  FtT's  decision
    aside for the following reasons:

          1. One of the core issues that required determination by the  FtT
             was the issue of the appellant's nationality i.e.  whether  he
             is of Ethiopian nationality, Eritrean nationality or both. The
             appellant asserts he is  not  of  Ethiopian  nationality.  The
             burden is on the appellant to establish this fact and there is
             plainly an obligation on him to take reasonable  steps  to  do
             so. The extent of the appellant's endeavours in this regard is
             of undoubted relevance to the Tribunal's determination of  the
             issue.

          2. In the instant case the willingness of the appellant to engage
             with the Ethiopian embassy in his attempts to prove he is  not
             an Ethiopian national are of direct relevance  to  the  weight
             that can be attached to the aforementioned  evidence  provided
             by the Ethiopian embassy.  The First-tier  Tribunal  proceeded
             at [66] on the basis  that  the  appellant  was  an  unwilling
             applicant in this regard.

          3. However, an analysis of the First-tier's decision discloses no
             other rationale for this conclusion other than the  fact  that
             it was not in the appellant's interests to cooperate with  the
             embassy, given his assertion that he is not Ethiopian.

          4. It was said by Ms Johnrose, who also represented the appellant
             before the First-tier Tribunal, that the  Secretary  of  State
             undertook detailed  cross-examination  before  the  First-tier
             Tribunal as to the events which took  place  at  the  embassy.
             The First-tier Tribunal's record of the  proceedings  confirms
             that numerous questions were asked, and answers given, by  the
             appellant in this regard.

          5. Nowhere in the First-tier Tribunal's decision is this exchange
             set out or even alluded  to,  and  there  are  no  conclusions
             reached as to the truth of the appellant's  evidence  on  such
             matters. Significantly, if credible,  the  evidence  given  on
             this issue is of undoubted  relevance  to  the  assessment  of
             whether the appellant was 'willing' in his dealings  with  the
             Ethiopian embassy.

          6. In my conclusion given the obvious relevance of  the  document
             from the Ethiopian embassy to the  issue  of  the  appellant's
             nationality, an analysis of the information  upon  which  that
             document was produced and the willingness of the appellant  to
             engage in the process leading to the conclusions therein,  was
             essential.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision   does   not
             demonstrate the rigour of analysis required in this regard.

          7. I find such failure to constitute an error of law  capable  of
             affecting the outcome of the appeal.  As a consequence, I  set
             aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

Remaking of Decision

5.   At  the  outset  Mr  McVeety  helpfully  accepted,  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State,  that  if  the  Tribunal  were  to  find  that  the
    appellant had established that he is not an Ethiopian national then  it
    ought to go on and: (i) accept that he is an  Eritrean  national;  and,
    (ii) allow the appellant's appeal on  Refugee  Convention  grounds,  in
    light of the recent country  guidance  decision  of  Eritrea  (MST  and
    Others (national service - risk  categories)  Eritrea  CG  [2016]  UKUT
    00443 (IAC))

6.   He submitted, however, that the appellant had not  established  himself
    to be a national of Eritrea and that he could  be  safely  returned  to
    Ethiopia, as a national of that country.

Burden and Standard of proof

 1. It is uncontroversial that the burden of proof rests on  the  appellant
    and that the applicable standard of proof is a low one - i.e. is  there
    a real risk that the appellant  would  suffer  treatment  amounting  to
    persecution (or treatment of such severity so as to lead to a breach of
    Article 3) in the country of his  nationality,  to  where  he  will  be
    returned.

Discussion

 5. The Upper Tribunal has recently had occasion to consider a  case,  such
    as the instant one, in which the appellant asserted himself  to  be  of
    Eritrean nationality but where the Secretary of State found him  to  be
    Ethiopian (MW (Nationality; Art 4 QD; duty to substantiate) [2016] UKUT
    453).  The head note to MW reads:

         1.  Article 4(1) of the Qualification Directive does not  impose  a
         shared duty of cooperation on the Member State to  substantiate  an
         applicant's nationality.

         2. Article 4(2) refers to  documentation  (including  documentation
         regarding nationality(ies)) "at the applicant's disposal"  -  which
         must include documentation which is not in the applicant's  present
         possession but is within his or her power to obtain.

         3. The terms of Article 4(3) are consistent with the position  that
         an applicant who denies he is a national  of  a  country  where  he
         could obtain protection can be expected to take reasonable steps to
         establish that he is not such a national.

 6. In the instant case  the  appellant  asserts  that  he  has  taken  all
    reasonable steps to establish that he is not a national of Ethiopia  by
    approaching the Ethiopian embassy. A document was subsequently produced
    by an embassy official stating that the appellant is not a national  of
    Ethiopia.  Such document, dated 17 November 2015, is  signed  by  a  Mr
    Tesfay - who is identified as being the Head of  Consular  Section.  It
    bears a stamp reading: "Republic of  Ethiopia  Consular  Section",  and
    states:

         "Dear Sir/Madam

         We are writing this letter to confirm that Mr  Yidnekchew  [K]  has
         come to visit us at the Ethiopian Embassy  on  17  July  and  on  5
         October 2015 with independent  witness  about  his  entitlement  to
         Ethiopian citizenship.

         According to the interviews that we  held  with  him  he  does  not
         fulfil the criteria of Ethiopian citizenship.  The following points
         made us to convince that he is not Ethiopian citizen.

         1.   We are unable to find a concrete documentary evidence to  show
             us he is Ethiopian national.

         2.   He has not provided or adduced any documentary  evidence  that
             makes us believe  that  he  is  Ethiopian  e.g.  his  family's
             residential identity card or the identity  card  of  him  that
             could convince us that he is Ethiopian.

         3.   There is no confirmatory residential prove of address  of  his
             family dwelling in Ethiopia.

         4.   There is  not  documentary  proof  rom  Ethiopian  court  that
             displays his Ethiopian citizenship.

         Based on the above stated facts, we would like to confirm  in  this
         letter that he is not an Ethiopian."

 7. It is not in dispute that this is an original document authored by  the
    Consular Section of the Ethiopian embassy in London. The dispute before
    me is to whether it is reliable as to its contents.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal was not satisfied that the appellant had  taken
    reasonable steps to establish that he is not  a  national  of  Ethiopia
    and, in particular,  it  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had
    provided all the relevant  information  within  his  knowledge  to  the
    embassy in order that a fully informed and reliable decision  could  be
    made by it on the question of his nationality.

 9. I set aside the FtT's decision aside as a consequence of its failure to
    make findings on  the  evidence  given  by  the  appellant  as  to  the
    questions that he had been asked at his interview at  the  embassy  and
    the answers he gave thereto.

10. Subsequent to the setting aside of the FtT's decision  the  appellant's
    solicitors contacted the Consular Section of the Ethiopian  embassy  by
    telephone and received confirmation that they do  not  make  a  written
    record of the questions asked and the answers given during  the  course
    of nationality interviews (of the type  undertaken  by  the  appellant)
    and, in particular, no written  record  was  kept  of  the  appellant's
    interview. The appellant did not  make  his  own  written  record,  and
    neither was the relevant  factual  matrix  provided  to  the  Ethiopian
    embassy in writing, as was recommended by this Tribunal in its decision
    in ST (Ethnic Eritrean - nationality - return) Ethiopia CG [2011]  UKUT
    00252.

11. Consequently, the only evidence before me as to  what  information  the
    appellant provided to the  Ethiopian  embassy  is  that  given  by  the
    appellant in his witness statement and oral evidence.

12. In  this  regard,  the  appellant  states  that  the  interview  lasted
    approximately fifteen minutes, was conducted in Amharic  and,  although
    he could not recall many of the questions asked and the answers  given,
    he did recall being asked: (i) whether he had an Ethiopian ID  card  or
    passport; (ii) the address of family members living in  Ethiopia;  and,
    (iii) the address he had lived at whilst he was in Ethiopia. In  answer
    the appellant asserts that he informed the embassy official:  (i)  that
    he had no such documents, (ii) that  he  had  no  relatives  living  in
    Ethiopia; and, (iii)  the  address  he  resided  in  whilst  living  in
    Ethiopia.

13. During evidence-in-chief the appellant stated that he could not  recall
    any of the other questions he had been asked during  his  interview  at
    the embassy.  However, in answer to questions  from  the  Tribunal  the
    appellant indicated that he had also informed the embassy official: (i)
    that he had spent a large part of his childhood in Ethiopia; (ii)  that
    he had studied there; and, (iii) that he had  been  deported  with  his
    father from Ethiopia to Eritrea.

14. It is plain from what I have set out above  that  my  determination  of
    whether the appellant has taken all  reasonable  steps  to  demonstrate
    that he is not of Ethiopian nationality rests to a large extent  on  my
    assessment of the truthfulness of the evidence given by  the  appellant
    as to the information he purports to have provided during the course of
    his interview at the embassy.  He did not  take  any  written  material
    with him to the  interview,  either  drawn  by  his  solicitors  or  by
    himself, and he did not attend the embassy with a solicitor  or  anyone
    from the solicitors' office.

15. I cannot assess  the  truth  of  the  appellant's  encounter  with  the
    Ethiopian embassy without considering it in the context  of  his  wider
    claim. In this regard, the First-tier Tribunal set out at  some  length
    the evidence given by the appellant during the course of his  screening
    interview of 6 December 2014, asylum interview of 15 May  2015  and  in
    oral evidence before it.  It is prudent for  me  to  set  out  in  full
    herein those paragraphs of the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  which
    accurately summarise (there is no dispute as to this) such evidence:

         "12. The appellant's screening interview took place on 6  December,
             2014.  The appellant gave his primary language as Amharic  and
             said that he did not speak any  other  languages.   He  stated
             that he feared persecution in Eritrea.  He did  not  have  any
             documentation.  He also stated that  he  came  to  the  United
             Kingdom because of its reputation for looking after immigrants
             and to follow his religion.  The agent who helped him come  to
             the United Kingdom had told him not to claim asylum  in  Italy
             or France because immigrants lived on  the  streets  in  these
             countries.  He had not been subjected to forced  work  or  any
             other form of exploitation.   He  gave  his  last  address  in
             Eritrea as 'Cambo Sudan, Assab.'  He did not have a partner or
             children or any other family in the United Kingdom.  He stated
             that he did not have any medical conditions.

         13.  The asylum interview took place  on  15  May,  2015,  and  the
             Amharic language was used.

         14.  The appellant said that he feared return to Eritrea because he
             had left illegally, he would  not  be  able  to  practise  his
             religion and he did not want to serve in the  army.   He  also
             said that he was born a Pentecostal Christian.  He  then  said
             that he was born in Assab and was ethnically a Tigrinyan.   He
             had left Eritrea when he was 2 years old and  lived  in  Addis
             Ababa in Ethiopia until 2000, when he went back  to  Assab  in
             Eritrea.  He left again in 2003 and went  to  the  Sudan.   He
             left Sudan in October, 2014.   After  25  days  in  Libya,  he
             travelled to Italy, where he stayed for two days before moving
             on to France.

         15.  The appellant said that his main language was Amharic.  Whilst
             he could understand a little Tigrinyan, he could not speak it.
              He did not know if he was born  in  a  hospital.   After  his
             return from Ethiopia, he lived in the same district as he  had
             lived in before.  The appellant was asked questions about  the
             area.  He was also asked about his  beliefs  and  why  he  had
             previously said that he was a Protestant but now said that  he
             was a Pentecostal Christian.

         16.  The appellant gave his father's place of birth as Eritrea  and
             his race as Tigrinya.  His father spoke Amharic and  Tigrinya,
             with Tigrinya as his main language although he  spoke  Amharic
             extensively and used this language with the appellant.  He had
             not seen his mother since he left Eritrea when he was 2  years
             old.  He knew that she spoke Tigrinya but did  not  know  what
             other languages she knew.

         17.  In Ethiopia, the appellant attended school for four years  and
             was taught mostly in Amharic but with some English.   He  said
             that he did not speak  English  very  well  and  it  was  just
             another subject.  Before he started school, he was  mostly  at
             home but spent a short  time  at  a  church  pre-school.   His
             father worked as a barber and  a  guard  at  the  Mulu  Wonuel
             Church.

         18.  The appellant said that he and his  father  were  deported  in
             2000 because of the conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia  and
             them being from Eritrea.  On his return to Eritrea, he was not
             aware of being given any  identification  documents.   He  was
             only 10 years old and the authorities dealt with  his  father.
             Although he had friends when he returned to Assab, he did  not
             have any family there.  He described the area where  he  lived
             as Abera Genda Sefer and said that the Pentecostal  Church  of
             Kale Hiwot, which he attended, was there.  He did not know the
             different  areas  of   local   government.    Throughout   the
             interview, he had difficulty identifying places in Eritrea and
             some that he named could not be verified.

         19.  In Addis Ababa, he went to school for free.   In  Eritrea,  he
             did not attend school because he said it was too  hot  and  he
             did not feel well.  He suffered from nasal  bleedings  because
             of the heat.  He found the climate in Ethiopia better for  him
             but found Sudan too hot.  Even in the cooler  months,  he  did
             not attend school in Eritrea because you could only  start  in
             certain months.  ...

         20.  The appellant said that in Assab, he went  to  church  once  a
             week with his father, until the church was  closed.   He  also
             attended some house prayer  meetings  with  his  father.   The
             church services were conducted in Tigrinya but  the  appellant
             prayed in Amharic.   Although  the  appellant  said  that  the
             Lord's Prayer was regularly recited in Tigrinya, he could  not
             repeat it, or any other prayer, in that language.  He appeared
             to have  difficulty  in  describing  the  differences  between
             Pentecostal and other Protestant beliefs.

         21.  Although the main language used in  Assab  was  Tigrinya,  the
             appellant said that the  local  people  accepted  the  Amharic
             speakers because they knew they were from the same country.

         22.  In Sudan, the appellant and his father lived in an area  where
             Amharic was used.  He attended the Bethel Church  in  Khartoum
             Telata.

         23.  The appellant was challenged about his nationality because  of
             his inability to speak Tigrinya.  The appellant  said  he  was
             very young when he moved to Ethiopia, Amharic was the language
             in use locally and the language used in school.  At that time,
             he was not expecting to return to Eritrea and did not need  to
             know Tigrinya.  He repeated that he was not sent to school  in
             Eritrea because of the heat.  He was  able  to  attend  church
             because he went at weekly intervals, whereas school took place
             daily.

         24.  The appellant said that his  father  was  not  called  up  for
             military service and he did not know if other men of the  same
             age were.

         25.  The appellant said  that  he  left  Eritrea  with  his  father
             because of their religion after  the  Pentecostal  Church  was
             made illegal.  They left in October or  November,  2003.   His
             father was arrested about a month before  they  left  but  was
             released after the payment of a bribe.  They were  driven  out
             of Eritrea in a vehicle.  The appellant did not know where  he
             was going and his father only told him that they were visiting
             relatives.  After crossing the border, they walked the rest of
             the way.

         26.  Whilst in Sudan, the appellant worked for  four  months  as  a
             labourer on a construction site.   His  ability  to  work  was
             affected by his health.  He was able to follow  his  religious
             belief and attended the Bethel Church of Khartoum, Telata.

         27.  When asked if he feared being returned to  Ethiopia,  he  said
             that he did not have any reason to go there.  There was no-one
             there for him and it was not his country.

         28.  The appellant said that, at the time of his interview, he  had
             been attending the Deeper Life Bible Church  for  about  three
             months.  He said that it  is  a  Pentecostal  church  and  the
             services were conducted in English.

         29.  The appellant was asked why he had not applied for  asylum  in
             Italy or France as he said that he had travelled through those
             countries.  He replied that he had been advised to  travel  to
             England and make his claim there by the agent who assisted his
             travel.  His father did not accompany him because he works and
             lives in Sudan.  He did not know if his father sent  money  to
             Eritrea or whether any other Eritreans in Sudan did.  He  also
             did not know if his father had any identification documents in
             Sudan.

         30.  The appellant stated that the Pentecostal faith was banned  in
             Eritrea in 2002, five or six months before he  left.   He  did
             not know why it was banned but he said that it  was  the  only
             faith that had been banned.  He was baptised in water in Sudan
             in 2010.  He described seeing  others  baptised  by  the  Holy
             Spirit and answered questions about it.  He  was  asked  other
             questions about his faith some  of  which  he  was  unable  to
             answer.

         31.  He was asked to confirm when  he  left  Eritrea  and  he  said
             November, 2003.  He explained the earlier  difference  in  the
             dates as being because it was a long time ago and he was young
             then."

16. The appellant's witness statement and oral evidence before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is summarised in the following terms  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision:

         "44. In his statement, the appellant confirms that his father, with
             whom he lived, divorced his mother before  they  left  Eritrea
             when he was 2 years old.  When they returned to Eritrea,  they
             went to live in Campo/Cambo Sudan, Assab, where his father had
             lived before  and  had  friends.   Until  it  was  closed,  he
             attended the Kale Hiwot Pentecostal Church in Cambo Sudan.  He
             states that he attended the house church at  Ms  Tesfamariam's
             house.  He states that his father was arrested 'from the house
             church' around September/October, 2003.  The appellant was not
             present because he  was  ill.   His  father  was  released  in
             November, 2003, and they then went to Sudan  illegally,  where
             they lived at 'Diem' with others from Eritrea.   He  maintains
             that he is  a  Pentecostal  Christian  and  is  continuing  to
             practise his belief at the Deeper Life Bible Church.

         45.  In response to a supplementary question,  the  appellant  said
             that he was not prepared to undertake military service  if  he
             was returned to Eritrea.

         46.  In  cross-examination,  the  appellant  was  asked  about  the
             languages that his father spoke and why his main language  was
             Amharic.  He explained that he had spent  most  of  his  early
             years in Ethiopia and that Amharic was used  when  he  was  at
             school  there.   He  was  referred  to  the  letter  from  the
             Ethiopian Embassy and asked how many times he went  there  and
             whether he was accompanied.  He maintained that he went on his
             own on three occasions, the  two  times  referred  to  in  the
             letter and a final time to collect it.  He had been asked  for
             details of his father but was not asked about  school  and  he
             did not volunteer the information.

         47.  The appellant said that he started  attending  church  in  the
             United Kingdom in February, 2015, and went twice a week.   The
             services  are  conducted  in  English.   He  follows  them  by
             watching a screen that gives details of  Bible  readings.   He
             can then follow the reading in his own Bible  in  the  Amharic
             language.  Sometimes there is an interpreter present  who  can
             assist him.  He did not ask the pastor to attend this  hearing
             on his behalf, although he was aware that his faith is one  of
             the issues in this case.

         48.  He said that he  knew  Ms  Tesfamariam  from  attending  house
             groups with her.  However, he knew very little about her other
             family members.

         49.  He was asked about the apparent discrepancy in  the  interview
             notes as to when he says that he left Eritrea.  He  said  that
             the Pentecostal faith was banned in May, 2002.  It was pointed
             out that he had said that he left five or six months after the
             banning but then he stated that he left in 2003.  He  was  not
             sure if  the  interpreter  at  the  interview  had  passed  on
             correctly what he said about  this.   He  had  been  suffering
             stress at the time and initially gave the  wrong  answer.   He
             was frightened of returning to Eritrea  because  he  had  left
             illegally and could be prosecuted and imprisoned.  He had  not
             claimed asylum in Italy or France under instructions from  his
             agent who assisted his travelling, although the agent did  not
             travel with him.

         50.  I asked some questions to clarify the evidence.   I  was  told
             that he left Sudan because he had entered illegally without  a
             permit.  Eritrea was abducting Eritreans and returning them to
             their home country.  His father helped him  to  leave  and  he
             does not know what has happened to him or where  he  currently
             is.  They  could  not  afford  for  both  of  them  to  travel
             together.

         51.  As part of his re-examination, the appellant produced a Bible.
              He stated that it was written in Amharic and had  been  given
             to him by a member of the congregation  about  eight  or  nine
             months ago.  I examined it and found it to  appear  reasonably
             new.  The  earlier  section,  which  I  took  to  be  the  Old
             Testament did not appear to  have  been  used.   However,  the
             second section had been used.  There was  a  bookmark  between
             two pages and on one of them a verse had been underlined.  The
             appellant told me that the verse  was  the  one  that  he  was
             currently meditating about."

17. I also observe that a Ms Tesfamariam produced a statement and gave oral
    evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  need  not  set  out  her
    evidence herein, but I confirm that I have had regard to it.

18. In her refusal letter the Secretary of State made the following points,
    which were adopted by Mr McVeety as the  foundation  the  Secretary  of
    State's present challenge to the appellant's credibility:

           i) The appellant failed to provide a reasonable  explanation  as
              to why he speaks Amharic, and why his father mostly speaks to
              him  in  Amharic,  given  that  both  of  his  parents  speak
              Tigrinya;

          ii) Although  the  appellant  stated  that  he  was  of  Tigrinya
              ethnicity during his asylum interview, when  asked  the  same
              question during his screening interview he did not provide an
              answer;

         iii) The appellant's explanation as  to  why  he  did  not  attend
              school in Eritrea between 2000 and 2003 is not reasonable and
              is inconsistent with his evidence to  have  later  worked  in
              construction in Sudan despite it being hot there;

          iv) The appellant gave inconsistent evidence as to when  he  left
              Eritrea, stating first that  he  left  Eritrea  five  or  six
              months after Pentecostalism was banned in May 2002, but  also
              claiming he left Eritrea around November 2003;

           v) The names of the areas the appellant stated were to be  found
              around Campo Sudan  could  not  be  verified,  despite  every
              attempt having been made to do so by the Home Office;

          vi) The appellant stated during his screening interview  that  he
              was a Protestant; however, he thereafter asserted himself  to
              be a Pentecostal Christian - the explanation given  for  this
              is not reasonable;

         vii) The appellant was unable to identify why  Pentecostalism  was
              banned in Eritrea in May 2002;

        viii) Whilst the appellant was able to name some of the  "Gifts  of
              the Spirit" he was not able to name them all and one  of  his
              answers was incorrect;

          ix) The appellant could not recall  how  St  Mark  described  the
              Gifts of the Holy Spirit or whether the Pentecostal faith was
              described in the Old Testament;

           x) The appellant names the Kale Hiwot Church  as  a  Pentecostal
              church.  However, this church is the Ethiopian equivalent  of
              the  Baptist  Church  and,  according   to   the   appellant,
              ceremonies  are  conducted  in  Tigrinya,  a   language   the
              appellant states he does not speak;

          xi) The appellant failed to produce any evidence of a  connection
              with the Pentecostal church in the United Kingdom;

         xii) The appellant failed  to  claim  asylum  in  the  first  safe
              country he travelled through, having travelled through  Italy
              and France before arriving in the United Kingdom.

19. Moving on to my consideration of the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    evidence, and taking matters in chronological order.

20. I reject the Secretary of State's assertion that it  is  not  plausible
    that the appellant did not learn to speak Tigrinya given that both  his
    parents speak Tigrinya. On the appellant's account his mother left  the
    family when he was just  two  years  old,  i.e.  at  a  time  when  the
    appellant  would  be  just  learning  to  speak.  Thereafter,  on   the
    appellant's evidence, he also moved to Ethiopia (Addis Ababa)  when  he
    was two years old, where Amharic would have been  the  major  language.
    If, as the appellant asserts, his father spoke both languages (which is
    consistent with him having come from Campo Sudan) it is  certainly  not
    implausible that his father would have chosen to speak to the appellant
    in Amharic and not teach him Tigrinya.

21. It is the appellant's case that he was deported from Ethiopia  back  to
    Eritrea in 2000.   This  is  broadly  consistent  with  the  background
    evidence which records a significant number of deportations of Eritrean
    nationals from Ethiopia at around that time (see for example HG  (Risk,
    Eritrean) Ethiopia CG [2002] UKIAT 05689, a decision maintained on  the
    Upper Tribunal's website with a CG designation).

22. The appellant states that he lived in Campo Sudan.  There  is  evidence
    before me relating to Campo Sudan and its existence which describes  it
    as one of the three divisions in the town of Assab.  Assab is described
    as having "more an Ethiopian than Eritrean feel to it" and Campo  Sudan
    is described as "the  former  domain  of  Ethiopian  residence".   This
    evidence is supportive of the plausibility of the appellant's claim  to
    have lived in that area  of  Eritrea,  but  still  not  able  to  speak
    Tigrinya.

23. Moving on, I also do not accept the  Secretary  of  State's  submission
    that it is implausible that  the  appellant  would  not  have  attended
    school in Eritrea between 2000 and 2003. Given his age it  is  unlikely
    to have been the appellant's choice as to whether  he  attended  school
    between 2000 and 2003, but his father's.  The appellant would have been
    aged between 10 and 13 during  the  material  years.  He  is  therefore
    recalling events which not only occurred when he was a minor - i.e.  as
    seen through the eyes of a minor - but which took place 13 to 16  years
    ago.

24. The same considerations apply my assessment as to the  weight  to  that
    can be attached to the inconsistency in the appellant's evidence as  to
    the date he left Eritrea and moved to Sudan. The appellant  would  have
    been only 12 or 13 years old at the  time,  and  he  is  attempting  to
    recall events which took place between 12 and 13 years ago. In all  the
    circumstances I attach little weight on the inconsistency  relied  upon
    by the SSHD in this regard.

25. In coming to my conclusions as to the truthfulness of  the  appellant's
    evidence of the  claimed  events  that  occurred  upon  his  return  to
    Eritrea, I bear in mind the consistency between such evidence  and  the
    known background circumstances prevailing in Eritrea in  2002-2003.  In
    YT (Minority church members at risk) Eritrea  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00218,
    which is still present on the Upper Tribunal's website,  the  appellant
    was found to be a Pentecostal Christian and to have been an activist in
    the Kale Hiwot Church in Eritrea ("KHCE"). This is a church  which  the
    Secretary of State takes the  view  (in  the  refusal  letter)  is  not
    associated with Pentecostal Christians.

26. The decision in YT further identifies, in its paragraph 11, that on  21
    May 2002 the Eritrean government closed all  churches  other  than  the
    Orthodox, Roman Catholic and Lutheran denominations (including KHCE). I
    observe that this is  entirely  consistent  with  the  appellant's  own
    evidence that the religion was banned in Eritrea in 2002.   There  were
    thereafter,  according  to  YT,  arrests  of  members  of   Pentecostal
    denominations, which is consistent with the appellant's  evidence  that
    his father was arrested at that time.

27. Looking at all the evidence in the  round,  and  taking  on  board  all
    matters relied upon by the Secretary of State, I find that the  account
    the appellant gives of the circumstances in 2002/2003 which he says led
    to him and his father eventually leaving Eritrea, is entirely plausible
    and consistent with the background evidence.

28. I further take into account that Ms Tesfamariam gave evidence that  (i)
    the appellant attended her home with his father in  Eritrea  (ii)  that
    she is a Pentecostal Christian  (iii)  she  witnessed  the  appellant's
    father practising the Pentecostal faith in house churches in Eritrea in
    2002 to 2003, (iv) that she lost contact with  the  appellant  and  his
    father at around the end of 2003 and (v) she met the appellant again in
    Liverpool in May 2015, having recognised him because of his birthmark.

29. The First-tier Tribunal took the view that both the  appellant  and  Ms
    Tesfamariam's evidence was diminished as a consequence of the fact that
    both had signed declarations at the end  of  their  witness  statements
    identifying that these  statements  had  been  read  back  to  them  in
    Tigrinya.  They both later asserted this not to  be  correct  but  that
    they had been read back in Amharic. I have before me a  statement  from
    the appellant's solicitor in this regard, confirming that  the  witness
    statements were read back  to  Ms  Tesfamariam  and  the  appellant  in
    Amharic, not Tigrinya. In light of this I do not treat as  adverse  the
    obviously incorrect  initial  indication  by  Ms  Tesfamarium  and  the
    appellant to the contrary.

30. The First-tier Tribunal  also  said  as  follows  in  relation  to  the
    evidence of the appellant and Ms Tesfamariam [64]:

         "The interview notes suggest that the appellant and Ms  Tesfamariam
         attended the same church in Sudan over a period  of  several  years
         but there is not any evidence to suggest that they ever  recognised
         one another.  Ms Tesfamariam gives a very clear description of  how
         the authorities handled raids on church houses and this  is  likely
         to  be  standard  practice.   I  therefore  assume  that   if   the
         appellant's father was  arrested,  all  of  the  other  worshippers
         present were  also  arrested.   It  is  not  explained  whether  Ms
         Tesfamariam and/or  her  father  were  present  on  that  occasion.
         However, I do not find it credible that the arrest  of  members  of
         her house group, would not have been known to other members.   Even
         if there were several groups with fluidity  of  membership  between
         them, I would still expect Ms Tesfamariam would have been aware  of
         a group being arrested but she does not make any reference to it in
         her evidence."

31. I do not agree with the First-tier Tribunal in this regard.   There  is
    simply no evidence that the church referred to by Ms Tesfamariam in her
    interview record is the same church referred to  by  the  appellant  in
    his. The places of worship named by the appellant  and  Ms  Tesfamarium
    are of the same faith and are in the same country, that does not  mean,
    however, that they are the same place of worship -  particularly  given
    the genesis of the word Bethel.

32. Having said  all  I  do  above  I,  nevertheless,  find  it  to  be  of
    significance that Ms Tesfamariam did not  give  oral  evidence  to  the
    Upper Tribunal  and,  therefore,  there  was  no  opportunity  for  the
    Secretary of State to test her evidence by way  of  cross  examination.
    This reduces the weight I place on it.

33. Indeed, the appellant did not  call  any  witnesses  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal in support of the assertion that  he  is  of  the  Pentecostal
    faith. Whilst I observe that there is written evidence before me from a
    Dr Akinsanya I concur with the First-tier Tribunal's view that it is of
    little assistance in furthering the appellant's case.

34. The Secretary of State  further  points  to  gaps  in  the  appellant's
    knowledge of his claimed faith which, it is said, appear in  answer  to
    questions asked of him during the interview process. The appellant does
    not seek to shy away from such gaps, asserting instead that as a normal
    follower of the religion it is perfectly legitimate  for  him  to  have
    such gaps in his knowledge.

35. Looking at the questions asked, and answers given, by the appellant  in
    relation to his knowledge of the Pentecostal faith in  the  context  of
    the matters raised in the Secretary of State's refusal letter  in  this
    regard, it is apparent that the appellant gave accurate  answers  to  a
    number of the questions posed of him. I deduce this is so  because  the
    Secretary of State does not raise query with such answers.

36. As to the questions the appellant either did not  answer,  or  did  not
    answer correctly, I have not been provided with  any  evidence  by  the
    Secretary of State to dispute the appellant's  contention  that  it  is
    perfectly plausible for a 'normal follower' of  the  Pentecostal  faith
    (as the appellant describes himself) might  have  such  gaps  in  their
    knowledge. I have no personal knowledge of the Pentecostal  faith.  The
    Secretary of State has known of the appellant's  explanation  for  such
    matters since January 2016. In the absence  of  evidence  contradicting
    the appellant's explanation, I am not prepared  to  conclude  that  the
    apparent gaps in the appellant's knowledge of matters relating  to  the
    Pentecostal faith is such so as to lead to a conclusion that he is  not
    of that faith.

37. Moving on, I take into account, as I must, the failure of the appellant
    to claim asylum en route to  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  first  safe
    country on his journey, the appellant  having  travelled  through  both
    Italy  and  France.   I  accept  that  such  failure   undermines   the
    appellant's credibility - a matter which I must, and do, weigh  in  the
    round.

38. However, having considered all of the evidence in the round, and having
    taken into account all matters raised by the Secretary of State,  I  am
    prepared to accept that the account given by the appellant  is,  albeit
    with some inconsistencies, an account which can be believed.

39. In particular,  I  am  prepared  to  accept  the  appellant's  evidence
    regarding the information he provided to the Ethiopian embassy, despite
    his failure  to  produce  any  written  documentation  to  support  his
    assertions in this regard.  I am also prepared to accept  his  evidence
    that he made attempts to contact his father in order to obtain relevant
    documentation to prove the truth of his account, but this did not  meet
    with success.

40. In all circumstances I accept that the appellant has  taken  reasonable
    steps to establish that he is not a national of Ethiopia. On the  basis
    of the steps that he has taken, and observing  that  Ethiopian  embassy
    have concluded that he is not an Ethiopian national, I also accept this
    to be so. I further accept that he is a national of Eritrea.

41. Mr McVeety properly accepted that  if  the  appellant  is  returned  to
    Eritrea he will be at real risk of  suffering  treatment  amounting  to
    persecution, and that this would be for a  Refugee  Convention  reason.
    Given this concession, I need  say  no  more  than  I  concur  with  Mr
    McVeety's analysis.

42. Consequently, I allow the appellant's appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant is a refugee. His return to Eritrea  would  also  lead  to  a
    breach of Article 3 ECHR.





Notice of Decision

For reasons given in the decision of the 26 July 2016, the decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

Having re-made the decision under appeal I allow it on the  basis  that  the
appellant is a refugee and that his  removal  would  lead  to  a  breach  of
Article 3 ECHR

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
