
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09146/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:    Columbus House, Newport |Decision promulgated                 |
|On 23 June 2015                      |On 2 July 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hoshi, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson in which she allowed the
    appeal of SH, a citizen of  Iran,  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse asylum. I  shall  refer  to  SH  as  the  Applicant,
    although he was the Appellant in the proceedings below.

 2. The Applicant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  1  November  2013  and
    claimed asylum the same day. His application was refused on 16  October
    2014.  The Applicant exercised his right of appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  This is the appeal which came before Judge Suffield-Thompson
    on 3 March 2015 and was allowed. The Secretary  of  State  applied  for
    permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  application  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson on 27 March  2015
    in the following terms

         "It is arguable that the  Judge  (a)  failed  to  provide  adequate
         reasons on  material  matters  in  relation  to  the  circumstances
         surrounding the Appellant's  father's  death  which  is  the  event
         leading to the alleged interest  in  the  appellant  by  PJAK,  his
         subsequent activities with PJAK, the issue of  the  claimed  arrest
         warrant and how members of the PJAK identified the Appellant in the
         first place and (b) misdirecting himself  in  not  considering  the
         arrest warrant in the round  in  the  terms  of  Tanveer  Ahmed  by
         shifting the burden of proof to the Respondent  that  she  has  not
         proved the arrest warrant is a forgery."

 3. At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Richards  appeared  to  represent  the
    Secretary of State and Mr Hoshi represented the Applicant.  A  rule  24
    response was submitted on behalf of the Applicant dated 10  April  2015
    opposing the appeal.

Background

 4.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Applicant was born in Iran on 1 February  1981
    in the Kurdish district of Baneh. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 1
    November 2013 and claimed asylum following his arrest for entering  the
    United Kingdom clandestinely. In refusing  the  Applicant's  claim  the
    Secretary of State did not accept that the Applicant had told the truth
    about his reasons for leaving Iran.

 5. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing the Judge accepted  the  credibility
    of the Applicant's account (see paragraphs 31 to 33). In doing  so  the
    Judge  accepted  that  the  Applicant  had  been  associated  with  the
    separatist militant group PJAK, that an arrest warrant had been  issued
    against him and that he left Iran illegally fearing  arrest,  detention
    and ill-treatment on account of his perceived political views.

Submissions

 6. On behalf the Secretary of State Mr Richards  said  that  a  number  of
    matters had not really been  dealt  with  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge. The Secretary of State's case is set out  at  paragraph  15.  At
    15(c) the Applicant's failure to claim at the earliest  opportunity  is
    recorded but the Judge does not go on to deal with this in her analysis
    or engage with matters in dispute identified in the refusal letter.  So
    far as Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00439 is concerned  the  Judge
    deals with this, in respect of the arrest warrant, at paragraph  30  of
    the decision. Mr Richards quoted paragraph 30 and said that the way the
    Judge makes her assessment is totally contrary to Tanveer  Ahmed  which
    holds that the document in question should be considered after  looking
    at all the evidence in the round. In this case  the  Judge  starts  her
    consideration with the  disputed  document.  Paragraph  34  and  36  of
    Tanveer Ahmed show that there is no obligation on the  Home  Office  to
    authenticate a document. The Judge's approach is entirely  against  the
    approach advocated in Tanveer Ahmed and here the  Judge  falls  into  a
    clear and material error of law. She looks at the document, says  there
    is no evidence that it is false and therefore  accepts  it  as  genuine
    before going on to look  at  the  rest  of  the  evidence.  Finally  at
    paragraph 33 of her determination the Judge  in  saying  that  she  has
    nothing before her to doubt the events described by the Applicant shows
    a clear implication that the burden of proof is upon the  Secretary  of
    State to adduce evidence to disprove the Applicant's account.

 7. For the Applicant Mr Hoshi said that it was perhaps trite to  start  by
    saying that the Secretary of State knows why she has lost this  appeal.
    The  reasons  are  clear,  it  was  because  the  Judge  accepted   the
    Applicant's account. So far as Tanveer Ahmed is concerned Mr Hoshi said
    that he could see why this ground  was  pleaded,  on  the  face  of  it
    paragraph 30 of the decision  is  a  gross  misapplication  of  Tanveer
    Ahmed. However if one refers to paragraph 38.3 of Tanveer Ahmed it  can
    be seen that the Judge applied the authority  correctly  on  the  basis
    that the  Respondent  had  made  an  allegation  of  forgery.  This  is
    confirmed by the record of the Respondent's  submissions  at  paragraph
    17. Where a specific allegation is made the Judge was entitled to  find
    that the Respondent must adduce evidence to support that allegation. Mr
    Hoshi said that the Judge then goes  on  to  apply  the  principles  of
    paragraphs 38.1 and 38.2 of Tanveer Ahmed. She assesses the Appellant's
    account in the round and she believes his account. The  Judge  examines
    the background information.

 8. Mr Hoshi said that paragraph 33 does not,  as  Mr  Richards  suggested,
    shift the burden of proof to the Secretary of  State.  By  saying  that
    there is 'nothing before me to doubt that the events  took  place'  the
    Judge means that she has no reason to doubt that the events took place.
    Mr Hoshi accepted that the determination as a whole was thin on reasons
    but there is no requirement to give  elaborate  reasons.  The  material
    matter was credibility and paragraphs 31 and 32 are sufficient in  this
    respect.

Decision - Error of law

 9. The grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  are  two-fold  asserting
    firstly that  the  Judge  failed  to  reconcile  evidence  and  provide
    adequate  reasons  on  material  matters  and   secondly   a   material
    misdirection in law. In considering whether there is a material error I
    am driven to look at these assertions in reverse order. This is firstly
    because the asserted misdirection comes before the analysis of evidence
    and reasoning and secondly because the one error, if made out,  infects
    the other. The very fact that I must deal with matters  in  this  order
    because that is the way they are  dealt  with  in  the  decision  under
    appeal almost inevitably leads to the conclusion that this decision  is
    unsafe and cannot stand.

10. The material misdirection asserted is  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the
    authority of  Tanveer  Ahmed.  Tanveer  Ahmed  is  a  well  established
    authority and possibly the most frequently cited  authority  in  asylum
    appeals. It is perhaps to be expected that the terms  of  such  a  well
    known authority are rarely  consulted  it  being  assumed  that  merely
    citing the authority is sufficient to convey the  principles  involved.
    There are other examples of authorities that evoke a  similar  respect;
    Chiver [1997] INLR 212 IAT is perhaps one. The rarely quoted principles
    of Tanveer Ahmed are succinctly set out at paragraph 38

         "In summary the principles set out in this determination are:

         1. In asylum and human rights cases it is for an individual
         claimant to show that a document on which he seeks to rely can be
         relied on.

         2. The decision maker should consider whether a document is one on
         which reliance should properly be placed after looking at all the
         evidence in the round.

         3. Only very rarely will there be the need to make an allegation of
         forgery, or evidence strong enough to support it. The allegation
         should not be made without such evidence. Failure to establish the
         allegation on the balance of probabilities to the higher civil
         standard does not show that a document is reliable. The decision
         maker still needs to apply principles 1 and 2."

11. In this case the document in question is  an  arrest  warrant  and  the
    issue of this arrest warrant is fundamental to the Applicant's  claimed
    fear of persecution on a return to Iran. At paragraph  15(vii)  of  the
    decision in summarising the Secretary of State's case the Judge records



         "The Respondent does not  accept  that  the  arrest  warrant  is  a
         genuine one and they rely on the  case  of  Tanveer  Ahmed  ...  in
         regards to false documents".

    At paragraph 17 in recording the Presenting Officer's  submissions  the
    Judge adds

         "The parts of his account that they do not believe  are  these  ...
         The arrest warrant is not a real one and he has forged it."

12. At paragraph 26 the Judge agrees with the representatives that the case
    stands and falls on the Applicant's credibility. The actual analysis of
    credibility starts at paragraph 30

         "The Respondent relies on the case of Tanveer Ahmed and states that
         the arrest warrant is false but has produced no evidence to support
         that contention. The Appellant has given evidence that his  surname
         Hamha in Persian is Mohammedi. Again I have no evidence  before  me
         from the Respondent to  prove  that  is  this  not  so  (sic).  The
         Respondent has provided an excerpt from  the  Danish  fact  finding
         report 2013 that deals with obtaining forged documents in Iran  and
         she has not provided for the Tribunal an  expert  report  with  any
         conclusion as to why I should be dubious about  the  legitimacy  of
         the Appellant's arrest warrant."

    The Judge then goes on  in  the  following  paragraphs  to  accept  the
    Appellant's account.

13. In my judgement the Judge misdirects herself in two ways. Firstly I  do
    not accept that there was an allegation of forgery by the Secretary  of
    State. The refusal letter does  not  allege  forgery;  it  follows  the
    Secretary of State's normal practice in such matters in  not  accepting
    that the document is genuine. It can be seen from paragraph 15(vii), as
    quoted above, that the Judge has taken the Secretary of State's refusal
    to accept the document as genuine as an implicit allegation of forgery.
    It is not. This is a misdirection of fact.

14. Secondly and in any event the Judge has misdirected herself as  to  the
    principles set out in Tanveer Ahmed. It is for the  Applicant  to  show
    that the document in question can be relied upon not for the  Secretary
    of State to prove that it cannot. The decision maker should  make  that
    assessment after looking at all the evidence in the round. In this case
    the Judge has  taken  the  Secretary  of  State's  failure  to  produce
    evidence to show that the document is false as the reason  for  finding
    that the document is genuine. It is only after making this finding that
    the Judge goes on to consider the rest of the  evidence.  Even  if  the
    Secretary of State's representative had, in her  submissions,  diverted
    from the refusal letter and explicitly submitted that the document  was
    false the principles of Tanveer Ahmed as quoted above still require the
    Judge to consider the evidence in the round before making a finding  as
    to whether the document can be relied  upon  (Tanveer  Ahmed  paragraph
    38.3).

15. Returning  to  the  first  asserted  error  the  reasons  why  this  is
    materially affected and infected by the  second  are  apparent.  Having
    firstly found, by default because the Secretary of State had not proved
    that it was not, the arrest warrant to be  a  document  that  could  be
    relied upon the Judge then goes on to  make  her  positive  credibility
    findings in respect of the rest of the Applicant's account.  Of  course
    she was almost bound to do so. Having started with the consideration of
    an arrest warrant and the issue of that arrest warrant and the  reasons
    behind its issue being the reason the Applicant claimed  to  have  left
    the country and to fear persecution on return it was axiomatic that the
    rest of his account must be believed. There was no  need  for  detailed
    analysis or reasoning because  having  found  the  arrest  warrant  was
    reliable the Applicant's case was made out.

16. My conclusion from all of the above is that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contains an error of law  material  to  the  decision  to
    allow the appeal. The appeal of the Secretary  of  State  is  therefore
    allowed.

Summary

17. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law. I allow the Secretary of State's appeal and  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

18. The nature of the error of law is such that none of the findings of the
    First-tier Tribunal can  stand.  In  accordance  with  the  President's
    direction this case is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    hearing de novo.



Signed:     Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
