
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09828/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 August 2016                     |On 7 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                     S Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Corben, Counsel, instructed by Orchid
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  In a decision sent on 18  May
    2016 First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  Judge  Spicer  dismissed  her  appeal
    against the decision made by the respondent on 24 June 2016  to  refuse
    to grant her asylum on the basis of her claim that she would be at risk
    on return because she was a lesbian and would  face   persecution  from
    her family, the wider community and the authorities.  She  claimed  her
    cousin had become aware she was gay in January 2015 during a  trip  she
    had made to Pakistan when she let him have her mobile phone.

2.   The principal reason the judge dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  was
    because she did not find credible her  account  of  having  been  in  a
    committed relationship with a Miss AR since 2004.

3.   The grounds alleged that the judge failed to give anxious  scrutiny  to
    the appellant's version of the facts.  They also alleged that the judge
    failed to take account of the fact that since arrival  in  the  UK  the
    appellant is now known to be a lesbian and that  such  evidence  should
    have been treated as indicative of her future  behaviour.  In  granting
    permission to appeal UTJ Coker said it  was  arguable  that  the  judge
    imposed her own views as to what is or is not a plausible or a credible
    account of having been in a committed gay relationship with a  Miss  AR
    and whether that was indicative  of the appellant's personal sexuality.

4.   Mr Corben for the appellant accepted that in the light of the  guidance
    given by the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) that he could only  succeed  in
    showing the judge materially erred in law if able to fault the  judge's
    primary finding that the appellant was not a lesbian. He submitted that
    as regards this primary finding the judge started off on the wrong foot
    by declaring at the outset of her assessment that she did not find  the
    appellant's  account  credible.   In  ensuing  paragraphs   the   judge
    displayed a lack of understanding  of  the  unusual  specifics  of  the
    appellant's claim, in particular that she had not realised her  lesbian
    sexuality until she was 32 and had had no sexual  relations  until  she
    met Miss RA in 2004.  This claim had  needed  to  be  assessed  in  the
    correct cultural context which was that in the appellant's  family  and
    social circumstances in Pakistan, lesbian activity was prohibited.

5.   Mr Corben also took  issue  with  the  fact  that  the  judge  attached
    adverse weight to the fact that the appellant's alleged  partner,  Miss
    RA, had made no mention of their relationship when she came to  the  UK
    in 2014.  Since Miss RA was a student at that  time,  that  should  not
    have been a relevant consideration.

6.   Mr Corben submitted that the judge had imposed her own  view  that  the
    couple's relationship could only have been as claimed if they had lived
    together or (when apart) had kept in continuous contact.

7.   As regards the incident with the appellant's mobile  phone,  there  was
    nothing implausible about the appellant's handing the cousin her  phone
    since if she had refused that would have strengthened his suspicion.

8.   Mr Corben said that the judge  was  effectively  saying  the  appellant
    should lie to her family to avoid persecution.

9.   Miss Fijiwala submitted that the judge had properly assessed the  claim
    in the light of country information and was entitled to find the  claim
    not credible in view of a number of shortcomings in the appellant's and
    Miss RA's evidence.  The lack of mention of the relationship by Miss RA
    when she came to the UK in 2014  was  only  one  of  many  shortcomings
    identified.

10.  I am not persuaded that the  judge  materially  erred  in  law.  I  see
    nothing untoward about the judge announcing her adverse findings at the
    outset.  In [68] the judge had  already  made  clear  that  [69]  would
    simply begin the setting out of his reasons. The reason the judge  gave
    for her adverse credibility findings were extensive and  I  agree  with
    Miss Fijiwala that the criticisms of Miss RA's failure to  mention  the
    relationship when she came to the UK was not one that  had  a  material
    bearing on the judge's assessment.  The judge's effective  reasons  for
    finding Miss RA's evidence lacking in  credibility  were  her  lack  of
    detail ([74]) and her life and career choices ([75]).

11.  I am not persuaded  that  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  appellant's
    account of when she discovered she was gay was vitiated by legal error.
     It is clear from [70] that the judge's assessment  took  into  account
    both the specifics of the appellant's account of  her  sexual  identity
    and the cultural context of Pakistani society.   The  judge's  approach
    does not betray any imposition of  her  own  views  or  of  stereotyped
    notions of plausibility or credibility.

12.  The principal reasons the judge gave for disbelieving  the  appellant's
    account of her gay relationship with Miss  RA  were  all  ones  with  a
    proper basis and included: the appellant's repeated choice not to go to
    Pakistan to see Miss RA ([77]), the long gaps  of  time  between  their
    meetings despite clear possibilities to do so if  they  had  chosen  to
    ([78]); and lack of evidence of contact between them during those  gaps
    ([79]).  The judge also relied correctly on a number  of  discrepancies
    in the evidence, which included a number of  matters  that  were  quite
    central to the claimed  relationship.   Significantly,  when  analysing
    these discrepancies the judge noted that as regards  two  of  them  she
    attached little weight  to  them,  thereby  demonstrating  the  judge's
    incremental and balanced  approach.  At  [88]  the  judge  stated  that
    "[a]lthough some of the discrepancies are minor,  taken  together  they
    adversely affect the credibility of both the appellant  and  Miss  RA".
    The judge's assessment was clearly one based on anxious scrutiny.

13.  As regards the alleged incident involving  the  appellant  handing  her
    mobile phone to her cousin during a trip to Pakistan,  I  consider  the
    grounds simply amount to a  disagreement  as  to  the  facts.   It  was
    entirely open to the judge to find implausible the appellant's  account
    of the circumstances for the reasons given, particularly as the  photos
    the cousin was said to have  accessed  showed  nothing  more  than  the
    appellant and Miss RA at a club with their faces close together.

14.  I do not consider that the judge's analysis at [93] involved any  legal
    error.  The judge was  not  expecting  the  appellant  to  lie  to  the
    Pakistan authorities but rather was evaluating the  way  in  which  the
    appellant claimed to deal with  her  family.  Following  their  claimed
    receipt of photographs of her and  Miss  RA  together,  the  judge  was
    simply seeking to analyse the internal logic of the appellant's account
    and in that context to point out the implausible nature  of  her  claim
    that she did venture an innocent explanation.

15.  For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT judge did not  materially
    err in law. Her primary finding of fact - that the  appellant  was  not
    and had never been a lesbian - was a reasonable one based squarely on a
    balanced assessment of the evidence. Accordingly there was no need  for
    her to go on to analyse  the  discretion  issues.   The  appellant  was
    personally found to fail at the first hurdle identified in HJ (Iran) in
    that she had failed to establish  her  claimed  sexual  identity  as  a
    lesbian or as a person in a sexual relationship with Miss RA.



Notice of Decision

16.  I conclude:

    The FtT judge did not materially err in law and her decision dismissing
    the appellant's appeal must stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 26 August 2016
               [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

