
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09763/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 March 2015                              |On 9 June 2015               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MR SURESHKUMAR POOLOGASINGAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Paramjorthy of Counsel instructed by S Satha &
Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  by  Judge
   of the First-tier Tribunal Metzer allowing an appeal  by  Mr  Sureshkumar
   Poologasingam (hereinafter referred to as "the claimant")  on  Article  8
   grounds.

2) This history of this matter is as follows.  The claimant was born  on  15
   December 1986 and is a national of Sri Lanka.  The previous appeal by him
   made on asylum grounds was dismissed in July 2012 on the basis  that  his
   asylum claim was not credible.   Subsequently  further  submissions  were
   made and following the commencement of judicial  review  proceedings  the
   Secretary of State accepted the further  submissions  as  a  fresh  claim
   under paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.  The basis  for  the  fresh
   claim was medical evidence relating to the claimant.   The  Secretary  of
   State made a decision on the fresh claim on 14 October 2013 in  the  form
   of a decision to remove the claimant.  This decision was appealed to  the
   First-tier Tribunal solely under Article 8.  The Judge of the  First-tier
   Tribunal had medical evidence before him, including a psychiatric  report
   from Dr Raj Persaud dated 19 November 2014.  This report stated that  the
   claimant was not fit to give evidence because of withdrawal and  lack  of
   concentration.  The claimant had symptoms of PTSD,  including  heightened
   anxiety, withdrawal, startle reaction, intrusive thoughts and flashbacks.
    The claimant was also diagnosed as suffering from major depression.  The
   claimant was living with his sister and her family in the UK.  Dr Persaud
   stated that it was not clear how the claimant would cope without the care
   and close supervision provision provided by his sister  and  her  family.
   The claimant was alleged to have made at least two suicide attempts.

3) The claimant's sister, Mrs Vijayakumar, gave evidence before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.  She described the  claimant  as  having  difficulty  with
   sleeping and having nightmares.  She had taken him to  the  GP  and  from
   October 2013 he was  prescribed  medication  for  sleeping  problems  and
   mental health  issues.   She  described  him  as  being  in  a  state  of
   helplessness and despair.  He is often  withdrawn  and  distant  and  she
   described him as completely different from when he first arrived  in  the
   UK.  He barely eats now and has difficulty sleeping even  on  medication.
   He talks about suicide.

4) The judge considered the appeal under Article 8 outside  the  Immigration
   Rules.  Having regard to the psychiatric evidence and the evidence of the
   claimant's sister, the judge found the claimant had a very high level  of
   dependency upon his sister and brother-in-law. They provided him with day-
   to-day care.  The question  of  the  claimant's  psychological  integrity
   arose  for  consideration  in  relation  to  his   private   life.    His
   psychological well-being had been severely adversely affected  since  his
   arrival in the UK in 2012.  The medical evidence showed that  the  effect
   of removal would increase the  likelihood  of  a  suicide  attempt.   The
   claimant had no close family in Sri Lanka apart from one uncle.   He  had
   been given great care and consideration by his sister and her family  and
   the relationship  of  dependency  extended  far  beyond  that  of  normal
   emotional ties between an adult and a sibling.

5) The judge further found that if the claimant were returned to  Sri  Lanka
   he would not be able to obtain the level of support  which  he  currently
   received from his sister and her  family,  and  from  his  GP  and  other
   medical services.  Taking into account the claimant's close  family  life
   with his sister and her family and the deterioration  in  the  claimant's
   mental health which had resulted in two  serious  psychiatric  conditions
   being diagnosed, the judge found that it would  be  disproportionate  for
   the claimant to be removed to Sri Lanka.

6) In the application for  permission  to  appeal  the  Secretary  of  State
   submitted that the judge erred by failing to have regard  to  the  public
   interest considerations in section 117B of the  Immigration,  Nationality
   and Asylum Act 2002.  In particular, the judge  failed  to  consider  the
   claimant's ability to  speak  English  and  whether  he  was  financially
   independent.   The  judge  had  failed  to  attach   little   weight   to
   private/family  life  when  assessing  proportionality,  as  required  by
   section  117B.   As  a  result  the  judge's  findings  in  relation   to
   proportionality  failed  to  take  into  account  the   public   interest
   considerations as required by section 117B.

7) Permission was granted on the basis that these grounds were arguable.

8) A rule 24 response was submitted on behalf of the claimant  on  24  March
   2015.  It was acknowledged that section 117B was not referred to  in  the
   determination and it could not be inferred from  the  determination  that
   the judge had had regard to this.  Nevertheless the failure  to  consider
   the claimant's ability to speak English and whether  he  was  financially
   independent was not material to the outcome of the appeal.  The  claimant
   was dependent upon  his  sister  and  her  family  both  emotionally  and
   financially.  There would therefore be no recourse to public funds.   The
   judge  considered  the  Secretary  of  State's  legitimate  interest   in
   immigration control but nevertheless considered that under the  balancing
   exercise removal would be disproportionate.

9) At the hearing before me, Mr Clarke submitted on behalf of the  Secretary
   of State that the failure to consider  section  117B  would  have  had  a
   significant  impact  on   the   balancing   exercise   in   relation   to
   proportionality.  There was no evidence that any of the Immigration Rules
   were met or that there was any application under European law.  There was
   no evidence of the claimant's ability to speak English.  In  relation  to
   whether the claimant was financially independent, there was  no  evidence
   of self-sufficiency.  The claimant had formed a private life  in  the  UK
   while his position was  precarious.   Mr  Clarke  acknowledged  that  the
   family life of the claimant was not affected by  section  117B  but  this
   family life was formed in full knowledge of the claimant's position.   Mr
   Clarke referred to the case of Nagre at paragraphs  39-41.  He  submitted
   that family life was not a trump card and a proper re-balancing  exercise
   was required.

10) For the claimant Mr Paramjorthy relied on the rule 24 notice.  The  lack
   of consideration of section 117B was not material.  The claimant did  not
   give evidence at the hearing so his spoken English was not heard  by  the
   judge.  Mr Paramjorthy indicated that he was instructed that the claimant
   spoke basic English but his grammar was poor.

11) Mr Paramjorthy  further  submitted  that  the  claimant  is  exclusively
   dependant upon his sister and is not a burden on  the  tax  payer.   This
   point was made by the judge at paragraph 10 of  the  determination.   The
   relationship between the claimant and  his  sister  extended  far  beyond
   normal emotional ties.  Mr Paramjorthy accepted  that  section  117B  was
   constructed to prevent Article 8 from being a trump card for  those  with
   precarious immigration histories.  In the case of the claimant,  however,
   there were serious psychiatric issues.

12) In response Mr Clarke referred to the cost  to  the  tax  payer  of  the
   claimant remaining in the UK.  The judge had made  no  reference  to  the
   financial implications of the claimant remaining in the UK and this would
   have to be considered by a judge.  Under sub-sections 117(4) and (5)  the
   judge was required to give little weight to private life.  The claimant's
   family life was instituted in the knowledge of  his  immigration  status.
   There was no evidence before the judge of the impact on  the  UK  of  the
   claimant's use of language and his financial circumstances.   The  appeal
   should have been dismissed.  According to the GP notes,  which  pre-dated
   the report by Dr Persaud by only three days, the claimant had no thoughts
   of self-harm and no consideration was given to this.  Further submissions
   on the medical evidence were required.

13) Mr Paramjorthy pointed out that the medical evidence, in particular  the
   report of Dr Persaud, was not challenged by the Secretary of State before
   the First-tier Tribunal.  The medical evidence  played  no  part  in  the
   alleged errors.  It was acknowledged, however, that in commenting on  the
   medical evidence Mr Clarke was not  alluding  to  an  error  of  law  but
   referring to the possibility of a further hearing.

Discussion

14) There is really no dispute in this appeal that the judge ought  to  have
   referred to section 117B of the 2002 Act (as amended).  The  question  is
   whether this omission was material.

15) For the Secretary of State, Mr Clarke has pointed  out  that  the  judge
   did not have proper regard to whether the  claimant  was  able  to  speak
   English  and  whether  he  was  financially   independent.    These   are
   considerations which arise from sub-sections 117B(2) and (3).   According
   to section 117B(4) little weight  should  be  given  to  a  private  life
   established by a person at a time when the person is in the UK unlawfully
   and under section 117B(5) little weight should be given to a private life
   established by a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
   precarious.  It seems that the claimant  entered  the  UK  illegally  but
   claimed asylum on the day he arrived.  Although his entry was illegal, it
   would seem that once he claimed asylum his status became not unlawful but
   precarious, at least until the asylum claim, including the  fresh  claim,
   have been resolved.

16) Nevertheless, the judge's decision is based  primarily  on  family  life
   rather than private life.   The  decision  is  based  on  the  claimant's
   dependency upon his sister and her family and the likely  effect  of  the
   claimant of being deprived of their care  and  support.   Even  accepting
   that the claimant's private life in the UK is to be given little  weight,
   the judge's decision  based  on  family  life  will  not  necessarily  be
   affected.

17) The judge clearly erred by not having regard to the question of  whether
   the claimant is able to speak English and not fully  considering  whether
   he is financially independent.  The further question which arises  though
   is whether  the  judge's  failure  properly  to  consider  these  matters
   materially affected the outcome of  the  appeal.   The  judge's  findings
   indicate that the claimant is dependent on  his  sister  for  his  living
   expenses and day-to-day needs.  Mr Clarke submitted that that was not the
   end of the matter and there  is,  of  course,  the  continuing  need  for
   medical treatment.  In carrying out the balancing exercise the judge  was
   clearly aware that the  claimant  receives  medical  services.   However,
   although the costs which may arise from the claimant being in the UK  are
   weighed on one side of the balancing  exercise,  they  are  by  no  means
   determinative.  It is important to stress, in addition, that this is  not
   a case about a need for continuing medical treatment  but  a  case  about
   respect for family life.  In the  terms  considered  by  Laws  LJ  in  GS
   (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40 at 86, this appeal is  within  the  Article  8
   paradigm in respect of the capacity to form and enjoy relationships.

18) Mr Clarke referred me to the case of Nagre,  which  is  one  of  several
   cases  dealing  with  the  proper  approach  to  Article  8  outside  the
   Immigration Rules.  I note, for example,  that  in  Oludoyi  [2014]  UKUT
   00539 it was said that there was nothing in Nagre or Gulshan [2013]  UKUT
   640 to indicate that a threshold test was being suggested, as opposed  to
   making it clear there that there was a need to look at  the  evidence  to
   see  if  there  was  anything  which  had  not  already  been  adequately
   considered in the context of the Immigration Rules and which  could  lead
   to a successful Article 8 claim.  This is consistent with the decision of
   the Court of Appeal in MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA  Civ  985,  at  paragraph
   128.  Since the hearing before me there has been a  further  decision  of
   the Court of Appeal concerning these issues in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ
   387.

19) There is no question but that the  judge's  reasoning  would  have  been
   better expressed and more thorough had the judge had  regard  to  section
   117B.  The judge's essential finding remains, however, that the  claimant
   succeeds due to his emotional and financial dependence  upon  his  sister
   and her family, with whom he has established family life in the UK.  This
   dependency was found by the judge to extend far  beyond  that  of  normal
   emotional ties between adult siblings.  The  medical  evidence  satisfied
   the judge that to disrupt this dependency would have  a  serious  adverse
   effect upon the claimant's mental health.  The claimant's  mental  health
   had deteriorated significantly  in  the  two  years  since  his  previous
   appeal.

20) On the basis of these findings I consider  the  judge  was  entitled  to
   find  that  the  removal  of  the  claimant  would  be   disproportionate
   interference with his right  to  family  life  under  Article  8.   Under
   section 117, given the precarious nature of the claimant's sojourn in the
   UK little weight can be given to private life but this  is  not,  in  the
   circumstances of this case, material.  Similarly,  consideration  of  the
   ability to speak English and of financial independence  are  not  matters
   that would weigh heavily against the claimant in the balancing  exercise.
   It seems that he has some knowledge  of  English  and  he  has  financial
   support from his sister.  Accordingly, although the judge made errors  in
   the decision, these are not of such significance as  to  materially  have
   affected the outcome of the appeal.

Conclusions

21) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision should be
   set aside.


Anonymity

22) The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  for  anonymity  and  as
   there has been no application for an order before  me,  I  make  no  such
   order.



Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal


