
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/09775/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2016                  |On 14 September 2016                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                             MR ANTIM KUMAR RAY
                        (Anonymity DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M Gore   (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates   (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   There is no need for any order restricting  publication  of  any  facts
relating to this case and I make no such order.

2.   This is the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the
permission of a  judge  of  the  First-tier Tribunal,  with  respect  to  a
decision of a different judge of the First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter  "the
Judge")  made  after  a  hearing  of  11 September 2015,  dismissing  the
appellant's  appeal  against  the   Secretary   of   State's   decision   of
31 October 2014 refusing  to  grant  him  asylum  or  any  other  form  of
international protection.

3.   By way of background, the appellant was born on 17 May 1982 and is  a
national of Bangladesh.  He  first  entered  the  UK  on  1 December 2010,
lawfully, as a Tier 4 General Student Migrant.  He subsequently obtained an
extension of his leave, on two occasions,  to  pursue  further  studies  but
that leave was curtailed  on  19 February 2014  because  the  Home Office
accreditation had been suspended in relation to the educational  institution
he was attending.  On 22 May 2014 he indicated he wished to claim asylum.

4.   The basis of the  appellant's  claim  was  that  he  had  written  some
controversial  articles  and  a  controversial  book  entitled   "Khed"   in
Bangladesh.  He claimed that the book had been published in 2013 and that  a
second edition had followed in February 2014.  He had also claimed to  have
propagated certain of his views on Facebook.  The views he expressed in  his
publications were, he said, anti-Islamic or had been taken to be so.   As  a
result, his book publishers had received threats and  he  too  had  received
some threats via  Facebook.   He  also  says  that  his  elder  brother  was
threatened by religious extremists in Bangladesh in May  of  2014  and  that
another of his brothers was attacked.  The appellant says that, in light  of
all of this,  he  concluded  that  he  would  be  at  risk  upon  return  to
Bangladesh and that that had prompted the asylum claim.

5.   The Secretary of  State,  it  is  fair  to  say,  did  not  regard  the
appellant as being honest and did not  believe  the  account  which  he  had
offered or, at least, very much of it.  The Secretary of State also  thought
that, were it necessary, the appellant would be able to  take  advantage  of
an internal flight alternative.  Finally, the  Secretary  of  State  thought
that the appellant  had  failed  to  show,  either  within  or  outside  the
Immigration Rules, that requiring him to leave the  UK  would  represent  a
breach of his rights under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human
Rights (UCHR).

6.   The hearing of the appellant's appeal before the Judge took  place  on
11 September 2015 and the  subsequent  determination  was  promulgated  on
12 October 2015.  At the hearing both parties  were  represented  and  the
appellant gave oral evidence.   There  were  no  additional  witnesses.   An
issue arose at the hearing concerning what is referred to as an ISBN  number
which is a type  of  number  allocated  to  books  which  are  published  in
Bangladesh.  The respondent had carried out  some  internet  searches  which
had suggested that an ISBN number appearing in the book said  to  have  been
written by the appellant was not a genuinely recognised or genuinely  issued
number.

7.   The Judge, like the Secretary of State, did not find the appellant  to
be credible.  In explaining why he was dismissing the appeal the Judge said
this:

         "Conclusions

         37.  At the heart of the Appellant's case is his claim that he  has
         published a book critical of  religion  (in  particular  Islam)  in
         Bangladesh, which he says has led to threats  of  violence  towards
         him and his family.  In support of this claim, he  has  produced  a
         letter from a publisher in Bangladesh  saying  the  book  has  been
         published.  Against this, the Respondent has produced evidence that
         the book he claims to have published bears  an  invalid  ISBN,  and
         ISBN searches using the book's title and author found no record  of
         its existence.  The appellant was unable  to  explain  this,  other
         than to say that it may not have been  published  to  the  'correct
         standards'.  But a book  needs  an  ISBN  number  in  order  to  be
         retailed and the appellant claims over 1,000  copies  of  the  book
         have been sold by bookshops in Bangladesh.  Having  regard  to  the
         evidence produced  by  the  respondent  I  reject  the  appellant's
         evidence that his book has been published.   It  follows  that  the
         appellant's evidence that he is at risk and his  family  have  been
         threatened because of the publication of this  book  must  also  be
         rejected.

         38.  The appellant also claims his family have been threatened, and
         that he will be at risk on return, because  of  statements  he  has
         made on Facebook.  His Facebook pages are 'public'  to  the  extent
         that others apart from Facebook friends may read them.  I note that
         although the Appellant said at his screening interview that he used
         a 'pseudonym' on  Facebook  some  of  the  Facebook  pages  he  has
         included in his evidence  do  contain  his  name.   But  there  was
         nothing to show that his identity and that of  his  Facebook  alias
         have been linked.  And his  Facebook  pages  do  not  identify  his
         address or whereabouts.  He also said (Q 21 asylum interview) that
         he had deactivated his account  on  21st April 2014  while  still
         living in the UK and before the  alleged  attacks  on  his  family.
         There was no evidence linking the contributors who  threatened  him
         on Facebook to the people  he  says  threatened  and  attacked  his
         brothers.  Nor was there evidence linking them to  the  killers  of
         the 'internet bloggers'.  I reject the  appellant's  evidence  that
         those who  threatened  him  on  Facebook  must  necessarily  be  in
         Bangladesh, noting that one  of  the  documents  he  has  submitted
         includes commentary from a person (Hani Noor) who states he is not
         Bengali and lives in another country (Doc 23).

         39.  I found the appellant's explanations for why  his  family  did
         not report  the  alleged  assault  on  his  second  brother  to  be
         inconsistent and unconvincing.  I find the appellant's  credibility
         is further damaged by the fact  he  produced  no  evidence  of  any
         threat to his life or safety prior to his  leave  being  curtailed.
         The events on which he relies, in April  and  May 2014,  all  took
         place after his leave had expired.  Prior to this he  had  remained
         in the UK for two months after his leave was  curtailed.   He  says
         that during this period he was preparing  himself  to  return,  but
         there is no evidence he had taken any active steps to do so.

         40.  Having regard to my findings on the appellant's credibility  I
         reject his evidence that he is a well known  writer  and  plans  to
         publish another controversial book in  Bangladesh.   There  was  no
         evidence of a second book.

         41.  Even if I were to accept the appellant's  account,  I  do  not
         accept that he would still be at risk  if  he  were  to  return  to
         another part of Bangladesh.  He says his family have relocated  and
         I see no  reason  why  he  cannot  also  do  so.   The  appellant's
         assertion that they are in hiding and never return  to  the  family
         home (Q115 of his interview) was contradicted by evidence that  his
         elder brother and family live in rented accommodation in Dhaka  and
         his brother returns to the family home and  continues  to  go  into
         work (Q40).  He has not alleged that his family have  suffered  any
         further threats since moving from the family home.

         42.  The appellant has been living in the  UK  far  from  home  and
         family.  There was no evidence that he would suffer undue  hardship
         if he moved to another area of Bangladesh, away from his home town,
         if he has concerns for his safety.   I  have  found  he  is  not  a
         published author and there was no other evidence to suggest  he  is
         well known in Bangladesh.  His evidence that his family's attackers
         are linked to  the  police  or  other  State  authorities  is  pure
         assertion.

         43.  For the above reasons I  reject  the  appellant's  claims  for
         asylum or in the  alternative  humanitarian  protection  under  the
         Immigration Rules, and his claims under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.

         44.  The only evidence the appellant has produced  to  support  his
         claim that his liberty will be infringed on return to Bangladesh is
         a newspaper article concerning the  arrest  and  prosecution  of  a
         Bangladeshi government minister Latif Siddique.  It is not possible
         from this article to establish the facts of this case.  There is no
         evidence that the appellant is at any risk of prosecution from  the
         authorities because of comments he has made on his Facebook  pages.
         The appellant has not shown that  article 5  is  engaged  by  this
         decision.

         45.  In MB Algeria 2002 UKIAT 01704 the Immigration Appeal Tribunal
         held that once persecution or ill-treatment contrary to  Article 3
         have been negated, it is difficult, if not impossible, to  envisage
         a case where the decision would breach Article 9.   There  may  be
         difficulties, or a degree of hardship in the appellant  manifesting
         his beliefs on return, but  there  would  have  to  be  exceptional
         circumstances for the enforcement  of  immigration  control  to  be
         disproportionate.  Having regard to  my  findings  above,  no  such
         circumstances exist in this case.  I therefore  reject  his  appeal
         under article 9 ECHR.

         46.  In relation to the claim under article 10, I have had  regard
         to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Naik v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1546.  The  evidence  does
         not support the appellant's claim that the decision  represents  an
         interference with his right  to  freedom  of  expression.   He  has
         deactivated his Facebook account, while living in the UK and I have
         rejected his evidence that he is a published writer.  Even assuming
         his article 10 rights are engaged by the decision, any interference
         is in pursuance of the legitimate  aim  of  a  fair  and  effective
         system of immigration control and is necessary in the interests  of
         a democratic society.  I therefore find it is proportionate.

         47.   The  appellant  does  not  satisfy   the   requirements   for
         establishing a private life under paragraph 276ADE of Appendix FM
         of the Immigration Rules.  He has shown no exceptional private life
         considerations  which  would  override  the  public   interest   of
         maintaining a fair and effective system of immigration control.   I
         therefore reject the appeal  under  article 8  ECHR  (outside  the
         rules)."

8.   The dismissal of the appeal was not the end of the matter  because  the
appellant applied for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal.   The
grounds made what seemed to me to  be  some  rather  generalised  complaints
regarding the Judge's determination but also sought to make the point  that
the Judge had erred in his treatment of the  evidence  regarding  the  ISBN
number, had failed to give adequate weight to Facebook evidence, had  failed
to carry out a proper assessment of the internal flight  issue  (though  the
grounds do not say why the assessment was not thought to  be  adequate)  and
had adopted a "review" rather than a "merits approach" with respect  to  the
Article 8 issues.   Permission  was  granted  by  a  judge  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal who made these salient comments:

         "3.  Having regard to the grounds for permission to appeal and  the
         Decision Reasons, I am satisfied that  in  reaching  his  decision
         the Judge arguably made an error of law for the following reasons:

             (a)  The appellant's claimed fear of  persecution  stems  from
             the publication of a book and Facebook entries [15-21].

             (b)  The Judge found that the book had not been published  as
             the ISBN number could not be traced [37].  It is arguable that
             the Judge was in error by apparently placing incontrovertible
             reliance on the ISBN issue, when  a  copy  of  the  book  with
             translation had been produced [6] a second edition of the book
             with biography had been produced [26] together with  a  letter
             from the claimed publisher [27].

             (c)  It is arguable that the Judge's reasoning  in  rejecting
             the Article 8 claim [47] is insufficient both in regard to the
             application of the Immigration Rules and Article 8 outside the
             rules (SS(Congo))."

9.    Permission  having  been  granted  there  was  a  hearing  before  the
Upper Tribunal (before me) so that the question of whether or not the Judge
had erred in law could be decided.  Representation at that  hearing  was  as
stated  above  and  I  am  grateful  to  both  representatives   for   their
assistance.

10.  At the outset of the hearing I noted that I had received a  new  bundle
of documents filed on behalf of the appellant and that  the  Upper Tribunal
had also received a letter written by one Arun Kumar Saha, though  it  was
unsigned, in which the author of the letter had said that the appellant  had
falsely given his name as the publisher  of  the  book  referred  to  above.
Mrs Gore had not previously seen  this  letter  though  Mr Bates  had.   I
indicated to both of them that I did not  consider  it  to  be  relevant  at
least with respect to the error of law  issue  and  both  agreed.   I  have,
therefore, not considered its contents at all in  addressing  the  error  of
law question.

11.  Mrs Gore indicated that, although she had not drafted the  grounds  of
appeal to the Upper Tribunal, she would rely upon them.  She argued  it  had
not been open to the Judge to rely upon  the  ISBN  number  issue  for  his
conclusion that the book had not been published bearing in mind  that  there
had been a copy of the book before him, there had been  some  references  to
it in Facebook entries and that it had not been disputed  that  he  was  the
author of the manuscript.  As to the alternative finding regarding  internal
flight, it was not open to the Judge to decide that such would be available
because if he were to accept the appellant's claim as  being  true  then  he
would have a well-founded fear throughout Bangladesh.

12.  Mr Bates for the Secretary of State submitted that the Judge had  not
considered the ISBN number issue in isolation.  The  issues  concerning  the
number had, instead, been part of an overall assessment of  the  appellant's
credibility.  In that context the Judge had noted at paragraphs 16 and  17
of his determination that whilst  the  appellant  had  made  various  claims
regarding his writing history other than the  book  or  books,  he  had  not
produced evidence of those other writings.  From paragraphs 18 to 20 of the
determination  the Judge  had  noted  contradictions  in  the  appellant's
evidence.  Paragraph 40  demonstrated  that  the Judge  had  undertaken  a
holistic consideration before rejecting the  appellant's  claims  to  be  an
author.  The internal flight alternative conclusion had  been  open  to  him
and although the Article 8 assessment was brief  it  was  adequate  because
there had been no real evidence of an Article 8 claim of substance.

13.  Mrs Gore, replying, contended that the Judge  had  primarily  focused
upon the question of  the  publication  of  the  book  and  had  reached  an
impermissible conclusion about it.  As to that conclusion he had  failed  to
factor in his own findings at paragraph 38 of the  determination  regarding
Facebook and in which he appeared to have accepted that  there  had  been  a
reference to the book on Facebook.

14.  I shall deal, first of  all,  with  the  various  points  which  caused
permission to appeal to be granted.

15.  The first such point is that relating to the ISBN number.  It  is  said
that the Judge may have erred by placing incontrovertible reliance  on  the
ISBN issue when there  was  other  evidence,  as  specified  in  the  grant,
regarding the book.

16.  It is certainly right, as Mrs Gore emphasises, that what was  said  to
be a copy of a genuine book had been produced as had a  second  edition  and
that there was also a letter said to emanate  from  the  claimed  publisher.
As to the ISBN number, the difficulty for the appellant  was  that  although
there was such a number on the book, searches of online  records  concerning
the allocation of  such  numbers  to  particular  publications  revealed  no
record of such a number having been allocated  to  the  book  the  appellant
claimed to have had published.  At first  blush  it  does  rather  look,  in
focusing  upon  paragraph 37  of  the  determination  in  isolation,  that
the Judge had simply relied upon that  to  reject  the  appellant's  claim.
However, I have concluded, as Mr Bates has urged me to, that a full reading
of the determination reveals that the Judge carried  out  a  more  holistic
assessment than that.

17.  The Judge  did  note  an  absence  of  evidence  concerning  newspaper
articles which the appellant had claimed to  have  written  (paragraph 17).
The Judge noted that the appellant had indicated in oral evidence that  the
book he had  written  was  "not  anti-Islamic",  whereas  in  the  screening
interview he had said the opposite and had chosen  to  describe  himself  as
"extremist against the Muslims" (paragraph 18).  The Judge noted a lack of
evidence regarding a second book the appellant had claimed to  have  written
(paragraph 20).  So, there were other concerns which the Judge  had  about
the appellant's  evidence  and  it  was  against  the  background  of  those
concerns, in addition to the ISBN issue, that  the Judge  reached  a  view,
confirmed at paragraph 40 of the determination that the appellant  was  not
credible and was not a well known writer.  I do not think it  can  be  said,
therefore, that the Judge had based his  rejection  of  the  book  evidence
solely on one particular concern and I conclude that  his  ultimate  finding
regarding the appellant's lack of credibility and regarding his  not  having
genuinely had a book published in Bangladesh was open  to  him  despite  the
existence of other supportive evidence from the appellant's perspective.

18.  The other point specifically raised in  the  grant  of  permission  was
that  concerning  Article 8.   In  fact  Mrs Gore,  very  properly   and
realistically in my view,  whilst  not  seeking  to  withdraw  that  ground,
acknowledged it was not  her  strongest  point.   Certainly  the  Article 8
assessment was brief as Mr Bates correctly  acknowledged.   However,  there
was no suggestion that the appellant had  established  any  form  of  family
life within the meaning of Article 8.  In looking at  the  evidence  before
the Judge I note that a witness statement of  3 September 2015  had  been
supplied.  Whist it is true that in that statement  reference  was  made  to
the appellant's immigration history and his presence in the  UK  since  2010
and the  fact  of  his  having  studied  in  the  UK,  nothing  of  note  or
significance was stated regarding the substance or quality  of  any  private
life he enjoyed here.  Nor is there  any  indication  in  the  determination
that the matter was pursued with any vigour at the hearing either by way  of
specific oral evidence as to the issue or via submissions.  Accordingly,  it
does not seem to me that the Judge was required to say anything  more  than
he did about Article 8 or that his brief assessment points to any error  of
law in that regard. Nor do I think it correct to  say  that  the  Judge  had
adopted what was described in the grounds as a "review" approach.   All  the
Judge was really saying was that there was no evidence of any  private  life
sufficient to outweigh the public interest in immigration  control.  He  was
entitled to so decide.

19.  Mrs Gore raised concerns  regarding  the Judge's  assessment  of  the
Facebook evidence.  I cannot see that what the Judge had to say about  that
demonstrates, of itself, an acceptance on his part that there was  reference
to the book the appellant had claimed to have had published. Even  if  there
was, though, it is clear from reading the determination as a whole that  the
Judge did not believe any such book had been written by  the  Appellant  or,
at least, published and he gave an adequate explanation  for  that  finding.
The Judge properly explained why he did not think there was anything in the
Facebook evidence which suggested any risk upon  return  to  Bangladesh  and
his conclusions, in that regard, were open to him  and  have  been  properly
explained.

20.  In light of the above, and in my judgment, nothing  has  been  said  in
the grounds of  application  or  in  the  oral  submissions  to  me  despite
Mrs Gore's determined and commendable efforts, to show that the Judge  did
err in law, once his determination is considered as a  whole,  in  rejecting
the contentions of  the  appellant  which  had  underpinned  his  claim  for
asylum.  That, really, is the end of  the  matter  concerning  international
protection.  However, I also accept that the Judge's conclusions  regarding
internal flight as set out at paragraphs 41 and  42  of  his  determination
were open to him and free  of  legal  error   The  written  grounds  do  not
contain anything more than an assertion that the Judge had  erred  in  this
regard.  Whilst I bear in mind Mrs Gore's point referred to above, it seems
to me that even if the Judge had accepted the appellant had  a  history  of
having written provocative  or  controversial  material,  including  a  book
which had been published on a small scale, and even if he had accepted  that
his family had had to relocate, that did not demonstrate that the  appellant
would be at risk throughout Bangladesh.  Accordingly, it was  properly  open
to him to consider the availability of an internal flight  alternative  and,
even taking the appellant's claim at its  highest,  to  conclude  that  such
would lead to his being safe and that  it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  to
expect him to so relocate.

21.  In view of all of the above I conclude that the Judge's  decision  did
not involve the making of an error  of  law  and  that  his  decision  shall
stand.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
error law.  That decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 14 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Since no fee is payable there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 14 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
