
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09934/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 26th June 2014                               |                           |
|Prepared on 3rd July 2014                       |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                                     MKZ
                              (ANONYMITY MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G. Loughran of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  He states that he was  born
    on 28th January 2000 but the Respondent contends that the Appellant was
    born over a year earlier on 28th January 1999.  He appealed  against  a
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Monson sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 25th  February  2014  who  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against a decision of the Respondent dated  23rd  October  2013.   That
    decision was to refuse the Appellant's application for asylum at a time
    when the Appellant had existing discretionary leave  until  23rd  April
    2016. This leave had been granted in accordance with  the  Respondent's
    published asylum instruction on discretionary leave  as  the  Appellant
    was an unaccompanied child for whom the Respondent was  satisfied  that
    adequate reception arrangements in Afghanistan were  unavailable.   The
    Appellant was referred to Kent Social Services for  an  age  assessment
    which was completed on 28th June 2013 in  accordance  with  the  Merton
    guidelines (B v Merton London Borough Council [2013] EWHC  1689)  which
    found that the Appellant was in fact aged 14 years old,  born  on  28th
    January 1999.  This was deemed to be an  authoritative  age  assessment
    and was accepted by the Respondent.

2.   The Appellant's claim was based on a fear of the Afghan  Taliban.   The
    Appellant's uncle was a member of the Taliban  and  the  Appellant  was
    told that this uncle wanted to kill the Appellant. Sheep  belonging  to
    the Appellant's (second) uncle  had  been  killed  by  the  Appellant's
    (first) uncle who also wanted to kill the Appellant. The  second  uncle
    arranged for the Appellant to come to the United Kingdom.

3.   Shortly before the substantive asylum  interview  took  place,  Ms  Ann
    Parnell, the Deputy Head of a Virtual School in Whitstable,  Kent  made
    an educational assessment  of  the  Appellant,  noted  the  Appellant's
    schooling in Afghanistan and that the Appellant  could  communicate  in
    both Pashtu and Dari.  Through looks and demeanour the Appellant seemed
    most appropriately placed in the category  14  to  16  years  old.   He
    engaged in  the  educational  assessment  with  little  hesitation  and
    demonstrated an ability to work independently.

4.   The Appellant was interviewed by the Respondent on 30th  July  2013  in
    Pushto.  The Appellant said that he knew he was 12 years old because he
    had had a vaccination about a month before he left Afghanistan  and  it
    was written in  the  record  card  that  he  was  12  years  old.   The
    Appellant's representatives raised concerns as to whether the Appellant
    might have a learning disability and did not  consider  it  appropriate
    for the Appellant to be questioned further after the interview.

5.   In the refusal letter the Respondent described the Appellant's  account
    as being inconsistent and vague. It was not accepted  that  he  was  at
    risk upon return to Afghanistan or that the (first) uncle  was  in  the
    Taliban.  The claim was rejected in its entirety.  When  the  Appellant
    made an application for asylum he claimed that he was 12 years old  but
    had failed to produce any satisfactory evidence  to  substantiate  this
    claim. Although the Respondent doubted  that  the  Appellant  was  from
    Afghanistan removal directions would  be  set  for  Afghanistan  unless
    information was received to confirm the Appellant's true nationality.

6.   The Appellant made  a  statement  after  both  his  interview  and  the
    refusal letter (it was signed and dated at court)  disclosing  for  the
    first time that he had been sexually abused  in  Afghanistan  by  older
    boys and also by the agents who had brought him to the United  Kingdom.
    He had been unable to say this in his screening and  asylum  interviews
    as he went along with what the agent had told him to do.   He  did  not
    understand his own sexuality.

7.   When the Appellant's appeal first came before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    the  matter  was  adjourned  to  enable  the  Appellant  to  obtain   a
    psychiatric report from a child and adolescent psychiatrist Dr Victoria
    Holt.  She saw the Appellant for two hours on  18th  January  2014  and
    produced a report dated 21st February  2014.   She  had  not  read  the
    Respondent's refusal letter.  The  Appellant  told  Dr  Holt  that  his
    father had been shot as a result of a feud (as opposed to  having  died
    in an accident, see questions 64 and 65 of the  asylum  interview)  and
    that people had paid him and his paternal  uncle  for  the  Appellant's
    sexual services.  It was his maternal uncle who was  worried  that  the
    Appellant would be killed and told the Appellant to leave  Afghanistan.
    The Appellant said he did not like  girls.   Dr  Holt  found  that  the
    Appellant's mood  was  objectively  and  subjectively  depressed.   The
    Appellant's presentation and report of symptoms might indicate that  he
    was suffering from PTSD as well as depression.  He would  benefit  from
    support  regarding  his  sexual  orientation.   She  advised  that  the
    Appellant be referred to a child and adolescent mental  health  service
    in order for his mental health to be assessed and supported.

The Substantive Hearing at First Instance

8.   At the outset Counsel for the Appellant (who did not appear before  me)
    asked for an adjournment on the  basis  that  the  Respondent  had  not
    formally considered the Appellant's present claim  (that  he  had  been
    sexually abused) nor had the  recommendations  of  Dr  Holt  (that  the
    Appellant be referred to a mental health service for  assessment)  been
    acted upon.  The detailed age assessment had not been provided by  Kent
    Social Services only a pro-forma of the age assessment  report  carried
    out by Val Mulholland, Social Worker working for Kent County  Council's
    Children's  Services  (see  paragraph   1   above).    This   pro-forma
    represented a summary of a more in-depth assessment.  According to  the
    pro-forma as quoted by the Judge:

         "The  Appellant's  physical  appearance  and   demeanour   strongly
         suggested that he was a young person.   Other  factors  taken  into
         account in assessing the Appellant as having a  date  of  birth  of
         about 28th January  1999  were:  observation  of  interaction  with
         peers; family and social history; education; independent  self-care
         skills; self-disclosure; interaction of person  during  assessment;
         cultural  or  linguistic   skills;   maturity   and   developmental
         consideration; and health or medical considerations if any."


9.   The Judge was not prepared to adjourn the matter.  The  case  had  been
    adjourned once already to obtain the report from Dr Holt.  The  dispute
    over the Appellant's true age had little or no bearing  on  the  asylum
    claim.   He  was  on  any  view  a   vulnerable   minor.    Dr   Holt's
    recommendations were not for the purpose of verifying  the  Appellant's
    core claim of sexual abuse.  The Judge noted in  passing  that  it  was
    open to the Appellant to withdraw his present appeal against the asylum
    claim and making a fresh claim based  on  sexual  abuse  and/or  sexual
    orientation sometime before the expiry of his  discretionary  leave  to
    remain in  2016.   The  Respondent  was  not  prepared  to  accept  the
    Appellant's current claim of sexual abuse as there has been no physical
    examination of the Appellant and no real evidence that the sexual abuse
    had happened.  The application for an adjournment was then renewed  but
    the Judge refused it again holding  that  it  was  doubtful  whether  a
    physical examination report would advance  the  Appellant's  case.   Dr
    Holt's recommendation was not a forensic one  but  in  order  to  check
    whether the Appellant had any ongoing physical trauma or infection as a
    result of being repeatedly raped.  The matter proceeded on  submissions
    only as the Appellant was not called to give evidence.

10.  The Judge dismissed the appeal  stating  that  whilst  the  psychiatric
    report of Dr Holt had some independent probative value in that she  was
    persuaded the appellant was making a genuine disclosure to her  it  was
    also necessary to consider the genesis of the sexual  abuse  claim  and
    the degree to which there was internal consistency in its presentation.
     The  claim  of  abuse  did  not  surface  until  one  week  after  the
    Appellant's original asylum claim had been rejected by the  Respondent.
    The Judge found that delay to undermine the claim.  It was not credible
    that an agent would encourage the  Appellant  to  sabotage  the  asylum
    claim by preventing the  Appellant  from  presenting  a  plausible  and
    coherent account.  It was far more likely that  the  agent  would  have
    given the Appellant a plausible  cover  story  to  follow.   The  Judge
    rejected the Appellant's claim that what he  had  said  in  his  asylum
    interview was simply what the agent had told the Appellant to say.

11.  The claim that the Appellant was suffering from some form of  cognitive
    impairment when first presenting his claim at interview  had  now  been
    totally dispelled (particularly in the light of Ms Parnell's evidence).
     The reason why the Appellant presented as being slow in answering some
    of the questions was not because he did not understand them but because
    he was working out how he should answer them.   It  followed  that  the
    Appellant's new case was a series of lies.  The Appellant had not given
    a hint in interview of what was now said to be the real foundation  for
    his asylum claim saying only when  asked  if  he  had  been  personally
    attacked that his friends had been a little bit mean to him.   What  he
    had told Dr Holt  did  not  match  what  he  had  said  in  his  appeal
    statement.  The Appellant's  presentation  on  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom was not that of one of someone who was likely to have been in a
    deeply traumatised state having been repeatedly raped by agents on  the
    journey to the United Kingdom.

12.  By contrast Ms Parnell who had seen him had described the Appellant  as
    polite, co-operative  and  enthusiastic.   The  evidence  pointed  very
    strongly to the Appellant being sent  to  the  United  Kingdom  by  his
    family for economic reasons not because he was genuinely in any danger.
     The Appellant had not known the answers to questions about Afghanistan
    not because of any learning disability but because that was  not  where
    he came from.  As  Pakistan  had  generally  been  more  peaceful  than
    Afghanistan in the last ten to  fifteen  years  it  was  reasonable  to
    question  the  plausibility  of  the  Appellant's  family  moving  from
    Pakistan to Afghanistan when the Appellant was aged 4 or 5 rather  than
    the reverse, the Judge noting at paragraph 113:


         "Of particular significance is the Appellant's ignorance of  Afghan
         currency which is not consistent with his claim  that  his  abusers
         would give his uncle money in exchange for being allowed to use the
         Appellant as a sex slave."

    Even after a liberal application of the benefit of doubt there were  no
    substantial grounds for  believing  that  the  Appellant  was  sexually
    abused in Afghanistan or sent by  his  family  to  the  United  Kingdom
    because his maternal uncle wanted to kill him.

The Onward Appeal

13.  The Appellant appealed against that  decision  in  grounds  settled  by
    Counsel who had represented him at first instance.   The  first  ground
    was that the Judge had erred in law by failing to adjourn the  hearing.
    Social Services had not engaged with the Appellant since the report  of
    Dr Holt due to the illness of the allocated social worker.   There  was
    however to be an appointment with Social Services  the  day  after  the
    hearing (that is to say 26th February 2014 as the hearing was  on  25th
    February).  According to the grounds, at this meeting:

         "It was anticipated  that  Social  Services  would  facilitate  his
         referral to other professionals specialised  in  dealing  with  the
         survivors of childhood sexual abuse.  It was anticipated  that  the
         context of expert therapy and support would enable [the  Appellant]
         to make fuller and more  reliable  disclosure  of  his  history  of
         sexual abuse."


14.  Counsel  for  the  Respondent  had  not  objected  to  the  Appellant's
    application for an adjournment.  By refusing the application the  Judge
    had erred by directing himself that there was a  high  threshold  under
    paragraph 21(2) of the Tribunal Procedural Rules.  In  fact  that  test
    was that the Tribunal had a duty to ensure that proceedings  before  it
    were fair and the grounds cited SH Afghanistan [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1284.
    The First-tier Tribunal had erred in failing to consider whether it was
    in the best interests of the Appellant,  a  child,  to  be  granted  an
    adjournment in circumstances where he was due on the very next  day  to
    meet with Social Services  with  a  view  to  his  onward  referral  to
    professionals who would be assisting in disposing the traumatic  events
    of his childhood.  The Judge had not mentioned when giving his  reasons
    in his determination for refusing the adjournment that this meeting was
    to take place on the next day.  The aim  of  the  appeal  should  be  a
    collaborative endeavour to get the truth by the  best  available  means
    (AK Iran [2008] EWCA Civ 941).  The Appellant's  representatives  could
    not question the Appellant about the sexual  abuse  and  therefore  the
    best available means would be for the Appellant to  be  given  time  to
    make disclosure to the relevant professionals.  The Judge  should  have
    given his reasons for refusing the adjournment request in line with the
    requirements of Section 55 of the 2009 Act.

15.  The second ground of appeal took issue  with  the  Judge's  conclusions
    that the Appellant's account of sexual abuse was not credible.  It  was
    an unattractive proposition to say that the child who had a very strong
    inclination to suppress the truth would nevertheless give hints of  the
    abuse.  Ms Parnell, described in the grounds as "an untrained  expert",
    was not in a position to detect symptoms of PTSD.  No weight was  given
    to  Dr  Holt's  detailed  and  unchallenged  psychiatric  report  which
    described  the  Appellant  as  suffering  from  post  traumatic  stress
    disorder and a depressive disorder.  The Appellant's account  of  being
    hired out as a sex slave for money  was  consistent  with  the  country
    background material.  A child making  an  asylum  claim  could  not  be
    expected to have the same understanding of his or  her  history  as  an
    adult would.  The Appellant have given a very poor account  of  himself
    at  interview.   The  possibility  that  the  Appellant  suffered  from
    cognitive impairment had not been excluded, the failure  to  grant  the
    adjournment had prevented the acquisition of any further evidence about
    it.  The Judge had placed insufficient weight on what the Appellant had
    said in his statement about why he had not disclosed the  abuse.   Case
    authority suggested that most asylum seekers depended  on  the  agent's
    advice and followed their lead.  The inconsistencies in the Appellant's
    account were assessed without reference to the Appellant's age.

16.  The third ground was that the  Judge  had  taken  a  series  of  points
    against the Appellant which had not been raised at the  hearing  or  by
    the Respondent.  These included the lack  of  trauma  which  the  Judge
    thought the Appellant had displayed to Ms Parnell, that the Appellant's
    solicitor had seen nothing in the Appellant's demeanour which suggested
    that  the  Appellant  might  be  suffering  from  PTSD  and  that   the
    Appellant's claim of homosexuality was inconsistent with the fact  that
    he had been able to conceal that sexual identity and make friends  with
    other Afghan boys.  Further the Judge's conclusion that the  notion  of
    cognitive impairment had been totally dispelled had  not  been  put  to
    counsel. The fourth ground was that the Tribunal had acted irrationally
    in rejecting  the  Appellant's  account  of  his  true  age.   The  age
    assessment was non-Merton compliant.

17.   Accompanying  the  grounds  of  appeal  was  a  statement   from   the
    Appellant's solicitor Ms Bezzano.  She stated that  she  had  seen  the
    Appellant on 16th July 2013 and went through the Appellant's  screening
    interview with him.  From the first time she met the Appellant she  was
    of the view that he was a deeply troubled young  person  and  this  was
    reinforced during her meetings with  foster  carers.   She  raised  her
    concerns about that at the interview.  Commenting on the  determination
    of the Immigration Judge she stated that she  had  at  all  stages  had
    difficulties  in  obtaining  instructions  from  the  Appellant   which
    included the meeting on 16th July 2013.  She had not assumed  that  the
    Appellant had been sent to  the  UK  for  economic  reasons.   She  had
    assumed rather that he was  genuinely  in  danger  of  his  country  of
    origin.  The Appellant's troubled presentation concerned her enough  to
    feel that professional attention was  warranted.   This  statement  was
    dated 14th March 2014 the same  date  as  the  Appellant's  grounds  of
    onward appeal settled  by  Counsel.   What  was  noticeable  about  the
    statement was that it made no reference to the meeting that was said to
    be due on 26th February 2014 and  which  featured  prominently  in  the
    grounds of onward appeal.

18.  Permission to appeal was refused at first by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Shimmin on the papers on 24th March 2014 because it was lodged  out  of
    time.  The application was then renewed on the same basis to the  Upper
    Tribunal where it came before Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds on 22nd  April
    2014.  She granted permission to appeal  stating  that  ground  1  (the
    failure to adjourn) raised a point of general importance concerning the
    approach to adjournment applications in circumstances  where  the  best
    interests of a child are potentially relevant.  "Whilst  the  remaining
    grounds submitted may in some respects give the appearance of  being  a
    disagreement with the findings of fact made, I grant permission on  all
    grounds."  She then gave directions for the hearing  which  was  to  be
    confined to the issue of whether there was an error of law.  If it  was
    found that there was an error of law and it  was  considered  that  the
    decision could be remade on the evidence that was before the First-tier
    Tribunal the Tribunal could proceed to do so at the hearing.

19.  Responding to the grant of permission,  the  Respondent  wrote  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on  21st  May  2014  that  the  Respondent  opposed  the
    Appellant's appeal.

         "While the lengthy grounds of  challenge  are  persuasive  to  some
         extent it is considered that  a  reading  of  the  equally  lengthy
         determination shows that the Judge has  in  fact  directed  himself
         appropriately and come to conclusions that were open to him on  the
         evidence."


    The Judge had given a very  thorough  and  fair  consideration  of  the
    application  to  adjourn.   He  was  entitled  to  conclude   that   an
    adjournment was not necessary in line with the  guiding  principles  of
    the Procedure Rules cited.  Having acknowledged that late disclosure of
    sexual abuse was by no means uncommon and should  not  be  held  to  be
    damaging to credibility per se, the Judge was nevertheless entitled  to
    find on the particular facts of this case that the Appellant's  account
    could not be believed for the detailed reasons he gives.

The Hearing Before Me

20.  In oral submissions Counsel stated that she relied on  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  I queried with Counsel what had happened  at  the  meeting  on
    26th February 2014 as it was not mentioned at all  in  the  solicitor's
    statement.  Counsel stated that the meeting had taken  place  and  that
    the Appellant was receiving ongoing support from Social  Services.   He
    now saw his social worker on a regular basis.  There were  in  fact  no
    referrals made as a result of that meeting on 26th February 2014.   The
    solicitor had not referred to the meeting as her statement was directed
    towards ground 3 of the  grounds  of  onward  appeal  (taking  a  point
    against the Appellant not raised at the hearing in relation to what the
    solicitor did or did not infer from the Appellant's presentation).

21.  Counsel argued that the adjournment should have  been  granted  because
    the full age  assessment  was  required  and  had  not  been  provided.
    Failure to adjourn was not in the Appellant's best interests.   It  was
    not clear from the determination on what basis the adjournment had been
    sought.  There was no prejudice to the Respondent in adjourning and the
    Respondent had not objected to the adjournment.

22.  In relation to ground 2 the Judge had  failed  to  give  weight  to  Dr
    Holt's report that the Appellant was suffering from PTSD.  As to ground
    3 the Appellant's solicitor's witness statement made clear that she did
    have concerns about the Appellant's presentation and  points  had  been
    taken against the Appellant not previously raised.  The  solicitor  had
    responded to  the  Judge's  point  that  she  had  said  nothing  about
    encountering any difficulties in taking  the  first  witness  statement
    from the Appellant.  From that it was to be  inferred  that  there  was
    nothing about his demeanour that indicated to her that he was suffering
    from PTSD whereas his presentation had concerned her.  In  relation  to
    ground 4 the Appellant had given a credible account of  his  age.   The
    Appellant had been unable to obtain the detailed age assessment report.

23.  In reply the  Respondent  stated  that  although  permission  had  been
    granted on all grounds it was clear that the Upper Tribunal  Judge  was
    most taken with ground 1, the failure to adjourn.  The  difficulty  for
    the Appellant was that he could not show what material difference there
    would have been if the case had been adjourned.   Four  months  on  the
    Appellant now has a specified social worker but no further evidence has
    been submitted as to the meeting that took  place  the  day  after  the
    hearing.  It was therefore not known what more could have been obtained
    from Social Services.  The Judge was aware that  the  Appellant  was  a
    vulnerable minor and was conscious of his duty under Section  55.   The
    Judge had listened to the submissions.  It could not be  said  that  he
    was materially wrong.  Although Kent  Social  Services  had  still  not
    provided the detailed age assessment the Appellant could have  obtained
    one of his own either before or since the hearing.  It was not right to
    say that there was  no  evidence  that  went  against  the  Appellant's
    assertion of his age.

24.  The Judge's findings were open to him and Grounds 2 to 4 were merely  a
    disagreement with them.  The Presenting Officer at first  instance  had
    put the Appellant on notice that his new  claim  of  sexual  abuse  was
    disputed.  Just because the Respondent did not  oppose  an  application
    for an adjournment did not mean that the Judge's refusal to adjourn was
    a perverse decision.  An application by the Appellant  not  opposed  by
    the Respondent was different to a joint application by both parties for
    an adjournment.  Ground 1 had little merit.  Discrepancies between  the
    Appellant's account in his statement and what he said to Dr  Holt  were
    not subtle, they leapt off the page.  At one point the  Appellant  said
    he was at school in Afghanistan for five years, another that he was not
    at school for seven.  That was a glaring discrepancy.   The  Respondent
    had  raised  the  issue  of  whether  the  Appellant  really  was  from
    Afghanistan in the refusal letter.  The  Judge  had  engaged  with  the
    evidence. The determination was sound.

25.  In response  Counsel  argued  that  there  was  a  material  difference
    between the situation now and the circumstances  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier as the Appellant now had regular  contact
    with a named social worker.  If there was to  be  a  fresh  substantive
    hearing evidence could be provided resulting from that.  That  evidence
    would have been before the  First-tier  if  the  adjournment  had  been
    granted.  Without further evidence of age it was perverse not to accept
    the Appellant's account of his age.  It was not being submitted that to
    refuse an adjournment where there was no objection to  the  adjournment
    from the Respondent was itself perverse, rather there was no reason not
    to grant the adjournment because there was no prejudice.  There was  no
    explanation why in the absence of prejudice it would nevertheless be in
    the Appellant's best interests to refuse the adjournment.   The  entire
    determination was flawed by the failure to adjourn.  It was not  lawful
    for the Judge to say that he understood  why  there  might  be  a  late
    disclosure of sexual abuse but nevertheless the Appellant  should  have
    mentioned it earlier.  The determination should be set  aside  and  the
    matter re-heard.

Findings

26.  The issue I have to decide is whether there was an error of law in  the
    Judge's determination such that it should be  set  aside.   If  I  find
    there is not, then the decision will stand.  It is fair to say that the
    main thrust of the Appellant's appeal against the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal was the refusal of the First-tier  to  adjourn  the
    hearing on 25th February 2014.  In turn the main thrust of that  ground
    is that a meeting was to take place the next day on 26th February which
    might result in referrals or other steps being taken that could  obtain
    more evidence that would be of  assistance  to  the  Appellant  in  his
    asylum claim. He might then be able to make further  disclosures  about
    what had happened to  him.   By  refusing  to  adjourn  the  Judge  had
    prevented the Appellant from obtaining that evidence.

27.  There are a number of difficulties with  this  line  of  argument.   In
    granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds was  concerned
    as to whether in the light of the duty upon  the  Tribunal  imposed  by
    Section 55 of the 2009 Act the best interests of  the  Appellant  as  a
    child required the Tribunal to give the Appellant  the  opportunity  to
    obtain further evidence about his claim.  I do  not  read  Judge  Reeds
    grant to mean that arguably the Appellant should have been  granted  an
    adjournment to enable therapeutic work as such  to  continue  with  the
    Appellant.  Whilst that therapeutic work may well be in the Appellant's
    best interests (depending on the view  one  takes  of  the  Appellant's
    case), that is a matter outside the  Tribunal  proceedings  which  were
    concerned with the evidence that  could  be  put  to  the  Tribunal  in
    support of the Appellant's claim.  The only basis  therefore  on  which
    the Judge could have adjourned the hearing  on  25th  February  was  if
    (adopting the test in SH Afghanistan) it was fair to give the Appellant
    an opportunity to obtain further evidence which  might  flow  from  the
    referrals for example recommended by Dr Holt.

28.  Importantly no such referrals were made.  Indeed the  meeting  on  26th
    February appears merely to have restored the status  quo  in  that  the
    Appellant now had regular meetings with his social worker which he  had
    not had prior to 25th February because of the illness of the  allocated
    social worker.  What did not happen at the meeting on 26th February  is
    that any referrals whether those recommended by Dr Holt  or  otherwise,
    had taken place.  The Judge was entitled to  conclude  that  Dr  Holt's
    recommendations which have not yet  been  acted  on  were  not  for  an
    evidential purpose that is "to verify the  Appellant's  core  claim  of
    sexual abuse" as the Judge put  it  at  paragraph  83.   Whilst  it  is
    correct that the Judge does not refer in his determination to the  fact
    that he was told that the meeting was to take place  the  next  day  on
    26th February, it is evident from a fair reading of  his  determination
    that he had in mind what Counsel had said and that he could see that no
    useful purpose would be served by an adjournment in such circumstances.



29.  In fact as matters turned out the situation was  less  persuasive  than
    the one presented to the Appellant since no referrals were made at  the
    meeting on 26th February. The case would thus have been in no different
    a position at the end of a period of adjournment than it  was  on  25th
    February.  In that context the Judge's remark that it would  have  been
    more in the Appellant's interests to withdraw his current asylum  claim
    and to in  effect  start  again  nearer  the  time  when  his  existing
    discretionary leave was about to expire made far more  sense.   It  was
    far more likely to be in the Appellant's best interests (assuming  that
    there was merit to the Appellant's  claim  of  having  suffered  sexual
    abuse) to withdraw his claim and start again rather than  proceed  with
    what on any view was a muddled account.

30.  As the Respondent did  not  accept  the  Appellant's  second  claim  of
    suffering sexual abuse it was for the Appellant  to  establish  to  the
    lower standard that there was a reasonable chance that his account  was
    true and that he would therefore be at risk if now returned.  Whilst it
    might  have  been  more  helpful  for  the  Judge  to   have   referred
    specifically to SH  Afghanistan  in  terms  rather  than  rely  on  the
    provisions of the Procedure Rules (which had not  featured  prominently
    in the Court of Appeal decision in SH) it cannot be said that the Judge
    in considering the application for adjournment did not have in the back
    of his mind that the test was one of fairness.  He  carefully  listened
    to the arguments and he gave sound conclusions for his  reasons  as  to
    why the case should proceed.  If the Appellant wished to  proceed  with
    his appeal on the grounds of sexual abuse, there was little purpose  to
    be served by an adjournment  so  as  to  enable  the  meeting  on  26th
    February to take place.  With the benefit of hindsight that decision of
    the Judge's is if anything reinforced.  Indeed the  grounds  of  onward
    appeal have a very noticeable gap by referring to the meeting that  was
    to take place on 26th February without stating what the outcome of that
    meeting was.  The grounds to that extent gave a  misleading  impression
    of the importance of the meeting on 26th February.

31.  The fact that the Respondent did not object to the application  for  an
    adjournment was not a decisive factor.  As the  Judge  made  clear  the
    Respondent was not asking for an adjournment, e.g.  to  obtain  further
    reports etc., but was simply not opposing the Appellant's  application.
    The burden still fell on the Appellant to justify  why  an  adjournment
    should take place in the light of the Tribunal's  overriding  objective
    to conduct proceedings fairly and expeditiously.   The  Judge  was  not
    satisfied  that  the  Appellant  was  able  to  demonstrate  this   and
    subsequent events have proved the Judge was right.

32.  In relation to the remaining matters considered of less  importance  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds, it is difficult to see how they  amount  to
    anything more than a lengthy disagreement with  the  Judge's  findings.
    The Judge was conscious that he was dealing with a vulnerable minor and
    was also conscious that there might be quite understandable reasons why
    the account had come out in the way that it had  as  opposed  to  being
    disclosed immediately.  However the assessment of  the  evidence  which
    was before the Judge was a matter for him.  It was for  him  to  decide
    what weight  he  placed  on  the  evidence.   He  was  concerned  about
    inconsistencies which were quite unexplained  between  the  Appellant's
    witness statement and what he told Dr Holt.  He was concerned about why
    the family should move from the relative safety of Pakistan to the more
    dangerous environment of Afghanistan in the context of  the  fact  that
    the Appellant appeared to know little about Afghanistan  including  its
    currency.  The Appellant had told Dr Holt  that  he  had  not  gone  to
    school from the age of 7 whereas he told Ms Parnell he had  attended  a
    state run school  for  five  years  in  Afghanistan.   Even  given  the
    Appellant's age these were matters  for  which  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the Appellant to show some degree of consistency.  It  was  open
    to the Judge to draw an adverse inference from such matters.

33.  Whilst the grounds of appeal sought repeatedly to  portray  Ms  Parnell
    as being non-expert, she was  a  Deputy  Head  of  a  school  and  thus
    experienced in dealing with children.  She was  not  giving  an  expert
    opinion on whether the Appellant had suffered from PTSD.  What she  was
    doing was recording her observations (inter alia)  on  the  Appellant's
    demeanour.  The denigration of her evidence in the  grounds  of  appeal
    was therefore misconceived.  The Judge was entitled to place weight  on
    her observations of the Appellant's demeanour and to draw a  conclusion
    from that that that too damaged the credibility of his  late  claim  of
    sexual abuse.

34.  The third ground raised is that the Judge took a series of  points  not
    raised at the hearing or by  the  Respondent.   This  ground  has  very
    little to it. The Judge's criticism of the solicitor's  evidence  about
    the  asylum  interview  was  that  there  was  a  strong   element   of
    subjectivity.  It was obvious from the transcript of the interview that
    the Appellant had no apparent difficulty in answering  questions  about
    his family circumstances.  It was for the Judge to draw a conclusion on
    the Appellant's apparent inability to answer questions in a  way  which
    advanced his asylum claim.  The witness statement taken earlier did not
    disclose a viable asylum claim.  The concern that the  Appellant  might
    be suffering from a learning disability flowed from his failure  to  be
    able to answer simple  questions  about  Afghanistan.   If  indeed  the
    Appellant had a learning disability that should have been apparent  for
    example from Dr Holt's report.  While she expressed concerns about  the
    Appellant's mental health, she  stated  there  was  no  evidence  of  a
    learning disability.  It was also  evident  from  the  evidence  of  an
    experienced educationist Ms Parnell that the  issue  of  the  Appellant
    suffering in some way from a cognitive disorder had been resolved.  The
    Appellant's solicitors had persisted with the claim that the  Appellant
    might be suffering from a learning disability because of his failure to
    answer questions about Afghanistan.  The  Judge's  conclusion  was  far
    simpler; the Appellant was unable to answer questions about Afghanistan
    because he was not from Afghanistan.  He had no learning disability  at
    all.  If the Appellant's representatives wished to advance the argument
    that the Judge had taken a point against the Appellant  not  raised  at
    the hearing that was decided on submissions it was incumbent  upon  the
    Appellant's representatives to provide some evidence that the Appellant
    really was suffering from a learning disability but beyond a concern by
    the  solicitors  no  such  evidence  has  been  provided.    In   those
    circumstances the conclusions of the Judge were open to him  and  there
    was no unfairness in the conduct of the proceedings.

35.  The final ground is that the Judge acted irrationally in rejecting  the
    Appellant's account of his age.  Although it is correct that the  Judge
    accepted the evidence contained  in  the  pro-forma  (supported  by  Ms
    Parnell) it was open to the Judge to state as he did at  paragraph  115
    that the argument over the  Appellant's  age  did  not  impact  to  any
    significant degree on the  asylum  claim  or  the  Appellant's  general
    credibility.  The difference between the age  assessment  conducted  by
    Kent Social Services and the Appellant's claimed age was only one  year
    and given that at all relevant times the Appellant  was  clearly  below
    the age of 15, it is difficult to see how much weight could  be  placed
    on a finding either that the Appellant was correct in what he  said  or
    he was not.  The argument as to the Appellant's age was something of  a
    red herring which distracted from the issues in  the  appeal.   As  the
    Judge put it at paragraph 115 the finding that he had just turned 15 as
    opposed to being  currently  13  "does  not  impact  adversely  on  the
    Appellant's general credibility".  That ground in short does  not  take
    matters significantly further.

36.  The Judge gave very careful consideration to  the  relevant  issues  in
    this case but the case was never going to be entirely straight  forward
    given that the account which the  Appellant  was  now  putting  forward
    differed significantly from the one which he had given in interview  to
    the Respondent. In those circumstances it was the task of the Judge  to
    analyse the evidence which he did scrupulously fairly bearing  in  mind
    both the effect  of  age  on  an  assessment  of  credibility  and  the
    Tribunal's duty under section 55. The Judge gave cogent reasons for the
    conclusions that he arrived at which were open to him on  the  evidence
    before him.  Subsequent events have borne out that the Judge was  quite
    right in the approach that he adopted towards the hearing.  I find that
    there is no material error of law in this determination and  I  dismiss
    the Appellant's appeal against it and uphold the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold it.  I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed this   28th  day of July  2014


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

