
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09477/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 12 November 2014                          |On 17 November 2014           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                    MS ES
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Nason, Solicitor instructed by Luqmani Thompson
&
     Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Nicholas Paul) which in a determination promulgated on  7  March
    2014 dismissed the appellant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's
    decision to refuse her international protection.  A claim under Article
    8 was also dismissed.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    on 9 July 2014.  There are five separate grounds  of  appeal,  but  for
    reasons that will become apparent a number of them  overlap  with  each
    other.

 3. The first ground of appeal was that there was a procedural impropriety,
    in that a number of submissions allegedly made by  the  respondent  and
    recorded in the determination were not in fact  made.   Mr  Nason,  who
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and appeared before  us  today,
    relies on the case of MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan  [2014]  UKUT  00105
    which sets out the principle that:

         "Where there is a defect or impropriety of a procedural  nature  in
         the proceedings at first instance, this may amount  to  a  material
         error of law requiring the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the
         "FtT") to be set aside."

 4. In support of that ground of appeal there was exhibited to the  grounds
    a  note  of  the  appellant's  cross-examination  and  a  note  of  the
    submissions made by the Presenting Officer on behalf of the  respondent
    (a Mr Page). The notes were taken by  Mr  Nason  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal in  manuscript,  and  have  been
    typed up.  It was suggested in the grounds that a comparison should  be
    made between those notes and the Tribunal's record of the  proceedings.
    The First-tier Tribunal Judge was asked to provide  the  record,  which
    was also typed up. The typed up record is entirely consistent with  the
    notes taken by the appellant's solicitor both in terms of  its  content
    and as regards the (short) number of the questions that were  asked  in
    cross-examination. There is also a consistency between the  record  and
    the notes in relation to the submissions that  are  recorded  as  being
    made by the parties on both sides.

 5. However a number of submissions,  itemised  in  paragraph  1.4  of  the
    grounds of appeal, which are attributed to the  presenting  officer  in
    the determination, appear neither in Mr Nason's notes nor in the record
    kept by the Tribunal.  These include a submission recorded in paragraph
    25 of the determination:

         "Ms Page [(sic)- in fact it was Mr Page] made the point in  passing
         that neither of the  two  witnesses  had  at  any  stage  in  their
         demeanour or in their explanations conveyed any real sense of  what
         must have  been  the  tragic  loss  given  the  disappearance  (and
         presumably murder) of the family members"

     Likewise, in paragraph 26:

         "....the account which it was submitted was manifestly absurd as to
         how a complete stranger at a church had taken her  under  her  wing
         and then brought her to the UK..."

     Later in that paragraph the respondent is said to have  submitted  that
    "the fact that (Mama Anna) had not been called to  give  evidence"  was
    also damaging to the appellant's case.

 6. On the basis of the absence of any record of those submissions and  the
    others referred to in paragraph 1.4 of the grounds of appeal, Mr  Nason
    submitted that there was a material error of the type  referred  to  in
    MM.

 7. Until the hearing today, Mr Nason had not had the benefit of  seeing  a
    note on the Tribunal file which had been  prepared  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in response to the appellant's solicitor's letter of  15
    August 2014 which had raised these concerns.  He  says,  amongst  other
    things, "my record of the submissions is reasonably  accurate  but  was
    also based on my recollection as I drafted the judgment within 24 hours
    of hearing the case".  He also stated that  "both  parties  highlighted
    credibility as a central issue".  Given that the  judge  says  that  he
    drafted the decision within 24 hours,  and  thus  whilst  matters  were
    still fresh in his mind, it is of course possible  that  he  remembered
    additional submissions that were not recorded in his own notes, or  the
    way in which Mr Page had developed the basic points which were recorded
    in the Tribunal's own record, and which were compared with the notes of
    the solicitor.

 8. We are concerned that a serious allegation that the Tribunal has  erred
    to the extent of making up submissions which were not in fact  made  to
    it has been raised on appeal in the absence of any clear evidence  that
    that is what had happened.  At the very least we would have expected to
    see a witness statement  from  those  who  were  present  at  the  time
    attesting to the fact that the respondent's representative, Mr Page did
    not make those submissions. The matter could then have been put  to  Mr
    Page for him to confirm or deny. However the highest that Mr Nason  was
    able to put it is that those submissions do not appear  in  his  notes;
    but we cannot draw the inference that the submissions were  never  made
    merely from the absence of a record that they were. It is possible that
    both the Tribunal's notes and the notes of submissions made by Mr Nason
    are not as full as they might have been. There is insufficient evidence
    before us to say that  the  judge's  recollection  that  he  wrote  the
    determination within 24 hours and that he had a recollection  of  those
    submissions being made to  him  is  to  be  disbelieved  and  rejected.
    Accordingly there is an insufficient basis for us to  find  that  there
    was a material error of law on that ground.

 9. However, having said that, we then have to look at  the  findings  that
    were made by  the  Tribunal,  which  brings  us  to  grounds  2  to  4.
    Essentially, it is submitted by Mr Nason that there was  a  failure  by
    the Tribunal to afford anxious scrutiny to the case such as  to  amount
    to an error of law in accordance with the  case  of  ML  (Nigeria).   A
    number of points are highlighted in ground 2 but perhaps the  strongest
    of these is the fact that in the conclusions in  paragraph  30  of  the
    determination the First-tier Tribunal says that "the appellant's  claim
    appears to be at its highest that  rogue  soldiers  have  attacked  her
    house and then taken her and her family into  custody".   As  Mr  Nason
    pointed out this was not the appellant's case  taken  at  its  highest.
    There was a detailed skeleton argument and submissions were made to the
    Tribunal which made  it  clear  that  her  claim  was  based  upon  the
    allegation that her father was a journalist  who  wrote  at  least  one
    article which was highly critical of the government  in  the  DRC,  and
    that as a result of that and of  his  political  affiliations  with  an
    opposition group he and  his  family  (including  the  appellant)  were
    kidnapped and ultimately many members  of  the  family,  including  the
    father, simply disappeared.  That was the case which was being  put  in
    terms of a claim for humanitarian protection and asylum, and  that  was
    the case which the Tribunal had to decide.

10. Mr Duffy, who appeared before us (but did not of course appear below on
    behalf of the respondent) made the fair point that the essence of  what
    the judge was saying in paragraph 30  of  the  determination  was  that
    because he rejected the evidence given in relation to  the  appellant's
    father (which is what he went on to say), then the appellant's claim at
    its highest was that rogue soldiers  had  attacked  her/her  house.  In
    other words, the judge's characterisation  of  the  claim  put  at  its
    highest must be read in the light of the rejection  of  that  evidence.
    However, even if that is what the  judge  meant,  we  cannot  be  sure,
    because that is not really the way  in  which  paragraph  30  naturally
    reads.  The remark about the appellant's claim appearing to be  at  its
    highest that rogue soldiers had attacked her/her house and  then  taken
    her and her family into custody comes  before  any  evaluation  of  the
    evidence about her father. It is only after he  has  characterised  her
    claim put at its highest that the judge goes on to say "even if that is
    true there is no evidence to link the appellant specifically  with  any
    risk of political persecution".  Mr Duffy's point would  have  had  far
    more force if the judge had dealt with these  matters  in  the  reverse
    order.

11.  That  is  simply  one  of  a  number  of  cogent  criticisms  of   the
    determination that have been made under the ground  that  there  was  a
    failure to afford anxious scrutiny.  Some are stronger than others  but
    when that particular ground of appeal is evaluated in conjunction  with
    the remaining criticisms in paragraphs  3  and  4  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal, it is clear that this determination simply cannot stand.

12. Grounds 3 and 4 focus on  a  lack  of  adequate  reasoning  for  making
    adverse credibility findings against the appellant  and  a  failure  to
    give her a proper opportunity to answer the  points  made  against  her
    before making such  findings.   Criticism  is  made  in  particular  of
    paragraphs 31 and 32 of the determination which are singularly  lacking
    in reasoning to support the judge's conclusions. Ground 4, a failure to
    put adverse credibility findings or the basis for them to the appellant
    in cross-examination, is even stronger.  We have  already  referred  to
    the fact that the cross-examination as recorded both  by  the  Tribunal
    and by the appellant's solicitor is quite  short.  In  fact,  when  one
    looks at it, it consists of no more than a handful of questions,  about
    fifteen, ending with questions about the reasons why  the  arrest  took
    place. Having being questioned about the soldiers,  there  was  nothing
    put to the appellant about what happened to her after she was  arrested
    or about how she came to meet the lady called Mama Anna  who  she  says
    helped to smuggle her into the UK using her daughter's passport.

13. If there was going to be an attack on the appellant's credibility based
    upon the whole of her account of how she came to the UK and  about  her
    treatment at the hands of the soldiers and how she came to escape  from
    them, fairness dictates that it should have been put to her  in  cross-
    examination.  It is not sufficient that the  reasons  for  disbelieving
    her account were given by the Secretary of State  when  her  claim  was
    initially refused, because thereafter  she  produced  detailed  witness
    statements in which she addressed the adverse credibility findings made
    by the Secretary of State. If those explanations were not going  to  be
    accepted, we would have expected the matter to have  been  put  by  the
    presenting officer to the appellant fairly and squarely when  she  gave
    her evidence in the witness box.  That procedural  unfairness,  coupled
    with the lack of proper or adequate reasoning for  not  believing  her,
    seems to us to fatally undermine this determination in  terms  both  of
    its content and its fairness.

14. We should record that Mr Duffy was very realistic  in  his  submissions
    before us this morning. Although he  could  point  to  aspects  of  the
    determination which could be upheld, he did not  feel  it  possible  to
    argue that there was no material error of law in the determination.  He
    is to be  commended  for  taking  that  entirely  realistic  stance  in
    relation to a determination which in our judgment is simply  so  flawed
    that it cannot be allowed to stand.

15. There was a final point which relates to  the  claim  under  Article  8
    ECHR.   We are less persuaded by that. However, if this matter is going
    to have to go back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  re-hearing,  as  we
    find it must, then it is appropriate that all matters be left open.

Decision

16. For the reasons given above, we find that there were material errors of
    law in the determination in the respects alleged in grounds 2, 3 and  4
    of the grounds of appeal. We will quash the determination and remit the
    matter to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-hearing  on  all  grounds
    previously raised before it by the appellant, including Article 8.



Signed   Date 17 November 2014

Mrs Justice Andrews



Anonymity

We make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant on the basis of serious harm arising from  the  facts
of her protection claim.


