
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09837/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd August 2016                            |On 5th August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                               MRS KIDST FITWI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     P Turner (instructed by Lei Dat & Baig, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission  by  the
    Appellant  against  a  judgment  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,   Judge
    O'Donnell, promulgated on 26th November 2015 in which he dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    her asylum claim.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Eritrea born on 15th  January  1990.  She
    left Eritrea with her parents when aged three, moving to  Ethiopia  for
    her father's employment. In 1998 her parents returned  to  Eritrea  and
    she travelled to Sudan. She was employed, she  claims,  as  a  domestic
    servant in Sudan. She claimed to  have  been  sexually  abused  by  her
    employer and became pregnant by him after being  raped.  She  was  then
    dismissed by his wife. She sought refuge in a church where she met  her
    future husband.

 3. Her husband  visited  his  mother  in  Ethiopia  in  2014,  taking  the
    Appellant's daughter with him. However, he  was  arrested  and  wrongly
    accused of being a supporter of the OLF. He remains in prison  and  her
    daughter remains in Ethiopia with his mother.

 4. After her husband was arrested the Appellant decided to leave Sudan and
    she came to the UK via Egypt, Greece and France and claimed asylum. Her
    asylum claim was based on her religion as a Pentecostal  Christian  and
    her imputed political opinion.

 5. The Judge noted that her nationality was accepted. He accepted that she
    had been born in Eritrea and left  at  the  age  of  three,  moving  to
    Ethiopia.

 6. The Judge did not accept the core of her asylum account  on  the  basis
    that her own and the evidence of her witness was unreliable. He did not
    accept that she is a Pentecostal Christian or that she would be at risk
    on return to Eritrea due to her religion or imputed political  opinion.
    Based on the Judge's adverse credibility findings he had to assess  the
    Appellant's risk on return to Eritrea on the only basis  left  to  her,
    namely that she was of an age where she would be  liable  for  military
    service. The Judge accepted that she would be unable to prove that  she
    was a married woman or that she had a child. However, she had not  left
    Eritrea illegally and was not, nor would  she  be  viewed  as  a  draft
    evader, having left at the age of three. He concluded on the  basis  of
    the country information and country guidance that  the  requirement  to
    perform national service, even endless national service, in Eritrea  as
    a single woman did not entitle her to international  protection  as  it
    does not amount to persecution or inhuman or degrading treatment.

 7. The grounds seeking permission  to  appeal  do  not  to  challenge  the
    factual findings; rather they challenge  the  Judge's  conclusion  that
    being required to perform endless national service does not in  and  of
    itself represent a risk that entitles her to  protection.  The  grounds
    refer to the fact that the country  information  and  country  guidance
    cases were tainted by the Danish fact-finding mission report which  has
    been heavily criticised.

 8. Whilst I accept the Danish  report  has  been  heavily  criticised  and
    indeed tends not to be relied upon by Judges in such cases,  that  does
    not mean that either case law or the country information indicates that
    military service, even endless military service, in Eritrea is  in  and
    of  itself  persecutory  or  inhuman  or   degrading   treatment.   The
    Appellant's representative's arguments are therefore misconceived.  Had
    she exited illegally when of draft age she would have been perceived as
    a draft evader and that would entitle her to international  protection.
    However, none of those apply in this case.  Mr  Turner  was  unable  to
    refer me to any country guidance case law that would entitle me to find
    that the requirement to  perform  military  service,  absent  any  risk
    factors, would entitle her to succeed.

 9. Accordingly I find the First-tier Tribunal  did not make  an  error  of
    law  material to the outcome and the decision is upheld.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

There has been no application for an anonymity order and I do not make one




Signed                              Date 4th August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin






