

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal number: AA/09384/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |                            |
|On March 31, 2014                    |Determination Sent          |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                           mr nigel tinashe mbohwa
                          (no anonymity direction)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bhanji, Counsel, instructed by Kesar & Co
      Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Norton (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born April 15, 1992 is a citizen of Zimbabwe. On  August
    28, 2013 the appellant claimed asylum.   The  respondent  refused  this
    application on September 27, 2013 and took a decision to remove him the
    same day.

 2. On October 11, 2013 he appealed under section 82(1) of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act.

 3. The appellant's appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Clarke (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on January 22, 2014  and
    in a determination promulgated on January 27, 2014  she  dismissed  his
    appeal for asylum, humanitarian protection and under ECHR legislation.

 4. The appellant appealed on February 6, 2014. Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Parkes  on  February  21,
    2014. He found it arguable there was no  analysis  of  the  appellant's
    mother's evidence and no reason had been given for rejecting the  same.
    Permission to appeal was given on  all  grounds.  A  standard  Rule  24
    letter was filed by the respondent, dated March 5, 2014,  opposing  the
    grant of permission but this added nothing to the overall picture.

 5. The matter was listed before me on the above date.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. Mr Bhanji submitted:-


     a. The primary and first ground of appeal was a failure by the FtTJ to
        assess her evidence. There was no evidence that  her  evidence  had
        been challenged but the FtTJ failed to assess her evidence or  give
        reasons why her evidence should not  carry  any  weight.  The  FtTJ
        should have considered  her  evidence  especially  as  it  provided
        support for the appellant's claim. This ground displayed  an  error
        in law.


     b. At paragraph [27]  the  FtTJ  erred  by  making  reference  to  the
        appellant's failure to provide corroborative  evidence.  In  asylum
        appeals there was no requirement to provide corroborative  evidence
        and again the FtTJ erred.

     c. The FtTJ's approach to plausibility was flawed as it  accepted  the
        respondent's own assessment of how long a person can  last  without
        water rather than assessing the plausibility of his whole  account.
        This amounted to a error in law.

     d. The FtTJ did not challenge the appellant's mother about her trip to
        Zimbabwe in 2011 and consequently it was not open to him  to  raise
        credibility about her motive. Additionally, the original  statement
        and interview were without the benefit of legal advice of what  was
        important and therefore no adverse finding should  be  attached  to
        the fact that in his most recent statement he mentioned Tendai Bitt
        whereas prior to this statement he had not.  There was no  evidence
        to support the finding that the  appellant  had  found  it  in  the
        background material and whilst the FtTJ was entitled to  say  there
        was an inconsistency she should not where the evidence had not been
        tested.

 7. Mr Norton submitted:


     a. As regards ground one the FtTJ was fully aware of  the  appellant's
        mother's evidence but as she rejected the appellant's  account  and
        gave detailed reasons for rejecting the same she  was  entitled  to
        reject the mother's evidence without making findings.

     b. As regards ground two the FtTJ was not  looking  for  corroboration
        because she believed nothing about the appellant's account.

     c. With regard to ground  three  the  FtTJ  had  to  decide  what  she
        believed and what she rejected and set  out  in  her  determination
        what she accepted or rejected.

     d. With regard to ground four the FtTJ was entitled  to  make  adverse
        findings about the appellant's failure to mention  Tendai  Bitt  in
        his original statement and interview and  this  ground  is  nothing
        more than a mere disagreement.

     e. The appeal should be rejected.


 8. I reserved my decision.

    FINDING ON ERROR OF LAW

 9. Permission to appeal had been given and in considering the  application
    I have had regard to the file of papers, the FtTJ's determination,  the
    grounds of appeal and the permission itself.

10. The appellant raised a number of grounds of appeal and whilst there are
    similarities in some of the  grounds  I  have  considered  each  ground
    separately.

11. The first ground centred on the  FtTJ's  approach  to  the  appellant's
    mother's evidence. In oral submissions Mr Bhanji submitted  that  there
    had been no questions put  to  the  witness  at  the  hearing  and  her
    evidence was unchallenged. He submitted the FtTJ should have dealt with
    the evidence in her determination.  In  assessing  this  ground  it  is
    important to consider the determination and what the appellant's mother
    actually stated in her evidence. Her statement  was  contained  in  the
    appellant's bundle and is dated January 11, 2014  (eleven  days  before
    the hearing).

12. The FtTJ considered the appellant's claim and made findings on the core
    part of the claim between paragraphs [21] and [29]. The  FtTJ  recorded
    the appellant's mother gave evidence (paragraph [13]).


13. In assessing whether there has been an  error  in  law  on  this  first
    ground I have taken into  account  that  the  appellant's  mother  left
    Zimbabwe in 2001 and only returned for visits during this  period.  The
    appellant's  mother's  evidence  added  nothing  to  the  core  of  the
    appellant's claim and she had confirmed that the appellant's father had
    been a Zanu PF MP.

14. The FtTJ had an opportunity to consider the appellant's account and the
    only area where the appellant's mother's account assisted the appellant
    was on the issue of how much contact her son had with  his  father  and
    therefore his knowledge about his father. However, she was out  of  the
    country during the relevant period and  I  am  satisfied  that  she  is
    wholly reliant on what the appellant told her. The  FtTJ  rejected  his
    account and in those circumstances the mother's limited evidence  would
    not have assisted the appellant or the FtTJ and consequently  there  is
    no error of law on ground one.

15. Mr Bhanju submitted that the FtTJ's finding in paragraph [27]  amounted
    to a requirement for corroboration. I accept a person  claiming  asylum
    does not need to provide corroboration but I have  had  regard  to  the
    following authorities as they provide  guidance  on  the  relevance  of
    evidence:-

     a. In I v Sweden Application no 6129-04/09  ECtHR  it  was  held  that
        although it was frequently necessary to give  an  asylum  applicant
        the benefit of the  doubt,  where  there  were  strong  reasons  to
        question  veracity  the  individual  was  required  to  provide   a
        satisfactory explanation. In this case the appellant had failed  to
        present any documents or information as evidence in support of  his
        alleged 12 years of journalistic activities which he relied on  and
        the court accepted that he had failed to show it was plausible that
        he faced a real risk  of  ill-treatment  on  return  to  Russia  in
        consequence.

     b. In TK (Burundi) v SSHD (2009) EWCA Civ 40 the Court of Appeal  said
        that where there were circumstances in which evidence corroborating
        the appellant's evidence was easily obtainable, the  lack  of  such
        evidence must affect the assessment of the appellant's credibility.
         It followed that where a judge in assessing credibility relied  on
        the fact that there was no independent  supporting  evidence  where
        there should be and there was no credible account for its  absence,
        he committed no error of law  when  he  relied  on  that  fact  for
        rejecting the account of the appellant.

     c. In Gedow, Abdulkadir  and  Mohammed  v  SSHD  2006  EWCA  1342  the
        Immigration Judge noted that the Somali appellant claimed  that  an
        uncle had funded his journey and the Immigration Judge referred  to
        "the absence of any corroborative evidence by letter or  any  other
        means from his paternal uncle".  The Court of Appeal said  a  judge
        was entitled to draw a conclusion from the absence of corroboration
        as long as he bore in mind the difficulties faced by asylum seekers
        in producing corroborative evidence.

16. The appellant had not produced anything to support  his  claim  and  in
    light of what he was claiming it  would  not  have  been  difficult  to
    produce something.  Merely  stating  the  appellant  had  not  produced
    anything was not placing an onus on the appellant  to  corroborate  his
    claim. I therefore do not find that the FtTJ erred in paragraph [27] of
    his determination.

17. With regard to the third ground the FtTJ assessed the evidence and made
    findings on what she felt was plausible or credible. Her  findings  are
    supported with reasons and evidence. No error is disclosed on the third
    ground.

18. The final ground  related  to  the  adverse  findings  made  about  the
    appellant's evidence. The fact the appellant was unrepresented when  he
    gave his first statement or at interview does not  mean  the  FtTJ  was
    unable to make an adverse finding on evidence that was introduced at  a
    later stage. In this case the FtTJ made numerous adverse findings  with
    reasons and no error of law is disclosed.

    Decision

19. There is no material error of  law  and  the  original  decision  shall
    stand.

20. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    request for anonymity has been and no order is made.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award in light of my findings.

Signed:                                 Dated:



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
