
IAC-FH-AR-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09401/2013


                            THE IMNIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 30 April 2015                             |On 14 May 2015                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        THE HON. MRS JUSTICE MCGOWAN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                   m f m z
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Seehra, instructed by Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   We have set out the parties above as they were  before  the  First-tier
    Judge although the appellant before us was the Secretary of  State,  as
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appellant's appeal. We  shall
    continue to refer to them as they were before the First-tier Judge.

2.   That appeal was against a decision of 27 September 2013 to  remove  the
    appellant from the United Kingdom by way of directions.    As  we  say,
    the judge allowed the appeal.  The material issue in that case was  the
    appellant's claim that, having initially come to the United Kingdom  in
    August 2010,  he  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  on  31  December  2011  and
    thereafter returned to  the  United  Kingdom  on  11  August  2013.   A
    significant part of his claim was with regard to the arrest,  detention
    and ill-treatment that he claimed to have experienced during the course
    of his time in Sri Lanka between 31 December 2011 and 11  August  2013.
    The judge considered evidence in this regard and with regard  to  other
    aspects of the appellant's claim, including letters  from  lawyers,  he
    specifically accepted that he did return to Sri Lanka in December  2011
    in the belief that it was safe to do so, that he was arrested, detained
    and ill-treated as he claimed and that he breached his bail  conditions
    by leaving Sri Lanka and that an open arrest warrant  was  then  issued
    against him.  He was found to be at risk on return and the  appeal  was
    allowed.

3.   Subsequently the Secretary of State sought and was  granted  permission
    to appeal against that decision on the basis that it was arguable  that
    inadequate reasons were given for finding the  appellant  credible  and
    the documentation produced by him reliable.  There was a hearing before
    a panel of the Upper Tribunal which set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Judge and remitted the appeal for redetermination  in  the  First-
    tier.  However, that decision was set aside pursuant to Rule 43 of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)   Rules   2008   in   that   the
    determination had been  promulgated without one  member  of  the  panel
    approving  the draft as a consequence of administrative oversight.

4.   The appeal was listed for hearing on 21 January 2015.    On  that  date
    the respondent withdrew the underlying decision which gave rise to  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that evidence  had  come
    to light demonstrating that the appellant had not returned to Sri Lanka
    on 31 December 2011.  The hearing was adjourned to 20 February 2015  to
    enable the relevant evidence to be provided and for  those  parties  to
    prepare submissions and skeleton arguments as to how the matter  should
    proceed.

5.   At the hearing on 20 February 2015 the matter was further adjourned  to
    enable submissions to be made as to the applicability of Rule 15(2A) of
    the Tribunal Procedure) Rules.  Thus the matter came before  us  on  30
    April.

Submissions

6.   Ms  Seehra  relied  on  and  developed  points  made  in  her  skeleton
    arguments, particularly the more recent skeleton argument.  She  argued
    that it was an over- simplification to  say  that  the  respondent  was
    relying on a mistake of fact.  The  respondent  sought  to  adduce  new
    evidence i.e.  a  photocopy  of  a  full  UK  driving  licence  in  the
    appellant's name and an issue date of 18 April 2012.  On behalf of  the
    respondent it was argued  that  the  issue  date  and  the  outcome  of
    telephone enquiries which confirmed that the  DVLA  were  taking  three
    weeks to process the issue of a driving licence, were inconsistent with
    the appellant's claimed returned to Sri Lanka on 31 December 2011.   Ms
    Seehra argued that the respondent's attempt to admit the  new  evidence
    was not in a true sense a case of  a  mistake  of  fact.   The  driving
    licence did not confirm that the  appellant  had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom when it was issued.  The driving licence showed it  was  issued
    on a certain date but the only real evidence in relation  to  when  the
    application was made was to be found in the recent  statement  provided
    by the appellant.  The matter had not been confirmed by the DVLA.   The
    licence did not establish that the appellant  had,  as  the  respondent
    claimed, never left the United Kingdom, and did not show it was  issued
    to him at any time or when the application was made.

7.   Ms Seehra did not accept that it  was  reasonable  to  infer  that  the
    appellant had put in the claim for the licence within a reasonable time
    of the date of issue.  For that to be made out there would need  to  be
    further evidence and the evidence thus far was neutral as to  when  the
    application was made.  The First-tier Judge could not properly draw any
    inference from when the application was made from the date of issue, as
    that did not show when the application had been made and it  could  not
    be inferred that it was reasonable to accept that the  application  had
    been made within a reasonable period of time proximate to the  date  of
    issue.  As to whether it was therefore irrelevant whether  the  licence
    was admitted or  not, Ms Seehra argued that as  the  respondent  sought
    its submission as evidence of the appellant not returning to Sri  Lanka
    and not just to show that it was a driving  licence.  She  referred  to
    paragraph 12 of her supplementary skeleton argument  and  the  examples
    given there quoting from paragraph 29 of R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ  982.
     She placed particular reliance on R v CICB ex parte A [1999] 2AC  330,
    but noted that the facts there were very different.   It  was  not  the
    same category of case as the instant one.  Also relevant was  what  had
    been said by the Court of Appeal in Shaheen [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1294  at
    paragraphs 27 to 29 about this issue, including the comment in  respect
    of the authority relied on by the respondent in Cabo Verde [2004]  EWCA
    Civ 1726 which,  it was  said,  would  be  appropriate  to  revisit  an
    appropriate occasion.

8.   The Secretary of State had had the driving licence for  some  time  and
    at least  three  Presenting  Officers  had  not  considered  it  to  be
    significant.  It was clearly contentious, bearing in mind the  criteria
    in E & R [2004] EWCA Civ 49 and it was not objectively verifiable.   It
    was the case that the existence of the driving licence and the date  of
    issue were uncontentious but the inference that the  respondent  sought
    to have drawn from this was not.  The admissibility of the document was
    disputed because of the underlying purpose behind and driving it.

9.   As regards the third element in E & R, the question of whether  or  not
    the person was not responsible for  the  mistake,  this  was  mandatory
    language and the respondent clearly fell foul of  this.    The  reasons
    for this were set out at paragraphs 4 to 6 of the skeleton, noting that
    the matter had not been relied on at the original  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Judge, nor at the first hearing before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    where the outcome was subsequently set aside, but only  in  20  January
    2015.

10.  On the point of materiality, the judge had had  a  lot  of  documentary
    evidence before him, and this could not  be  looked  at  in  isolation.
    There had been  oral  and  documentary  evidence  including  court  and
    business documents.  The evidence the  respondent  sought  to  rely  on
    would not have played a material part and for the evidence  not  to  be
    admitted had to give rise to unfairness.  The respondent had  not  been
    denied a fair hearing.  The decision of the Upper Tribunal in MN [2014]
    UKUT 00105 (IAC)  was  very  different  as  was  the  CICB  case.   The
    respondent had not been denied the opportunity to produce evidence  and
    was seeking  a  second  bite  of  the  cherry.   Verde  could  also  be
    distinguished on the basis that the respondent had not  had the  police
    allegation until after the hearing had taken place before the  IAT  and
    the evidence post dated the hearing and was of a  completely  different
    nature.  Verde was in any event not a case of mistake of fact but  more
    a Ladd v Marshall [1954] 1WLR 1489  situation.  As  had  been  said  in
    Shaheen at paragraph 28, there was a risk of opening appeals out  where
    further evidence was  found  and  attempts  to  challenge  the  factual
    conclusions which would lead to the  flood  gates  being  opened.   She
    referred to the fact that in  addition  to  the  appellant's  statement
    there was a lawyer's letter attached to it.

11.  It was accepted that the appeal was not concluded  in  the  sense  that
    the final decision had not  yet  been  reached.   There  was  a  public
    interest in finality. This was not a  case  for  relaxing  the  Ladd  v
    Marshal criteria.

12.  As regards Rule 15(2A), it  was  unclear  on  its  wording  whether  it
    referred to admission of evidence at the error  of  law  state  or  the
    stage of the remaking of the decision.  Ms Seehra thought the  practice
    directions said  it  could  be  either  and  the  point  was  that  the
    application had to be made but the Rule was subject to the error of law
    test and admissibility requirements.

13.  In his  submissions  Mr  Walker  said  the  driving  licence  had  been
    submitted when the appellant made his first asylum application  and  it
    was only when he had prepared the case for the 20 January hearing  that
    he had found the reference to the licence and a copy of  it  which  had
    indicated that in April 2012 the appellant was in the  United  Kingdom.
    This was a reasonable inference though there was no evidence as to  how
    long applications would have  taken  at  the  time.   He  accepted  his
    conversation with the DVLA was not evidence.

14.   As  regards  the  matter  remaining  contentious,  the  appellant  had
    submitted the documents and produced it willingly at the  time  and  it
    was contentious as he said that when he left in 2011 it was  for  good.
    If so it was open to question why he had a UK driving  licence.    This
    piece of evidence could  show or infer that he had not returned to  Sri
    Lanka and it would be unfair not to take it into account in fairness to
    the Secretary of State and the evidence needed to be tested.

15.  It did not appear that there could be any  costs  implications  in  the
    respondent's conduct in  this  case  since  the  new  regime  was  only
    applicable to claims which had been instituted after October 2014.  (We
    are grateful to Ms Seehra for this clarification).

16.  Mr Walker went on to argue that the point  was  not  material  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge as he had found the appellant to be  entirely
    credible and there was strong evidence  in  support.   If  the  driving
    licence and the evidence had been before the judge it would have been a
    fact in play as to whether the appellant was in the United  Kingdom  at
    the time when he claimed to have returned to Sri Lanka.

17.  As to the question whether the earlier  hearing  which  was  marred  by
    procedural irregularity was to be taken into account, that,  Mr  Walker
    argued, had to be considered not to have happened and the error of  law
    hearing had been the hearing on 20 January 2015.

18.  By way of reply, Ms  Seehra  was  able  to  assist  with  regard  to  a
    question we had about the reference at paragraph 20 in her skeleton  to
    "exceptional circumstances", which came from paragraph 91(iii) in  E  &
    R, as quoted at paragraph 18 in her skeleton argument.   The  statement
    by the appellant and by the lawyer were relevant  to  all  the  issues.
    She argued that the  point  about  exceptional  circumstances  was  not
    relaxed further by the Court of Appeal in JG at paragraph 9 when it was
    accepted that the Ladd v  Marshall  principles  was  irrelevant,  still
    where the court applied them more flexibly.

19.  We reserved our determination.

Discussion

20.  In deciding whether or not there is an error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision, argument has focused, as set out above, on the issue  of  the
    new evidence and whether the respondent should be allowed to  introduce
    it and what, if so, its implication are for the error of law issue.

21.  It seems logical to deal with the first matter  at  the  outset.   Rule
    15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 states  as
    follows:

         "(2A)    In an asylum case or an immigration case -

             (a)  if a party wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider evidence
                  that was  not before the First-tier Tribunal,  that  party
                  must send or deliver a notice to the  Upper  Tribunal  and
                  any other party -

                  (i)  indicating the nature of the evidence; and

                  (ii) explaining why it was not submitted to the First-tier
                      Tribunal; and

             (b)  when considering whether to admit evidence that  was  not
                  before the First-tier Tribunal, the  Upper  Tribunal  must
                  have regard to whether there has been  unreasonable  delay
                  in producing that evidence."

22.  Ms Seehra very fairly accepted in her supplementary  skeleton  argument
    addressing the point, that it is unclear from the wording of  paragraph
    15(2A) whether it applies to evidence which it is sought to  employ  at
    the error of law stage or is confined to the consideration of  evidence
    after an error of law has been identified.  Ms Seehra very fairly  also
    drew our attention to the Practice Direction, the terms  of  which  she
    did not have with her, but which she thought touched on the matter.  We
    have checked this and find that she is entirely correct.  Paragraph 4.2
    of the Practice Direction of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the Upper  Tribunal  in  the  context  of  Rule
    15(2A) states as follows:

         "4.2 A party who wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider any evidence
             that was not before the First-tier Tribunal must  indicate  in
             the notice whether the evidence is sought to be adduced:-

             (a)  In connection with the issue of  whether  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal made an error of law, requiring its  decision  to
                  be set aside; or

             (b)  In connection with the remaking of the  decision  by  the
                  Upper Tribunal, in the event of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                  being found to have made such an error."

23.  It is clear from the wording of the Practice  Statement  that  evidence
    may properly be considered at the error of law stage, although,  as  Ms
    Seehra points out at paragraph 23 of her  supplementary  skeleton,  the
    admission of such evidence is still subject to the principles to  which
    she refers  earlier in the skeleton, i.e. the points to  which  we  now
    come and whether the new evidence should be admitted in  light  of  the
    authorities, some of which we have referred to above, in particular E &
    R, R (Iran), Ladd v Marshall, Verde, MN, AG (Jamaica) [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    215 and Shaheen.

24.   In  his  skeleton  argument  Mr  Walker  makes  the  point  that   the
    appellant's driving licence was not considered by the  case  owner  who
    decided  the  asylum  application  and  its  significance  only  became
    apparent when he was preparing the case for the error of law hearing in
    January 2015.  Mr Walker goes on to argue, basing his argument  on  MN,
    that there has been a defect or impropriety of a procedural  nature  in
    the first instance proceedings in that the judge did  not  have  before
    him this evidence which is capable  of  showing  that  the  appellant's
    evidence that he returned to Sri Lanka was untrue.  He argues that  the
    evidence should be admitted as it reinforces the  respondent's  grounds
    of challenge to the First-tier Judge's decision  and  that  through  no
    fault of the judge he was not in possession of  all  the  evidence  and
    made a  material  error  as  to  the  availability  of  evidence  on  a
    particular matter.  Ms Seehra, as we have seen, argues that the case is
    not fours with any of the authorities and  that  the  Ladd  v  Marshall
    requirements, relatively flexibly though they may be applied to  public
    law cases as opposed to private  law  cases,  have  not  been  met  and
    accordingly the evidence should not be admitted, or if it is,  that  it
    does not go to show an error of law in the judge's decision.

25.  It is clear from E&R, and we take this  in  particular  from  paragraph
    66, that for a mistake of fact giving rise to unfairness to be  a  head
    of challenge in an appeal on a point of law, there must first have been
    a mistake as to an  existing  fact,  including  a  mistake  as  to  the
    availability of evidence on a particular matter; secondly the  fact  or
    evidence must  have  been  "established"  in  the  sense  that  it  was
    uncontentious and objectively verifiable, and, thirdly,  the  appellant
    or his advisors  must  not  have  been  responsible  for  the  mistake.
    Fourthly, the mistake must have  played  a  material  (not  necessarily
    decisive) part in the Tribunal's reasoning.

26.  Previously in Ladd  v  Marshall,  the  Court  of  Appeal  set  out  the
    principles upon which fresh evidence may be admitted and said that this
    would occur when:

         (i)  the evidence could not  have  been  obtained  with  reasonable
             diligence

         (ii) if given,  the  evidence  would  probably  have  an  important
             influence on the result of the case

         (iii)    the evidence must be such as presumably to be believed.

27.  It was accepted in JG, as it had been in E&R, that  there  was  a  need
    for some  flexibility  in  the  application  of  the  Ladd  v  Marshall
    principles, in asylum cases as referred to in E&R, and  in  public  law
    cases as referred to in JG.  The court went on in JG, however, to  make
    the point  that the Ladd v Marshall principles are still  relevant  and
    there must be a limit to the flexibility. In JG itself, the  respondent
    had always been in possession of the  fresh  evidence  upon  which  she
    wished to rely and  had  neither  deployed  it  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal nor the Upper Tribunal but only in  fact  a  week  before  the
    hearing in the Court of Appeal and the court considered that  that  was
    no  excuse  for  compliance  with  the  Rules  and   consequently   the
    application was refused.

28.  In Shaheen, the court reviewed  the  authorities  but  noted  that  the
    court had not purported to  set  out  a  precise  code  in  E  &  R  as
    expressing caution about the allowing of appeals on  fact  to  re-enter
    through a backdoor, as referred to at paragraph 26 in Shaheen.   Brooke
    LJ went on to say at paragraph 28:

         "We seem to be in danger,  in  this  area,  of  slipping  from  the
         identification of an uncontentious and objectively verifiable  fact
         such as the prior existence of  crucial  and  reliable  documentary
         evidence into a willingness to reopen  appeals  for  error  of  law
         merely because a witness had been subsequently found who could have
         made a witness statement challenging the factual  conclusions  that
         were reached by the original decision maker in  ignorance  of  such
         evidence."

29.  Earlier he had expressed the view that it would be  desirable  for  the
    court to revisit on an appropriate occasion  the  earlier  decision  in
    Cabo Verde where evidence had emerged subsequent to the decision of the
    IAT that the appellant who had been believed to have been severely ill-
    treated in Angola had in fact, it  seemed  on  the  evidence,  been  in
    Portugal at the relevant times.

30.  Essentially it is, as was said in E & R, a matter of  fairness.   There
    will be a point beyond which evidence cannot be adduced to go  to  show
    error in the decision of the lower court, bearing in mind the  criteria
    set out in the authorities which we have set out above. As regards  the
    applicability of the Ladd v Marshall criteria, we accept the point made
    by Ms Seehra that on a strict interpretation of  the  Ladd  v  Marshall
    principles the evidence would not be admitted.  The respondent had been
    aware of this piece of evidence since August 2013 and has not sought to
    rely upon it on several occasions.  It is, however, evidence that would
    probably have an  important  influence  on  the  result  of  the  case.
    Although, we accept, the evidence about the timing of applications  for
    driving licences and the issuing of licences is  slender,  nevertheless
    there is the fact of the licence and its date and that is  a  piece  of
    evidence that was not before the judge.  It  is  certainly  capable  of
    having a significant influence on the result of the case given that  it
    tends to show that the appellant was in the United Kingdom  at  a  time
    when he says  he  was  in  Sri  Lanka  and  suffered  significant  ill-
    treatment.  There is nothing to cause doubt as to  the  credibility  of
    the fact of the licence and we do not understand that to be a matter of
    dispute.  We bear in mind also on the one hand that the Ladd v Marshall
    principles are to be considered more flexibly in public law  cases  but
    also  the  stricture  in  JG  that  there  must  be  a  limit  to  that
    flexibility.  Clearly JG, on its facts, was  seen  as  going  too  far,
    although it can clearly be distinguished from the instant case in  that
    as noted above, it was only a week before the matter was heard  in  the
    Court of Appeal that the fresh evidence was produced as opposed to  the
    stage at which it appeared before the Upper  Tribunal  in  the  instant
    case.

31.  Moving on to the application of the  E&R  principles,  and  bearing  in
    mind that as Carnwath LJ said, he was not seeking to lay down a precise
    code, we consider that it is possible to characterise the situation  in
    this case as involving a  mistake  as  to  an  existing  fact  if  this
    evidence is to be accepted and certainly the evidence  of  the  licence
    itself must be said to be uncontentious and objectively verifiable.  We
    do not consider it would be quite right to say that the respondent  was
    responsible for the mistake.  She had the evidence and did not  realise
    the potential significance of it until January 2015 but that  does  not
    seem to us to be a matter of responsibility for a mistake.  It  is  the
    case that Cabo Verde remains a binding authority  on  us  although,  as
    noted above, it was thought in Shaheen that it would be desirable on an
    appropriate occasion to revisit it.  As was said  at  paragraph  18  in
    Cabo  Verde,  it  is  the  existence  of  the  allegations   that   was
    uncontentious and they were objectively verifiable, as opposed  to  the
    truth of the material to which they relate.  At paragraph 18 the  court
    went on to quote from  Carnwath  LJ  in  E&R  agreeing  with  the  lead
    judgment of May LJ and saying:

         "Whatever the precise limits of this court's  power  to  admit  new
         evidence in such cases as this, I have no doubt that we  should  do
         so where there is material which appears to show that  the  factual
         basis on which the Tribunal proceeded was, through no fault of  its
         own, simply wrong."

32.  Likewise in this case as in Cabo Verde, there is material  which  shows
    that the factual basis upon which the Tribunal proceeded  was,  through
    no fault of its own, simply wrong.  In that case it was the unawareness
    of the Tribunal  of  the  involvement  of  the  Portuguese  authorities
    investigating the affairs of Mr Cabo Verde.  In this  case  it  is  the
    unawareness of the First-tier Judge that the appellant had been  issued
    with a driving licence on 12 April 2012 when  it  could  be  reasonably
    inferred that the application which led to the issuing of that  licence
    was made at a time when the appellant claimed in fact to have  been  in
    Sri Lanka.  Accordingly we conclude that in the interests of  fairness,
    and again, agreeing with what was said at paragraph 19 in  Cabo  Verde,
    fairness to a proper and rational immigration policy, it  is  necessary
    for the full facts to be before a First-tier Judge so that they can  be
    addressed together with the evidence that was considered by  the  judge
    in this case.

33.  Accordingly we have concluded that there is an error of fact  amounting
    to  an  error  of  law  in  this  case,  and  we  therefore  allow  the
    respondent's appeal against the First-tier  Judge's  decision,  and  we
    direct that the matter be reheard de novo before a First-tier Judge  at
    Taylor House.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

