
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09899/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 10th February 2016                         | On 22nd February 2016        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between


                                     S N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Lawrence of Counsel, instructed by Sriharans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, HOPO

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge  Rimington
    made following a hearing at Taylor House on 12th February 2015.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  5th  March  1980.   Her
    immigration history is as follows.  She came to the  UK  on  27th  June
    2006 as a student and her visa  was  extended,  ultimately  until  31st
    December 2010.  Her subsequent application was rejected and she  became
    appeal rights exhausted on 25th June 2012.  A further  application  for
    leave to remain on Article 8 grounds was refused on 27th July 2012.  On
    10th July 2014 she claimed asylum which was  refused  on  31st  October
    2014 and it is this decision which was the subject of the appeal before
    the Immigration Judge.

 3. The basis of the appellant's claim was twofold. First, that she  was  a
    Christian and feared a return to Pakistan on the basis of her  religion
    and second, that, as she had had a child out of  wedlock,  her  brother
    would kill her and society would reject  her.  The  judge  applied  the
    current case law of AK and SK (Christians:  risk)  Pakistan  CG  [2014]
    UKUT 00569 and concluded that she would not be at risk  on  grounds  of
    her religion.  There is no challenge to that aspect of her decision  in
    the grounds.

 4. The judge rejected the appellant's evidence in relation to her  family,
    and in particular she was not satisfied that the  family  had  rejected
    her or that she was at risk  of  an  honour  killing  on  return.   She
    concluded that she would be able to find support from  her  family  and
    would not be returning  to  Pakistan  as  a  lone  single  woman.   She
    considered that the best interests of the child would be to remain with
    his mother.  He is a Pakistani citizen and would be  returning  to  his
    country of nationality where he would be able to  access  medical  care
    and educational facilities.  On that basis she dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to make a finding on whether the appellant was  at  risk  of
    persecution as a single mother in Pakistan.  The  judge  had  correctly
    summarised the grounds of appeal at paragraph 32 of  the  determination
    but had failed to deal with one of them.

 6. Second, she had not conducted a proper analysis of the  best  interests
    of the child, failing to take into account the impact on him of  social
    stigma associated with single mothers in Pakistan.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Brunnen on 9th April 2015.

Submissions

 8. Mr Lawrence relied on his grounds and initially sought to amplify  them
    by challenging the judge's credibility findings.

 9. Mrs Pettersen defended the determination  which  she  said  was  wholly
    sustainable.

Findings and Conclusions

10. This is a  careful  well-drafted  determination.   The  judge  properly
    outlined the evidence both that which was in favour  of  the  appellant
    and that against her and came to clear sustainable conclusions.

11. In relation to ground 1, the judge rejected the appellant's account  of
    being ostracised or worse by  her  family  because  she  was  a  single
    mother.  There is no challenge to her reasoning in  the  grounds.   She
    was plainly aware that it is the appellant's case that she would be  at
    risk on return as a consequence of having had a child outside marriage.
    The reference at paragraph 57 to "lone  single  woman"  as  opposed  to
    "lone single mother" is wholly immaterial.

12. In any event, this is not a challenge which could ever have  succeeded.
    In SM/(lone women - ostracism) Pakistan [2016] UKUT  00067  the  Upper
    Tribunal held that, where there is a risk  of  persecution  or  serious
    harm in her home area for a single woman or a female head of household,
    there may be an internal relocation option to one of Pakistan's  larger
    cities, depending on the family, social and  educational  situation  of
    the woman in question.  SM considered the issue of  single  mothers  as
    well as single women and held that where  ostracisation  has  occurred,
    the question of internal relocation and whether it is unduly harsh will
    be a question of fact in each case.

13. In this case the judge came to the decision, plainly open to her on the
    evidence, that there was no  such  risk  of  harm  in  her  home  area.
    However even if there was, the judge was clearly entitled to find  that
    the appellant is a mature woman of 35 years of age, well  educated  and
    with work experience in the UK, and accordingly in a position  to  live
    elsewhere in Pakistan.

14. The judge's consideration of the best interests of the child was clear,
    detailed and legally unassailable.

Decision

15. The original judge did not err  in  law.   The  decision  stands.   The
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


