
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09864/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2017                            |On 31 January 2017            |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                    DMPT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Blair of Counsel, instructed by Switalskis
(Huddersfield)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

 1. The appellant is a  female  citizen  of  Congo-Brazzaville  born  on  3
    September 1984.  The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision of the respondent dated 23 June 2015 to  refuse  the
    appellant's asylum claim.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated  on  7
    November 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human  rights
    grounds.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission.  The grounds of  appeal  are  as
    follows:

 1) Failure to consider relevant factors/evidence in respect of the medical
    report when assessing credibility;

 2) failure to take material evidence into account;

 3) taking into consideration irrelevant considerations/irrationality;

 4) error of law on Article 8.

    The judge granting permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal indicated
    that all issues were arguable  and  in  particular  the  judge  made  a
    finding that the appellant could reasonably be expected to continue her
    private and family life in the  DRC/Brazzaville  on  the  basis  of  no
    specific evidence.  The permission judge was also of the view  that  it
    was arguable that the  judge  should  have  heard  evidence  upon  this
    discrete issue from the appellant and the appellant's partner.

 3. Ms Blair relied  on  her  detailed  grounds  of  appeal.   In  relation
    specifically to the medico-legal report, this was an Istanbul  Protocol
    compliant medico-legal report produced by the  Medical  Foundation  and
    the respondent's  published  policy  accepts  that  Medical  Foundation
    reports  are  produced  by  specialist  experts.   There   were   three
    particular issues.  The judge  only  assessed  the  medical  report  at
    paragraphs [56] and [57] after he had reached his negative  credibility
    findings contrary to the relevant jurisprudence including the Court  of
    Appeal in Minani [2004] EWHC 582.  It was submitted that the judge  had
    made his mind up already and did not use the expert report as  part  of
    his  credibility  assessment.   The  judge  also  fails  to  take  into
    consideration the detailed critique in the expert report in relation to
    the appellant's asylum claim including that the medico-legal report set
    out an evaluation including as to why the  appellant  might  have  been
    vague.  In addition, in terms of the appellant's substantive  evidence,
    the judge criticised the appellant for being vague.  However, following
    three very detailed sessions, given the difficulty that  the  appellant
    had in giving evidence, the appellant provided  a  much  more  detailed
    account in her expert report including  paragraphs  13  to  16  of  the
    medico-legal report and this was not taken into account  by  the  judge
    and it was not clear that this had been taken into  consideration  when
    credibility was assessed.

 4. In addition, it was submitted that the judge made significant errors in
    his consideration of the expert report at [56] and [57], in  particular
    stating that less than half of the lesions were attributed to  torture:
    "I make the finding that in relation to the lesions that less than half
    of them are being attributed to the incidents being relied upon by  the
    appellant."  However, it was submitted that this was a clear  error  of
    fact as the expert report confirms that all  of  the  injuries  are  at
    least consistent with torture (except for a stabbing injury  which  was
    found to be typical) and Ms Blair relied on paragraphs 49 to 54 of  the
    expert report where thirteen injuries are attributed to  torture.   The
    judge was therefore wrong to conclude that only seven of  the  nineteen
    lesions  are  considered  consistent  with  torture,  as  set  out   at
    paragraphs 49 to 54 of the expert report.  It was submitted  that  this
    probative evidence was misunderstood.  In addition, the judge only made
    one reference to PTSD but failed to take into account the  evidence  on
    mental health, despite there being a diagnosis of posttraumatic  stress
    disorder and made no  findings  on  the  fact  that  her  partner  gave
    corroborative evidence in  relation  for  example  to  the  appellant's
    nightmares and her mental health issues.

 5. Mr Walker noted that the Rule 24 response of the  respondent  dated  16
    December 2016 opposed the appeal and stated that the judge had provided
    extensive  reasonings  including  recording   the   medical   evidence.
    However, Mr Walker indicated that the report of the Medical  Foundation
    had not been before the author of the Rule  24  response.   It  was  Mr
    Walker's concession that, having considered that report, it  was  clear
    that the judge had made material errors in  his  consideration  of  the
    medical report, as identified by Ms Blair.  He also considered that the
    judge failed to make adequate findings in relation to the  evidence  of
    the second witness.

 6. I am satisfied that that has to be the case and that  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal cannot stand when  the  identified  errors  are
    considered in their entirety.  In particular the consideration  of  the
    medical report, both the fact that it was not considered until after  a
    negative credibility  finding  had  been  reached  and  the  fact  that
    substantive factual issues, which go to the heart of the assessment  of
    the appellant's credibility, were misunderstood.  It is also of concern
    that although the judge noted the  diagnosis  of  PTSD  there  were  no
    findings in relation to how that might have  impacted  the  appellant's
    ability to give evidence  and  the  judge,  although  noting  that  the
    evidence suggested PTSD, did not make  any  findings  and,  as  already
    noted, did not  make  any  findings  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    husband's evidence.

 7. Although the judge noted at [20] that the representative requested that
    the appellant be treated as a vulnerable witness there was  no  further
    indication that the appellant's vulnerabilities were considered by  the
    judge in reaching the negative credibility findings that he did and  in
    rejecting the appellant's evidence.  Ground 1 discloses an error of law
    sufficient that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal cannot stand.

 8. Although it is not necessary for me to go on to consider the  remaining
    grounds,  I  am  satisfied  that  these  would  separately  have   also
    established errors of law in terms of grounds 2 and 3 and  the  failure
    to take into account the material evidence identified.

 9. In relation to the final ground in relation to Article 8, as I  pointed
    out to Ms Blair Article 8 was not pleaded in the appellant's grounds of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  Even  if  it  had  been  I  am  not
    satisfied that there was any error in the judge considering  Article  8
    where the appellant  had  not  specifically  withdrawn  the  ground  of
    appeal.  Indeed he would have fallen into error had he not.  Ms Blair's
    practice before the First-tier Tribunal, of maintaining  an  Article  8
    appeal, whilst indicating that no submissions would be  made  and  then
    criticising the judge for making findings on that  appeal  is,  at  the
    very least, unsatisfactory.  It was Ms Blair's submission that  if  the
    representatives had been aware that the judge  intended  to  deal  with
    Article 8 she would have provided  further  evidence  in  this  regard.
    Whilst I am not  satisfied  that  there  is  any  error  in  the  judge
    considering Article 8 where an Article 8 ground remains (which does not
    appear to have been the case in this appeal) the judge  may  also  have
    fallen into error in making findings not based on any evidence that was
    before him, including in relation to the ability of the  appellant  and
    her partner to reasonably be expected to continue family life in Congo-
    Brazzaville, particularly as the appellant's partner was not a national
    of Congo-Brazzaville and was not married to the appellant and there was
    no reason to believe he would be entitled to live there.

10. In any event, as ground 1 succeeds such is immaterial.

Conclusion

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error of law  such
    that the decision cannot stand and is set aside in  its  entirety.   No
    findings are preserved.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to any judge other than Judge Abebrese.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee is payable I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
