
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09210/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Liverpool                   |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Tuesday 17 January 2017           |On Friday 20 January 2017            |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    E H K
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Evans, Counsel instructed by Waddell, Taylor
                    Bryan solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  As this is a
protection claim, it is appropriate to make an anonymity direction in this
case.


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS


Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge M  A  Khan  promulgated  on  19  July  2016  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 13 May 2015 refusing his protection claim.


    2. The Appellant is a citizen of  Iran.   He  arrived  in  the  UK  via
       Turkey, he claims on 28 November 2014.  His protection claim centres
       around events which he says occurred on 17 November 2014 when he was
       working as a  taxi  driver  in  Iran.   He  says  that  one  of  his
       passengers was stabbed to death in his cab.  He says that  he  fears
       that the authorities will blame him for the crime.


    3. The Appellant's appeal was dismissed on the  basis  that  the  Judge
       found his claim to be entirely fabricated.  The Appellant challenges
       the Decision on two grounds.  The first concerns the inconsistencies
       relied upon for the credibility finding.  The  second  concerns  the
       application of section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of
       Claimants etc) Act 2004 ("section 8").  Permission  was  granted  by
       Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek on 1 September 2016,  principally  on
       ground two but also because the findings in relation  to  section  8
       may  arguably  have  infected  the  remainder  of  the   credibility
       findings. The matter comes before me to decide whether the  Decision
       contains a material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision
       or remit the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

Discussion

Ground one


    4. The first of the Appellant's grounds concerns the  Judge's  findings
       at [28] to [30] of the Decision.  Miss  Evans  explained  that  this
       ground was not simply based on the application of section 8 and  the
       potential impact on the credibility findings of what is said at [27]
       of the Decision but rather is a self-standing ground based  on  what
       she said is  a  misunderstanding  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  in
       relation to the inconsistencies alleged.


    5. Miss Evans first directed my attention to [28] of the Decision where
       the Judge sets out what he understands to be the inconsistencies and
       the explanation which the Appellant gives for those.  That reads  as
       follows:-


            "[28]      In evidence before me, the appellant  was  extremely
           vague and evasive as to the event of 17/11/2014.   He  has  made
           contradictory  and  inconsistent  statement  in  his   screening
           interview,  the  substantive  asylum  interview,  his   previous
           solicitors two letters seeking  to  amend  his  answers  in  the
           interview.  The appellant seeks now  to  distance  himself  from
           what was stated in the solicitor's  letters  of  07/04/2015  and
           0/05/2015.  In  their  letter  of  07/04/2015,  the  appellant's
           previous solicitors, Broudie Jackson Canter stated that in reply
           to question 4.2 in the screening interview, the appellant  seeks
           to state that 'three people armed with knives came out,  one  of
           them sat in the front of the car and took the car keys from  him
           and they pulled the passenger ut and told the  second  passenger
           to flee'.  In his evidence, the appellant said that he  did  not
           know if this letter was going to be sent to the Home Office.  He
           said that his passenger who got out of his car was chased by the
           two men and he was not told to flee."


    6. Miss Evans readily accepted that the Judge was entitled to take into
       account the inconsistency.  She also readily accepted that there was
       an inconsistency as recorded between the content of the  solicitor's
       letter dated 7 April 2015 and the  Appellant's  evidence  elsewhere.
       However, she drew my attention to [19] to [23]  of  the  Appellant's
       witness statement which explains the background to  the  writing  of
       that letter. In essence, the Appellant says that he considered  that
       what was recorded in his screening interview was  misunderstood  and
       he had wished to correct that.  However, he says that at the meeting
       he had to discuss this misunderstanding,  his  legal  representative
       was not present.  He met only with the interpreter and a lady who he
       had not met before who typed as he was  asked  questions.   He  says
       that he did not know that what she was writing was a  letter  to  be
       sent to the Home Office, that the letter was not read  back  to  him
       and he could not read it himself.  He had not therefore checked  the
       content.


    7. The Appellant's version of events in  relation  to  that  letter  is
       borne out at  least  to  some  extent  by  the  following  evidence.
       Firstly, in the course of  his  substantive  asylum  interview,  the
       Appellant was asked about an assertion in the letter of 7 April that
       PJAK (referred to in the letter  as  "Pejak")  are  Turkish  Freedom
       Fighters with whom the Appellant or his family were  involved.   The
       Appellant denied those assertions.  The interviewer continued:-


            "[Q103]    One would expect your legal reps to take  more  care
           if they are sending alterations and different details about your
           account, I suggest you complain to  them  strongly.   So  to  be
           clear, you never told your legal reps  that  Pejak  are  Turkish
           Freedom Fighters?"


       Secondly, and of more importance is the  concession  in  the  letter
       from the  Appellant's  previous  solicitors  dated  8  May  2015  as
       follows:-


           "We confirm that there  were  some  difficulty  in  reading  the
           Screening interview back to our client in his  language.   As  a
           result some  confusion  occurred  that  were  reflected  in  our
           previous letter of further representation.   For  instance,  our
           client did suggest that PEJAK was an  Iranian  and  not  Turkish
           opposition group that had agents  and  members  on  the  Iranian
           borders  to  both  Turkey  and  Iraq.   This  was  not   covered
           completely.  We apologise for the confusion."


       In response to a question from me, Miss Evans confirmed (so  far  as
       she was able without breaching legal professional privilege) that  a
       complaint had been made against the Appellant's previous  solicitors
       and that those instructing her had received a referral on the  basis
       that the previous solicitors were conflicted.


    8. Miss Evans pointed out that none of the above evidence  in  relation
       to the inconsistency was taken into account.  All that  is  recorded
       is that the Appellant did not know that the letter was to  be  sent.
       In fact, his evidence was that he did not know it was  a  letter  at
       all  nor  what  it  contained.   Further,  the  evidence  that  this
       particular inconsistency arose as the Appellant says  needed  to  be
       taken into account.  It was not.  The impression was also  given  at
       [28] that the Appellant had changed his position at the  hearing  in
       relation to the solicitor's letters.  In fact, he had asserted  from
       the time of his substantive interview that the information in the  7
       April letter was incorrect and  he  had  never  sought  to  distance
       himself from the 8 May letter.


    9. I am satisfied for those reasons that the Judge has made an error of
       law  in  misunderstanding  and/or  failing  to  give   reasons   for
       disbelieving the Appellant's account as to the inconsistency.   That
       inconsistency is the foundation for the adverse credibility findings
       in relation to the Appellant's account.


    Ground two


   10.  Ground two concerns the Judge's application of  section  8  to  the
       Appellant's case.  Miss Evans drew my attention  first  to  what  is
       said in the Respondent's reasons for refusal letter about section 8.
        That reads as follows:-


           "In  determining   your   asylum   and   human   rights   claim,
           consideration has been given to section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
           Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004 and the  Court
           of Appeal case of JT Cameroon v Secretary of State for the  Home
           Department [2008] EWCA Civ 878 (28  July  2008)  which  provided
           that a deciding authority shall take account  of  the  following
           behaviour, as potentially damaging to your credibility.
           It is noted that your claims to the incident  in  November  2014
           and the police    wanting you in connection to  this  have  been
           rejected. Your claim that the police believe you are a member of
           PJAK have also been rejected.  It is considered that those  were
           fabricated in order to mislead or conceal  information,  and  to
           obstruct or delay the handling and resolution of your case. This
           engages Section 8(2)(a)-(c) of the Act."


   11. Miss Evans criticised that passage as failing  to  set  out  in  the
       first paragraph what behaviour was said to be  damaging.   That,  it
       seems to me, is clear from what follows.  Of more substance  is  her
       challenge to the reason given for applying section 8.  The  argument
       that the claim is  disbelieved  and  that  therefore  section  8  is
       applied is a circular one.


   12. This though is not  an  appeal  directly  against  the  Respondent's
       decision.  The question for me is what the Judge made of  that  part
       of the Respondent's decision.  That leads on then to a consideration
       of what is said at [27] of the  Decision  which  was  the  principal
       reason for the grant of permission to appeal.  The Judge there deals
       with section 8 as follows:-


           "The respondent raises a number of  credibility  issues  against
           the appellant including Section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration
           (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004.  The appellant claim  is
           related to the incident in November 2014 and the police in  Iran
           wanting him in connection with is rejected  by  the  respondent.
           The respondent considers that the appellant has  fabricated  his
           claim in order to mislead or conceal information,  and  obstruct
           or delay the handling and resolution of  his  case.   I  do  not
           accept this  as  a  credible  or  a  consistent  statement.  The
           respondent  states  that  Section  8(2)  of   the   Asylum   and
           Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004 is engaged  in
           this case.  The appellant's credibility is seriously damaged."


   13. Miss Evans submitted that the Judge's finding and reasoning is there
       unclear.  I accept her submission that it is ambiguous.  It  is  not
       clear whether the Judge is there recording the Respondent's decision
       but rejecting the application of section 8 or accepting that section
       8 applies and damages the Appellant's credibility in which case  his
       reasons for doing so are lacking.  Mr Harrison was  prepared  to  go
       one step further and described this paragraph as  "incoherent".   He
       indicated that on this basis alone he was prepared to  concede  that
       there is an error of law in the Decision.  That is material because,
       on one reading,  the  Judge  has  found  against  the  Appellant  by
       applying section 8 and this infects the remainder of the credibility
       findings. I have already, in any event,  found  at  [9]  above  that
       there is a separate error in relation to those findings.


   14. Both representatives were agreed that, if I found a  material  error
       of law, I should remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
       challenge is to the Judge's   adverse credibility findings.


      DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision contains a material error of law for
    the reasons given above. The decision of Judge M A Khan promulgated on
    19 July 2016 is set aside. I remit the appeal to the First-tier
    Tribunal for re-hearing before a Judge other than Judge M A Khan.  I do
    not preserve any findings.




      Signed           [pic]      Dated:  19 January 2017

      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
