



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09605/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 12th March 2014                              |                           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                              mr amadou diallo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ahmed

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent, Amadou Diallo was born on 19th March 1987 and claims to
    be a citizen of Guinea. For the remainder of this determination I shall
    refer to the Respondent as "the Appellant" as he was before the  First-
    tier Tribunal and refer to the Secretary of State as "the Respondent".

 2. The Appellant arrived as a visitor in the UK  on  30th  June  2013.  He
    claimed asylum on 21st August 2013. This application was refused and on
    4th October 2013 a decision made  to  remove  him  from  the  UK  under
    Section 10 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.  The  Appellant
    appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hindson). In a
    determination dated 29th November 2013 the Judge allowed the appeal  on
    asylum/Humanitarian Protection and human rights grounds. The  Secretary
    of State now appeals, with permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. Judge Hindson found the Appellant to be a national of  Guinea  and  not
    Sierra Leone as  the  Respondent  believed.  In  paragraph  24  of  his
    determination the Judge set out that the Appellant  fears  that  if  he
    returns to Guinea he will be killed by the government  because  of  his
    father's involvement with the late President Conte. It  is  correct  to
    say therefore, that the Judge was aware that he had  to  be  satisfied,
    that the Appellant had demonstrated (to the lower  standard  of  proof)
    the two strands to his claim.

      i) That he was a national of Guinea.

     ii) As a national of Guinea he feared to  return  to  that  country  on
         account of his fear that he would be killed because of his father's
         involvement with the late President Conte.

 4. The grounds seeking permission assert that the majority of the  Judge's
    findings concentrate on the nationality claim without giving sufficient
    reasoning for what appears to  be  a  comprehensive  rejection  of  the
    Respondent's claim. Permission to appeal was granted by IJ Plumptre  in
    the following terms.

         "It is arguable that if the judge  concentrated  on  the  issue  of
         disputed nationality  and  failed  to  make  sufficient  and  fully
         reasoned findings on the substantive claim since these were limited
         to 2 paragraphs  in  the  determination  whereas  the  reasons  for
         refusal letter dealt with this from paragraphs 23-50".

 5. Before me Mrs Pettersen essentially followed the lines of  the  grounds
    seeking permission. She drew  my  attention  to  paragraph  33  of  the
    Judge's determination and submitted that the paucity of reasoning meant
    that the determination was seriously  flawed,  because  the  Judge  had
    failed to engage with the issues raised by the Respondent.

 6. Mr Ahmed on behalf of the Appellant relied on his Rule 24 response.  He
    submitted the Respondent's argument that the Judge did not engage  with
    the issues raised in reasons for refusal letter were not borne out.  He
    referred to paragraphs 25 and 26 of the determination where  the  Judge
    states:-

         "In undertaking this assessment I have taken full account of all of
         the oral evidence I have heard and on  the  written  testimony  and
         other documentation that has been placed before me.  I  have  taken
         account of what was said in submissions  regarding  credibility.  I
         have considered all if (sic) the evidence together".

 7. Mr Ahmed then referred me to Shizad (Sufficiency of reasons: set aside)
    [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC) and submitted as per the head note of that case
    reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a whole  makes  sense,
    having regard to the material accepted by the Judge. He urged upon  me,
    that the determination, of Judge Hindson  was  sustainable  and  should
    stand.

Consideration of Error of Law

 8. I find that Judge Hindson has based his assessment of the risk to  this
    Appellant upon an incomplete and possibly inaccurate factual matrix.  I
    say this for the following reasons. The Judge's  determination  focuses
    heavily on deciding the Appellant's claimed nationality. In this he has
    made an error which may have resulted in an  incorrect  assessment.  In
    paragraph 28 for example the Judge says:


         "The respondent points out that the official language of Guinea  is
         French. The appellant does not speak  French.  His  explanation  is
         that he was not  formally  educated  and  therefore  never  learned
         French. He is a member of the Fula tribe and speaks that  language.
         He also speaks some of the Susa language.  The respondent has  made
         a bare assertion that the official language of  Guinea  is  French.
         She has provided  no  evidence  to  support  that  contention.  (My
         emphasis) In addition, the fact that a  language  is  the  official
         language of the country does not necessarily mean that it is spoken
         by all, or even most, of the citizens. Clearly Guinea was a  French
         colony and the  use  of  French  is  a  legacy  of  that  era.  The
         respondent has provided no evidence about the extent, geographical,
         demographical or on  any  other  basis,  that  French  is  actually
         spoken".

 9. Contrary to the above if one looks  at  any  Country  Information  Fact
    Sheet relating to  Guinea  it  will  confirm  French  is  the  official
    language. Furthermore, the Appellant in interview (Question 17)  offers
    the same information.

10. Having spent the greater part of the determination in focussing on  the
    nationality issue, the Judge has failed to carry out the core  exercise
    required in any claim to asylum, which is would  the  Appellant  be  at
    risk if returned to his home country?

11. The Respondent says that the Appellant would not be at risk  in  either
    Guinea nor Sierra Leone and sets out five headings  for  consideration.
    It is not possible to see from the determination what facts  the  Judge
    accepts or does not accept in order to ascertain firstly whether he has
    adequately considered those headings or secondly how he has arrived  at
    the decision he has.

12. I keep in mind Shizad which tells me that  reasons  pertaining  to  the
    central issue need not be extensive,  but  there  is  a  duty  to  give
    adequate reasons so that it can be seen that the decision made  by  the
    Judge is one that was open to him on the evidence available.  This  has
    not happened here and the determination  is  incomplete  and  therefore
    flawed.

13. Because I have found that the factual reasoning  established  in  Judge
    Hindson's determination is flawed, it is necessary  to  set  aside  the
    first Tribunal's findings of fact. The case will need to be heard again
    and new findings made on the whole case. No findings are  preserved.  I
    consider that it would be more appropriate in the light of  the  amount
    of oral and documentary evidence which has to be  considered,  for  the
    decision to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal and direct that it  is
    remitted to that Tribunal accordingly.

DECISON

14. The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  is  dated  29th
    November 2013 is set aside. I direct that the appeal be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal to remake the decision (not Judge Hindson).


No anonymity direction is made




Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
