
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09070/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 25th May 2015                    |On: 28th May 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     KK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant: Ms Price, Counsel instructed by Addison Khan
    Solicitors
    For the Respondent:     Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of India who is now aged 31.   She  appeals
    with permission[1] the decision of First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Herbert)
    to dismiss her appeal against the decision to refuse to vary her  leave
    and to remove her from the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  s47  of  the
    Immigration Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006[2].   That  decision  had
    followed rejection of her claim to international protection.

    Background and Basis of Claim

 2. The basis of the Appellant's asylum claim was  that  she  had  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution in India for reasons of her membership of a
    particular social group.  She stated that she had been in  violent  and
    unhappy marriage to a man who lived in Amritsar. Under his  instruction
    she had successfully applied for a Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant
    visa and he had been granted entry clearance  as  her  dependent.  Once
    they had reached the UK he  had  effectively  abandoned  her.  She  had
    entered into a relationship with another man, and together they had had
    two children. Her husband was become aware that he was not  the  father
    of the children and had subjected her to domestic abuse.  He  told  her
    family who have disowned her. She fears that if returned to  India  she
    will face a real risk  of  serious  harm  either  from  her  (now  ex-)
    husband, or her own family who perceive that she has disgraced them.

 3. This had all been rejected on credibility grounds  by  the  Respondent,
    but  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  accepted  that  the  core  of  the
    Appellant's account was true and that she had been ostracised by her ex-
    husband's family, and possibly her own, because she had entered into an
    adulterous relationship with a Sikh man of  a  different  caste.   That
    said, the Tribunal was not satisfied that the Appellant  qualified  for
    international protection: it could not even be said with certainty that
    her husband was in India today (he may well still be in the UK); he had
    made no further attempt to contact her since March 2014 and even if  he
    is still interested in pursuing her she could relocate within "the very
    significant Sikh community which exists in most cities in India".   The
    appeal was therefore dismissed.

 4. The grounds of appeal begin by alleging that the Judge appeared to have
    made up his mind about the decision before the hearing had begun. There
    is no justification for such an allegation and Ms Price was quite right
    not to pursue it.  She was also right to apologise for  the  inordinate
    length of the grounds, which were almost as long as  the  determination
    itself.  The challenge can be reduced to the following points:

      i)    The First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  take  objective  background
         material into account which indicated that there is  a  failure  of
         protection for women who are victims of domestic violence in India;

     ii) The options for internal flight for a woman with two young children
         are "very limited" and it would be unduly harsh for  a  woman  with
         two young children to relocate when it is clear she  has  committed
         adultery;

    iii) In considering internal flight no consideration was  given  to  the
         best interests of the  children  in  accordance  with  s55  of  the
         Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009;

     iv) The fact that the Appellant's ex-husband did not continue  to  look
         for her in the UK was not  relevant  to  whether  he  continued  to
         present a danger to her in India;

      v) The suggestion that the Appellant  and  her  partner  could  change
         their names was not open to the Tribunal as a way of meeting  their
         protection needs.

 5. For the Respondent Mr Kandola pointed out that this case  wasn't  about
    the sufficiency of protection available to single mothers, since it had
    not been found that the Appellant  was  actually  at  risk  outside  of
    Amritsar. Nor was she a single mother, since she would be removed  with
    the father of her  two  children.  There  was  nothing  preventing  the
    Appellant from marrying her partner and  there  would  be  no  way  for
    people they met to know that they were not/had not  been  married  when
    the children had been born. It was not a question that they were likely
    to be confronted with since they would present to the outside world  as
    a husband, wife and children.

    No Error of Law

 6. The principle submission made by  Ms  Price  was  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in its risk  assessment.   She  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's husband was a "wounded" party who would not  simply  forget
    that his wife had committed adultery and left him. He  might  not  have
    looked for her in the UK but that was because there is a sufficiency of
    protection here; it  would  be  different  in  India.   In  short,  the
    Tribunal should have found there to be a risk of  persecution  wherever
    she went  in  India.   With  respect,  there  was  not  the  evidential
    foundation for the First-tier Tribunal to have  made  such  a  finding.
    There was certainly  no  evidence  that  the  aggrieved  husband  would
    "easily find" the Appellant if he wanted to hunt her down (paragraph 16
    of the grounds). The Respondent's case was that internal flight  was  a
    safe option in a  population  of  approaching  one  billion.  This  was
    something  the  Tribunal  took  on  board,  albeit   in   more   modest
    terminology, at 74.  There  was  no  error  in  the  finding  that  the
    Appellant and her partner could relocate  to  another  city,  and  this
    finding was not simply based on a suggestion  that  they  change  their
    names. It was based on the finding that she and her  partner  are  both
    educated, have the advantage in the Indian  job  market  of  having  UK
    based experience, and crucially, that they had each  other.   This  was
    the basis of the Tribunal's conclusions at 84: "I am certain that  they
    would  be  able  to  make  provisions  for  themselves  and  their  two
    children".

 7. If there was no evidential basis for finding that this normal family  -
    i.e. a family without any particular "reach" - could find the Appellant
    outside of Amritsar then there was no need for the Tribunal to consider
    the country background material about how the police would  respond  if
    she went and made a complain about domestic violence.

 8. The grounds of appeal are unfortunate in that it is  possible  to  read
    them without understanding that the Respondent proposes to remove  this
    family together.  Paragraphs 3 through to 11 suggest that the Appellant
    and her children are facing internal flight alone.  This  is  unhelpful
    and arguably misleading. Those are not the facts of the appeal, and not
    the facts upon which the First-tier Tribunal  reached  its  sustainable
    decision on internal flight.    The  finding  made  was  based  on  the
    evidence before it, and supported by sound reasoning.

    Decisions

 9. The determination contains no error of law and it is upheld.

10. Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity
    Orders I make the following direction:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
         Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings".



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                                               25th May 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert on the 11th
February 2015
[2] Decision dated 17th October 2014

