
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09144/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On January 10, 2017             |On January 13, 2017             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                 MR AZIM [M]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Schwenk, Counsel, instructed by IAS
Respondent  Ms Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I do not make an anonymity order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

    2. The appellant is a national of Iran. On or around December  6,  2014
       the appellant entered the United Kingdom clandestinely  and  claimed
       asylum. The respondent refused his application in a  decision  dated
       June 1, 2015.

    3. The appellant appealed that decision on June 17, 2015 under  Section
       82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and  his
       appeal came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  A  Simpson
       (hereinafter referred to as "the Judge") on February 16, 2016. In  a
       decision promulgated on May 20, 2016 she dismissed his claims.

    4. The appellant appealed the  Judge's  decision  on  June  3,  2016and
       permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Kelly on June 13, 2016. FTTJ Kelly found that it  was  arguable  the
       Judge's finding on the comment made about  the  Supreme  Leader  was
       either equivocal  or  irrational.  Permission  to  appeal  was  also
       granted in respect of the grounds of  appeal  relating  to  (a)  the
       existence of the arrest warrant and (b) the fact  no  findings  were
       made about the arrest of the appellant's wife.

    5. The matter initially came before me on the above date  and  I  heard
       submissions from both representatives following which I found  there
       was an error in law for the reasons hereinafter stated.

SUBMISSIONS

    6. Mr Schwenk adopted the grounds of appeal  and  submitted  there  had
       been a delay of over  three  months  in  the  promulgation  of  this
       decision and that was relevant to at least one  of  the  grounds  of
       appeal.  The Judge made no reference in her decision to  the  arrest
       of the appellant's wife in her decision and made no findings on that
       and the fact  there  was  a  delay  in  promulgation  supported  the
       appellant's submission that it was  possible  the  Judge  overlooked
       this with the delay. The second ground of appeal was that the  Judge
       erred in her approach to the appellant's  evidence  about  what  was
       said about the Supreme Leader. It is  argued  that  the  words  said
       would be treated as hostile and this would  place  him  at  risk  of
       arrest upon return. The other ground of appeal was  that  the  Judge
       made inconsistent findings on the appellant's actual arrest warrant.
       She stated it was genuine but then made a finding that she could not
       be certain what it related to.

    7. Mr Harrison  adopted  a  Rule  24  response  dated  June  29,  2016.
       However, he acknowledged that the Judge  made  no  findings  on  the
       appellant's wife's arrest and  made  inconclusive  findings  on  the
       arrest warrant. In the circumstances he agreed  there  had  been  an
       error in law.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

    8. In granting permission to appeal Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Kelly identified arguable errors of law and at  today's  hearing  Mr
       Harrison agreed that two of the matters identified by Mr Schwenk did
       amount to an error of law and that being the case there  would  have
       to be fresh findings.

    9. I am satisfied that the Judge erred in her approach  to  the  arrest
       warrant and the evidence relating to the appellant's wife.  What  is
       required is a fresh consideration of all of the evidence  and  fresh
       findings.

   10. I raised with both representatives where this appeal should be heard
       in the event there was an error in law.  Both agreed that  in  light
       of Part 3, Section 7.1 to 7.3 of the Practice Statement  the  matter
       should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

   11. I direct that any additional evidence should be served on  both  the
       Tribunal and other party in accordance with the  current  Procedural
       Rules.

DECISION

   12. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
       the making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision.

   13. The appeal is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  these
       issues to be addressed hearing under Section 12  of  the  Tribunals,
       Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

   14. The matter should not be  listed  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal A Simpson. Ideally, this matter  should  be  listed  before
       myself in the First-tier but I leave that to the listing  department
       to decide if that is necessary.


   15. A Farsi interpreter will be required.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
