
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: AA/09751/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 September 2016            |On 05 October 2016              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    A. K.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Cole, Solicitor, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally  and  claimed
           asylum on 15 January 2015. That application was  refused  on  17
           June 2015, and a decision to remove him was made in consequence.
        2. The Appellant's appeal to the Tribunal against those immigration
           decisions was heard and dismissed  by  decision  of  First  Tier
           Tribunal Judge Hindson promulgated on 8 June 2016.
        3. The Appellant's application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
           permission to appeal was granted on 4 July 2016 by Judge Lambert
           on the basis it was arguable (since there was no reference to it
           in the course of the decision) that  the  Judge  had  failed  to
           apply the relevant country guidance of AA (Article  15(c))  Iraq
           CG [2015] UKUT 544 in his consideration of the evidence.
        4. Thus the matter comes before me.


      Error of Law?
        5. It is accepted before me that both those who drafted the grounds
           of the application for permission to appeal, and,  the  Rule  24
           response to  the  grant  of  permission,  failed  to  accurately
           identify the findings of fact that were made by  Judge  Hindson,
           following his assessment of the reliability of  the  Appellant's
           evidence.
        6. It is also accepted before me that the  Judge  did  not  make  a
           positive finding  that  the  Appellant  originated  from  either
           Baghdad, or, from the KRG. I  am  satisfied  that  this  is  the
           proper analysis of the decision, when it is  read  as  a  whole,
           notwithstanding the use of the phrase "return to the IKR"  [36].
           If the Judge did intend  to  make,  and  did  make,  a  positive
           finding of fact that the Appellant originated from the KRG  then
           the Appellant had identified no risk of harm to himself  in  the
           KRG, and his appeal would be dismissed without more.
        7. As Mr Cole accepts, the Judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant's
           evidence was not only unreliable, but clearly  inconsistent,  as
           to where he had last lived in Iraq. The Appellant had originally
           claimed to have last lived in Iraq in Rahinawa,  in  Kirkuk.  He
           had then claimed at interview to have lived in Bayji a  district
           in Kirkuk, but also claimed to have fled Kirkuk in 2003. Finally
           he had said that whilst he was born in Rahinwa, Kirkuk,  he  had
           moved in 2003 to Bayji, Salahaddin. He had  also  denied  having
           been taught at school in Arabic, which given his age,  ought  to
           have been the case had he grown up in an area outside the KRG as
           he claimed to have done  [27].  The  Judge  concluded  that  the
           Appellant had not  told  the  truth  over  a  relatively  simple
           matter, and concluded that he was not satisfied either that  the
           Appellant was born in Kirkuk, or, that he  had  lived  in  Bayji
           since 2003 [33]. Mr Cole accepts that  those  findings  are  not
           open to challenge. I agree, they were findings that were open to
           the Judge upon  the  evidence,  were  adequately  reasoned,  and
           followed the application of the correct burden and  standard  of
           proof to the evidence.
        8. The Judge made no positive finding  of  fact  as  to  where  the
           Appellant was in truth born, or, where he  had  in  truth  lived
           within Iraq from time to time. It is plain that the  Judge  felt
           unable to do so given the lack of  reliable  evidence  from  the
           Appellant upon those issues, and in my judgement it is not  open
           to the Appellant in these circumstances to  complain  about  the
           lack of such a positive finding made in his favour.
        9. In my judgement it is not a necessary consequence of either  the
           fact  that  the  Appellant  is  a  Kurd,  or,  the  Respondent's
           concession that the Appellant's father and brother  were  killed
           as police officers in the Ba'athist regime  of  Saddam  Hussein,
           that the family were based at any  particular  date  within  any
           particular city, or province.  I  reject  the  argument  to  the
           contrary.
       10. The Judge noted that on his own case, for over twelve years, the
           Appellant had experienced no difficulty in Iraq as a  result  of
           either his father or his brother having acted as police officers
           in the Ba'athist regime of Saddam Hussein. As a result the Judge
           concluded, as he was entitled to do, that he was  not  satisfied
           that any difficulty would emerge on that  account  now,  in  the
           event of the Appellant's return to Iraq [32].
       11. Those findings disposed of the asylum and Article 3 appeals, and
           no material error of law is disclosed in the Judge's approach to
           those grounds of appeal.
       12.  Turning  then  to  the  humanitarian  protection   claim,   the
           Appellant's case  before  the  Tribunal  was  that  he  and  his
           immediate family (together with the majority of the  inhabitants
           of their village) had fled their village  in  the  face  of  the
           advance of ISIS forces. Although the Judge did not believe this,
           his case was that he  had  left  his  immediate  family  at  the
           Iraq/Turkey border, within Iraq, because the family were  unable
           to raise the funds for them all to cross into Turkey, and so  he
           travelled alone. Accordingly, the true thrust of the Appellant's
           claim, as the Judge correctly identified, was that as a civilian
           he faced a risk of harm in the event of his return to  his  home
           area in the course of the indiscriminate violence affecting  the
           civilian population, resulting from  the  armed  conflict  being
           pursued between ISIS and the forces of  the  Iraqi  authorities;
           Article 15(c). In considering that aspect of his case the  Judge
           did not expressly consider or make reference  to,  the  guidance
           that is to be found in  this  respect  in  the  decision  of  AA
           (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544, which in  turn  follows
           the guidance of the Court of Appeal in HF (Iraq) & Others [2013]
           EWCA Civ 1276.
       13. Before me, the argument turned upon whether the Judge's  failure
           to do so amounted either to any error of law at all,  or,  to  a
           material error that required the  Judge's  decision  to  be  set
           aside and remade. Ultimately I am satisfied that it was neither.
           The Appellant failed to  discharge  the  burden  of  proof  that
           rested upon him, to establish where his home area was.  Thus  he
           failed to establish that he had fled from his home area  in  the
           circumstances that he described. He  also  failed  to  establish
           that he faced any risk of harm as a civilian arising out  of  an
           internal armed conflict should he seek to  return  to  his  home
           area. Both  were  necessary  conclusions  from  his  failure  to
           establish where in truth his home area actually was.
       14. In circumstances where an applicant has failed to establish that
           his home area was affected by an internal armed conflict  it  is
           not enough in my judgement  to  assert  baldly  that  since  the
           majority of the populations of the areas that  are  so  affected
           are ethnically Kurdish, that his home  area  must  by  necessary
           inference be one of them. The Judge was not obliged to draw such
           a favourable inference, and plainly did not do so.
       15. Although the Appellant had said that he had  lost  contact  with
           the members of his immediate family in Iraq, having left them at
           the border, the Judge made it plain that he did not believe  him
           [29]. Thus, even if the Appellant did not in truth have  in  his
           possession at the date of the hearing  any  identity  documents,
           the Appellant had failed to establish that he would be unable to
           use the family members with whom he was in contact, to vouch for
           him, and, to identify the page  in  the  family  book  that  his
           family were registered  in,  and,  the  city/province  for  that
           family book. Depending upon  where  that  city/province  was  in
           truth, then he would be able through the Iraqi  Embassy,  and/or
           using a lawyer in Baghdad as a proxy, obtain the  issue  of  new
           identity documents; AA. There was  therefore  no  error  in  the
           Judge's conclusion that he was not satisfied the Appellant would
           be unable to obtain the issue of a  passport,  or  in  turn  the
           issue of a CSID. Armed with a CSID he would be  able  to  access
           state support, in addition to the family support that the  Judge
           concluded was available to him [35]. So much is clear  from  the
           guidance to be found in AA.
       16. In the circumstances it was open to the Judge to  conclude  that
           return to Iraq was feasible, and that  the  Appellant  could  in
           safety be returned to  Baghdad,  and  either  settle  there,  or
           relocate to the KRG. If, in truth, he originated from  the  KRG,
           then he would be returned there directly, or make his way  there
           in safety from Baghdad.
       17. In the circumstances the Judge did not make any  material  error
           of law in his decision to dismiss the appeal on all grounds. The
           Appellant's appeal is dismissed.









   DECISION


      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  8
      June 2016 did not involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law  in  the
      decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision to  be  set
      aside and remade. That decision is accordingly confirmed.








Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 26 September 2016



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008


      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.





   Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 26 September 2016



