
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/09086/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 April 2015                               |On 30 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MR A R S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Chelvan (Counsel)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision promulgated  on  16  January  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Aujla ("the judge") allowed the  respondent's  appeal  against  a
    decision to remove him from the United Kingdom.   The  judge  concluded
    that the respondent would not be at real risk of  persecution  or  ill-
    treatment in breach of Article 3, on  return  to  Somalia.   He  would,
    however, be at real risk of suffering serious harm and was entitled  to
    humanitarian protection.  In reaching his conclusion  that  the  appeal
    fell to be allowed on this basis,  the  judge  took  into  account  and
    applied country guidance given in MOJ [2014] UKUT 442.

2.   The Secretary of State, applied for permission  to  appeal,  contending
    that the judge erred in failing to give reasons or adequate reasons  on
    material matters.  The guidance given in MOJ showed that  it  would  be
    for a person facing return to explain why he would be unable to  access
    economic opportunities in Mogadishu.  Only those with no clan or family
    support, who would not receive remittances from abroad  and  who  would
    have no real prospect of securing access to  a  livelihood  on  return,
    would face the prospect of living in circumstances falling below  those
    acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.  The  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that the respondent was from a minority  clan  but  he  was  a
    resourceful individual who had failed to explain why he would be unable
    to gain access  to  economic  opportunities  on  return  to  Mogadishu.
    Furthermore, he had failed to explain why he would receive  remittances
    from abroad.  The judge failed to fully address  the  position  in  the
    light of the presence here of members of the  respondent's  family.  At
    paragraph 23 of the decision, the judge referred  to  the  respondent's
    family as including an aunt and a niece but at paragraph 40, he did not
    give adequate reasons why the  respondent  would  not  have  access  to
    financial support  and  failed  to  mention  these  relatives  in  that
    paragraph.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge  may  have
    misunderstood or misapplied the country  guidance  in  MOJ.   Arguably,
    that guidance did not support the judge's conclusion and  it  was  also
    arguable that he failed to adequately address  whether  the  respondent
    would be able to make a  living  in  Mogadishu  on  return  or  receive
    remittances from family members outside Somalia.  The decision appeared
    to have been written on the basis that the respondent would  refuse  to
    take advantage of financial support available  to  those  who  returned
    voluntarily, an error in the light of AN and SS [2008] UKAIT 00063.  In
    that case, the Tribunal held that  it  was  appropriate  to  take  into
    account the availability of financial  support  through  the  voluntary
    returns programme.

4.   In a rule 24 response, the respondent contended that the judge made  no
    material error and that the Secretary of State's  grounds  disclosed  a
    mere disagreement with his sustainable findings.   The  judge  accepted
    that the respondent was a credible witness, that he had been  a  victim
    of past persecution, that he had never lived in Mogadishu and  that  he
    had no family, friends or any clan associations there.  The judge heard
    evidence, which he accepted, on the lack of availability  of  financial
    support from relatives in the United Kingdom and made a  clear  finding
    on this at paragraph 40.  There was no basis for a submission that  the
    respondent should have placed evidence before the Tribunal to show that
    his family could not assist him, in the light of the judge's acceptance
    of the evidence in this  regard.   So  far  as  the  voluntary  returns
    programme was concerned, it was contended that this was irrelevant.  As
    at the date of hearing, the respondent was  clearly  not  part  of  the
    programme and this aspect did not form part of the pleaded  grounds  or
    indeed the Upper Tribunal's reasoning in MOJ.  The point had  not  been
    put to the respondent at any stage during the hearing.




Submissions on error of law

5.   Mr Walker said that the  proper  focus  was  on  paragraph  40  of  the
    decision.  The judge had not explained there why the  respondent  would
    be unable to receive remittances from the United Kingdom.  In the  body
    of the decision, he mentioned and took into  account  the  presence  of
    family members in this  country.   The  judge  granting  permission  to
    appeal drew attention to AN and SS and the availability of grants under
    the  voluntary  returns  programme.   The   appeal   was   allowed   on
    humanitarian protection grounds and so it appeared that the  respondent
    would be able to avail himself of this resource.  No reasons were given
    in the decision for the judge's conclusion that financial support would
    not be  available  to  the  respondent,  including  support  under  the
    voluntary returns programme.  Reliance was placed upon the Secretary of
    State's written grounds.

6.   Mr Chelvan said that the appeal was unusual,  in  some  respects.   The
    voluntary returns programme point was raised in the grant of permission
    but it was clear that it was not relied upon by the Secretary of  State
    in the grounds of application.

7.   Could the  respondent  rely  on  the  programme?   There  were  several
    obstacles.  It was clear that the Upper Tribunal in MOJ  did  not  give
    weight to the voluntary returns programme in giving country guidance or
    view it as a significant factor.  The programme formed no part  of  the
    ratio in the case.  It would have been  a  clear  error  if  the  judge
    decided not to follow the country guidance.  Secondly, the  appeal  was
    allowed on humanitarian protection grounds and the  availability  of  a
    grant could only have become  a  live  issue  on  promulgation  of  the
    decision, with the dismissal of the appeal on  asylum  grounds  and  in
    relation to Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.  The point  could
    only have arisen in hindsight.

8.   At paragraph 25 of the decision, the judge recorded  the  Secretary  of
    State's submission that the respondent was not at risk  on  return  but
    nowhere was there any challenge to the evidence, accepted by the judge,
    regarding lack of support in Somalia or from  the  respondent's  family
    here.  There was also no submission regarding  corroborative  evidence,
    to  support  the  respondent's  case,  although  there  was  a  related
    submission regarding medical evidence.  The point about  the  voluntary
    returns programme was new.  At paragraph 23 of the decision, the  judge
    recorded the respondent's evidence, which was not challenged,  that  he
    had no family in Mogadishu, had never lived there, had no clan  support
    and would not receive support from his mother.  The evidence  regarding
    his aunt was to similar effect.  At paragraph 24,  the  judge  recorded
    evidence from the aunt.  There were no submissions from  the  Secretary
    of State challenging this evidence,  particularly  regarding  financial
    support.  The thrust of the Secretary of State's case  at  the  hearing
    was that the respondent ought to be able to generate  his  own  income.
    There was nothing about a  lack  of  any  supporting  or  corroborative
    evidence.  The judge made  cogent  findings  regarding  credibility  at
    paragraph  27  and  those  following.   The  narrative  regarding  past
    persecution was accepted.

9.   At paragraph 38, the judge cited the relevant paragraphs of MOJ,  which
    were at 424 and 425.  There was no mention  of  the  voluntary  returns
    programme there.  Again, this aspect was not raised in the  grounds  of
    application for permission to appeal.  The Secretary of  State  clearly
    did not argue before the First-tier Tribunal that the respondent  could
    avail himself of support under the  programme.   The  judge's  findings
    were clearly guided by MOJ and were sustainable.  They  expressly  took
    into account the ratio of MOJ.

10.  At paragraph 40, the judge clearly had paragraphs 424 and  425  of  MOJ
    in mind and he reminded himself of his earlier findings of  fact.   The
    only close family the respondent had available was his  mother  and  no
    financial support was available from her or other relatives, on return.
     Overall, this was a gold standard determination.

11.  So far  as  the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  of  application  were
    concerned, again, there was  no  inclusion  of  the  voluntary  returns
    programme.  In seeking to rely on the respondent's own resourcefulness,
    the Secretary of State overlooked that this was  not  relevant  to  the
    Upper Tribunal's reasoning in paragraphs 424 and 425 of MOJ.   Nor  was
    the respondent under an obligation to identify every single  member  of
    his family.  In the decision, the judge took into account the available
    sources of support and the family members here.  Again,  there  was  no
    challenge to the respondent's evidence regarding a lack of support,  or
    to his mother's evidence.  It was  clear  that  the  voluntary  returns
    programme was  not  raised  below.   The  suggestion  that  a  lack  of
    corroborative evidence undermined the judge's findings took no  account
    of his clear acceptance of the evidence before him and the  sustainable
    findings  that  were  made.   The  judge  accepted  the  account  given
    regarding family members here and possible sources of support,  drawing
    together his reasoning in paragraph 40.

12.  So far as AN and SS was concerned, the support  package  considered  by
    the Upper Tribunal in that case was clearly not part of  the  ratio  in
    MOJ.  Moreover, there was no evidence before the Upper Tribunal  in  AN
    and SS regarding any current terms of support.  This aspect was clearly
    not part of the Secretary of State's case in the present appeal.  In AN
    and SS, the Upper Tribunal was looking at  facts  in  relation  to  Sri
    Lanka, in 2008.  The judge clearly did not err in applying the ratio in
    MOJ.

13.  Mr Walker had nothing to add to the  written  grounds  or  his  earlier
    submissions.

Conclusion on error of law

14.  I conclude that the judge made no material error of law  and  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.  The decision has been
    prepared by a very experienced judge and contains a  clear  summary  of
    the  evidence  before  him,  reasoned  findings  of  fact,  a  succinct
    direction in the light of MOJ and the application of  country  guidance
    given in that case to his findings.  All of  this  led  to  sustainable
    conclusions.  The judge was entitled  to  allow  the  appeal,  for  the
    reasons he gave.

15.  Although paragraph 40 of the  decision  is,  as  Mr  Walker  said,  the
    proper focus for an assessment of the Secretary of  State's  case  that
    the decision contains a material error of law, it must not be  read  in
    isolation.  The judge reminded himself there of his earlier findings of
    fact.  He  accepted  the  account  given  by  the  respondent  of  past
    persecution in Somalia and the evidence regarding the presence here  of
    family members.  The judge was entitled to accept that  the  respondent
    had no available means of financial support  on  return  to  Mogadishu.
    There were no family members there, he had never lived in the city  and
    he had no clan support.  Insofar as the Secretary  of  State's  grounds
    amount  to  a  suggestion  that  the  judge  ought  to  have   required
    corroborative evidence, no material error of law has been  shown  here.
    The judge did not err in accepting the  evidence  before  him,  in  the
    light of the cases put to him by the parties.

16.  The judge took into account and applied the country  guidance  in  MOJ,
    at paragraphs 424 and 425 of that decision, dealing with Mogadishu as a
    destination for internal relocation.  This was relevant guidance as the
    respondent is from Kismayo and, as noted earlier, the judge found  that
    he had never lived  in  Mogadishu.   The  reasoning  which  appears  at
    paragraph 40 is clear and builds on the earlier findings.  It is simply
    not the case, as contended in the  grounds  of  application,  that  the
    judge  failed  to  properly  take  into  account  any  failure  by  the
    respondent to explain why he would not receive remittances from abroad.
     He took into account the available sources of support and  found  that
    they were insufficient.

17.  I accept Mr Chelvan's submission  that  the  point  identified  by  the
    judge granting permission, regarding support available to returnees  to
    Sri Lanka under the voluntary returns programme,  was  not  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal in the present appeal.   There  is  no  mention  of
    support from this source in the  Secretary  of  State's  letter  giving
    reasons for  the  removal  decision  and  her  representative  made  no
    submissions to the judge in this  context.   The  point  was  also  not
    raised in the application for permission to appeal.  As  it  formed  no
    part of the Secretary of State's case, the judge did not err in law  in
    failing to consider it.  In any event, the judgment  in  MOJ  makes  no
    mention of  support  from  such  a  programme,  in  the  assessment  of
    Mogadishu as a location for internal relocation for Somali returnees.

18.  For these reasons, I conclude that the judge  made  no  error  of  law.
    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

DECISION

19.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Signed                                  Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell





ANONYMITY

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an anonymity direction and I direct  that
it shall continue, until varied or set aside by this Tribunal or a court.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


