
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09785/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 August 2016                            |On 17 August 2016             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                 mr said [L]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. N. Stevens, Legal Representative.
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Morocco who appealed against  a  decision
    of the respondent to give directions for the appellant's removal and to
    refuse to grant him asylum and Humanitarian Protection  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He also relied upon Articles 2,  3  and  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 2. His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chana who in a
    decision promulgated on 14 April 2016 dismissed it on all grounds.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This was refused but a  renewed  application  was  made  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt on 4 July 2016.   Her
    reasons for so doing were:-

         "1.  The appellant,  a  Moroccan  national,  appealed  against  the
             respondent's decision to refuse his asylum  and  human  rights
             claim.  First-tier Tribunal Judge (FTTJ) Chana  dismissed  the
             appeal on all grounds.

         2.   It is arguable that the FTTJ erred in stating at [50] and [52]
             that gay men in Morocco are not subject to violence as this is
             stated in the country evidence document  relied  upon  by  the
             appellant, from page 3 onwards of his appeal  bundle.   It  is
             also arguable that the FTTJ  failed  to  address  the  witness
             statement of Ms. [B] notwithstanding her non-attendance  where
             she had provided identity documents and evidence of her travel
             to Morocco at the time that it is claimed the  appellant  told
             her that he was gay.  It is arguable that the  FTTJ  erred  at
             [55] in placing weight on a minor failing to claim asylum  for
             28 days after arrival and not disclosing his sexuality when he
             first came to the UK.

         3.   All grounds are arguable."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. Mr. Stevens relied upon  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal,
    particularly the failure to  properly  consider  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's  witness  who  had  provided  a  signed  witness  statement
    confirming that the appellant had told her that he had  a  relationship
    with another boy whilst he was living in Morocco and while she  was  on
    holiday there in 2010.  He went on to expand that ground  and  also  to
    submit that the judge had failed to properly consider country  evidence
    and particularly that it was common  that  homosexuals  are  physically
    attacked in Morocco.  The third ground relates to the reliance  of  the
    judge on an age assessment  report  which  was  carried  out  when  the
    appellant had just arrived in the United  Kingdom  prior  to  receiving
    legal advice and when it was accepted that he was only 16 years of age.



 6. Mr Kotas in response to the failure of the judge to  properly  consider
    the evidence of the appellant's witness said  it  would  have  made  no
    difference whatsoever to the ultimate outcome of the  judge's  decision
    and cannot possibly be  said  to  be  material.   The  judge  has  made
    findings which are "damning" and would not have  been  controverted  by
    this evidence.  Moreover, in finding that any attack upon the appellant
    was random the judge has properly taken  into  account  the  background
    evidence.

 7. This latter submission was responsed to by Mr. Stevens who argued  that
    the  attack  was  not  random  and  that  the  appellant  was  targeted
    consequent  upon  his  homosexuality  and  that  this  aspect  of   the
    appellant's  claim  sits  well  into  the  context  of  the  background
    material.

 8. For all the reasons put forward by  the  appellant's  representative  I
    find that the judge here has materially erred.  In essence  though,  in
    light of my finding in relation to the failure to consider the evidence
    of the appellant's witness there is no need for me to  examine  in  any
    great detail the remaining grounds.  The failure  to  take  account  of
    this evidence and to give reasons as to why weight either can or cannot
    be attached to it is a material error which  in  the  context  of  this
    appeal renders the whole decision unsafe.   For  all  the  reasons  put
    forward I find the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  errors
    of law and has to be set aside in its  entirety.   All  parties  agreed
    that, in the circumstances, it was appropriate for  the  appeal  to  be
    considered and all matters decided afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt with  afresh,
    pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement  7.2(b)  before  any  judge
    aside from Judge Chana.

10. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 16 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
