
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/09045/2014
                                                               AA/09046/2014
                                                               AA/09114/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|18 December 2015                     |On 17 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     MJ
                                     RN
                                     SN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza, instructed by Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. The parties before us agreed on the outcome  of  this  appeal  and  the
    reasons for it.

 2. The appellants are nationals of Iran.  They appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal against decisions of the respondent on 23 October 2014 to make
    removal directions, following the refusal of their asylum claims.   The
    second and third appellants' cases essentially depend on  that  of  the
    first appellant.

 3. The appeals came before Judge Coaster in the First-tier  Tribunal,  who
    heard them on 20 February 2015 and sent out  her  decision,  dismissing
    the appeals, on 6 March 2015.  Essentially, she dismissed  the  appeals
    because she did not  believe  the  first  appellant's  account  of  her
    politico-religious views and activities.  The grounds of appeal to this
    Tribunal, on the basis of which permission was granted,  are  that  she
    did not take into account all the material before her.

 4. The  evidence  relating  to  the  first  appellant's  profile  included
    evidence of blogs.  At para 44 of the determination,  the  judge  wrote
    that "there was no evidence of any  blog  which  pre-dated  the  asylum
    claim on 5 September 2014".  This was clearly a  matter  going  to  the
    judge's assessment of  the  first  appellant's  credibility.   It  was,
    however, clearly wrong.  The notes of the judge  and  of  both  parties
    make it clear that the judge was  shown  copious  evidence  of  earlier
    blogs, going back to 2011.  The appellants'  representative  says  that
    there were 47 entries in total.

 5. In the circumstances, whatever may be the  eventual  outcome  of  these
    appeals, we cannot  be  confident  of  Judge  Coaster's  assessment  of
    credibility.  Although her determination takes  into  account  a  large
    number of other aspects of the evidence, it is impossible to  say  that
    her overall view on credibility would have been the same,  if  she  had
    realised that the internet evidence had a considerable  history  before
    the asylum claim was made.  The appeals will have to  be  reheard.   In
    the circumstances, and as the parties also agree, it would not be right
    to try and preserve any of Judge Coaster's  findings.   The  appeal  to
    this Tribunal is therefore allowed.  We set aside the determination  of
    Judge Coaster.  We remit the  appellants'  appeals  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing before a judge other than Judge Coaster.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 5 February 2016
