
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09930/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd May 2017                              |On  19th May 2017             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A GRUBB
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     j d
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Dipnarain (Solicitor) Duncan Lewis Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Anonymity having previously been ordered  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
there being no application to remove the order, we see no reason  to  do  so
and the order remains in place.  Unless and until  a  Tribunal  or  a  court
directs otherwise, the Respondent is granted anonymity.  No report of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  them  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies both to  the  Respondent  and  to  the
Appellant.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
court proceedings.

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State,  for  convenience
    we will refer to the parties as they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of China.  She was born on [ ] 1973.

 3. The Appellant was trafficked  to  the  United  Kingdom  for  sex  work.
    Having entered on a visit visa she overstayed and was arrested  at  the
    massage parlour in which her traffickers had placed  her.   Apparently,
    the police had been alerted by a tip-off instigated  by  the  Appellant
    and made through a client of hers.  On 23rd July  2013,  the  Appellant
    made a claim for asylum.   On  8th  May  2015,  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism (NRM) concluded that the Appellant  was  a  victim  of  human
    trafficking.

 4. On 24th June 2015, the Respondent refused her  application  for  asylum
    and decided to remove her.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The Appellant appealed against the decision to remove her and to refuse
    her claim for asylum asserting that in her circumstances, namely  being
    the  victim  of  human  trafficking,  her  history  of  involvement  in
    prostitution, having suffered historical domestic violence  and  having
    outstanding debts to traffickers and a daughter to support, she was  at
    real risk of re-trafficking.

 6. Judge Solly found that the risk was made out and concluded  that  there
    was not a sufficiency of protection in China (i.e. whether in her  home
    area or elsewhere) and that in any event internal relocation was not an
    option.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. On 26th October 2016, the Respondent was granted permission  to  appeal
    by the First-tier Tribunal because the judge  had  arguably  failed  to
    make any or any adequate findings on the sufficiency of  protection  in
    China.  The judge in rejecting the argument that  the  Appellant  could
    internally relocate given the size of China and her ability to live and
    work in several different countries, arguably gave insufficient reasons
    why she was departing from existing country guidance of HC [2009] UKAIT
    00027.

 8. On 30th November 2016, the Appellant filed a rule 24 notice seeking  to
    uphold the judge's decision.

Discussion

 9. Before us, Mr Kotas, who represented the Secretary of State, relied and
    elaborated upon the Grounds of Appeal.

10. Ground 1 is  that  the  judge  failed  to  make  a  proper  finding  on
    sufficiency of protection in China, instead relying on the  Appellant's
    subjective  position  i.e.  that  she  has  no  confidence   in   state
    protection, and her finding at [139] that the police in China have been
    unable to protect the Appellant from domestic  violence  in  the  past.
    The judge was  obliged  to  make  a  finding  based  on  the  objective
    position.  Engaging in discussion with the panel Mr Kotas was quick  to
    recognise  that  the  grounds  mischaracterised  the  judge's  findings
    because, whilst she acknowledged the  Appellant's  subjective  view  at
    [124] and [139] her conclusion, when  the  decision  was  read  in  the
    round, it shows sufficiency of protection was assessed in  the  context
    of the country background information including expert reports.

11. The ground is sustainable.  The  judge  correctly  self-direct  in  the
    context of HC and RC (Trafficked Women) China  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00027
    when she highlights at paragraph 95 head  note  (ii)  of  the  case  as
    follows:

         "Women and girls in China do not in general face  a  real  risk  of
         serious  harm  from  traffickers.   Where,  however,  it   can   be
         established in the given case that a woman or a girl  does  face  a
         real  risk  of  being  forced  or  coerced  into  prostitution   by
         traffickers, the issue of whether  she  will  be  able  to  receive
         effective  protection  from  the  authorities  will  need   careful
         consideration in the  light  of  background  evidence  highlighting
         significant deficiencies in the system of protection for victims of
         trafficking.  But each case, however, must be  judged  on  its  own
         facts.  China is a vast country and it may be, for example, that in
         a particular part of China the efforts to eliminate trafficking are
         determined and the level of complicity between state officials  and
         traffickers is low.  If an Appellant comes from such an area, or if
         she can relocate to such an area, there may  be  no  real  risk  to
         her."

12. Further the judge records at [98] the Respondent's assertion  that  the
    support from the authorities is sufficiently  effective  to  reach  the
    standards set out in Horvath, and considers the provisions of  Horvath,
    in the context of the facts, between [103] and [106].  Whilst the judge
    notes  the  subjective  views  of  the  Appellant   which   she   finds
    consistently expressed and genuinely held, it is the country and expert
    evidence of Elizabeth Flint at [107], [109] and [110], the views of the
    Respondent at [111], the expert evidence of Professor Sheehan at [113],
    [114] and [115] which provides the foundations for the judge's finding.
     The judge, at [112] reminds herself of the test that she  has  earlier
    identified, and at [17] and [18] factors  in  the  submissions  of  the
    Respondent.  The judge notes the positive regard that the  NRM  had  to
    the evidence of Ms Flint, and sets out  at  [121]  why  she  finds  the
    academic qualifications and experience of Professor Sheehan justify her
    giving weight to what she notes is an extremely  detailed  report  with
    referenced foot notes.  Although rejecting the Respondent's  criticisms
    of Professor Sheehan as articulated by the Presenting Officer the judge
    has plainly taken a balanced view of the report because for example  at
    [102] finds that her evidence was not sufficient  to  depart  from  the
    country guidance of HC and RC concerning the ease of  ordinary  migrant
    workers to obtain temporary rights to work in urban areas  noting  that
    the references are to evidence that predates the country guidance case.
     The judge was careful in paragraphs [113] and  [114]  to  examine  the
    sources  relied  upon  by  the  expert  and  notes  that  the  evidence
    concerning risk on re-trafficking does postdate  the  country  guidance
    case.  In short, the decision of Judge Solly does not run counter to HC
    and RC but represents precisely the individual  consideration  required
    by it.  The judge concludes that the expert is right when  she  asserts
    that the Appellant will be vulnerable to re-trafficking  in  China  for
    the same reasons that she was vulnerable in the first  place,  further,
    historically she has been trafficked by  an  established  network  with
    police connections, able to locate her in the event that she returns to
    her home area, something the judge  finds  that  she  is  bound  to  do
    because of  contacting  her  daughter  there.   The  judge  notes  that
    contrary to the grant of permission the Appellant's  family  have  been
    contacted by the traffickers.  In short even if the Appellant relocated
    she would remain at risk of being traced by the traffickers because  of
    the  continuing  connection  with  her  home  area  that  the  daughter
    presents.  Having found that there was not a sufficiency of  protection
    countrywide the issue of internal relocation falls away  to  the  point
    that any error asserted in these grounds is immaterial.

13. Mr Kotas made a valiant effort to save the ground by persuading  us  to
    interpret the ground as a challenge to the expert evidence arguing that
    "everything" turned on the evidence of Dr Sheehan, and because, in  his
    view, Dr Sheehan's evidence was insufficient to support the  conclusion
    of an inadequacy of  sufficiency  of  protection:  the  conclusion  was
    perverse.  However, as Mr Kotas recognised before us, the  grounds  are
    clearly drawn as an assertion that the  judge  has  not  made  her  own
    independent assessment, including of the country information, as to the
    availability and sufficiency of protection but merely relied  upon  the
    Appellant's subjective bare assertion. The ground  cannot  be  read  to
    extend to encompass a perversity challenge to the judge's assessment of
    the expert evidence.  As can be  seen  from  our  reasoning  above  the
    reduction to  reasoning  premised  on  Dr  Sheehan's  report  alone  is
    simplistic.  In any event, we see no  basis  upon  which  a  perversity
    challenge could succeed given that support evidence.

14. Ground 2 is an irrationality challenge to the decision  in  respect  of
    internal relocation.  If the matters set out above are  not  sufficient
    to dispose of this criticism of the judge, there is a clear finding  at
    [141] that internal relocation does not provide an answer to the  risk,
    and reading the decision in the round, as  we  are  bound  to  do,  the
    conclusion has its basis in the finding at [129].  The judge  sets  out
    the consistency between the two expert  reports,  the  absence  of  any
    criticism of Elizabeth Flint's report, the support  that  the  external
    evidence provides to their opinions and, relying on the expert  opinion
    from Professor Sheehan, finds that internal relocation is not a  viable
    option for the Appellant. That finding,  reads  back  to  [112],  which
    properly identifies that relocation  must  be  to  a  safe  place,  and
    continuing forward to [125], is clearly premised on  the  finding  that
    the Appellant would be at risk of re trafficking from new, if  not  the
    same traffickers, anywhere in China.   Although  the  judge's  detailed
    consideration jumps around a little, read in the round, she  has  dealt
    with the  relevant  issues  following  a  correct  self-direction,  and
    reached conclusions which were open to her on the evidence.

15.  Ms  Dipnarain  made  helpful  submissions  pointing  to  the  detailed
    reasoning of the judge concerning the  treatment  of  the  experts  and
    referred us to various parts  of  the  country  information  supporting
    their conclusions including  the  Trafficking  in  Persons  Report  and
    reminded us that the requirement to give reasons is not unduly  onerous
    particularly where there is no departure either from  country  guidance
    or from the views of the experts.  The judge made plain  what  evidence
    she expected and the primary data upon which she relied was  sufficient
    to support her conclusions.

16. In short for the reasons we have set above the evidence, including  the
    expert reports provides an adequate evidential basis for the  findings,
    and there is no merit in the Respondent's grounds.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal reveals no  error  of  law  and
    stands.






Signed            E. Davidge            Date 17 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


