

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09195/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester IAC                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27th July 2017                         |On 28th July 2017                |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                            KHALID HASSAN LAMOURY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel instructed by Broudie Jackson and Canter
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. Following a hearing on 3rd May 2016, Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede found
      the First-tier Tribunal judge had erred in law and she set  aside  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal. A  copy  of
      her decision is annexed herewith.


   2. The First-tier Tribunal judge had found the appellant was not at  risk
      of being persecuted for a Refugee Convention reason and nor would  his
      removal from the UK be a disproportionate interference in his  Article
      8 rights. The First-tier Tribunal judge also found that he was not  at
      risk because of the security situation in Libya.

   3. Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede found that the First-tier  Tribunal  judge
      had not erred in law in her conclusions that the appellant, who  is  a
      Libyan national, was not at risk of being  persecuted  for  a  Refugee
      Convention reason but  Judge  Kebede  concluded  that  the  background
      evidence was such that the First-tier Tribunal conclusions on  Article
      15(c) risk were not sustainable. The First-tier Tribunal decision  was
      therefore set aside in that regard only.

   4. Since that decision by Judge Kebede there  has  been  further  Country
      Guidance ZMM (Article 15(c) Libya  CG  [2017]  UKUT  00263  (IAC)  the
      headnote of which reads as follows:

             The violence in Libya has  reached  such  a  high  level  that
             substantial grounds are shown for believing that  a  returning
             civilian would, solely on  account  of  his  presence  on  the
             territory of that country or region, face a real risk of being
             subject to a threat to his life or person.


   5. The appellant, through his solicitors submitted a bundle of  documents
      including  reports  since  the  promulgation  of  ZMM.  There  was  no
      challenge to that material. Mr Harrison did not  seek  to  distinguish
      ZMM or make any submission that the appellant would  not  be  at  real
      risk of being subject to a threat to his  life  or  person  solely  on
      account of his presence in Libya.  Although  plainly  it  is  for  the
      appellant to prove his case, the lack of even a suggestion  that  this
      appellant would not be  at  risk  renders  any  further  consideration
      unnecessary, given ZMM.


   6. I allow the appeal.



     Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    The decision is set aside but the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    with regards to the Refugee Convention and Article 8 preserved.

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.






[pic]

                                    Date 27th July 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
