
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/09922/2012
     AA/09924/2012
     AA/09923/2012
     AA/09925/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Sent           |
|On 22nd August, 2013                          |On 22nd October 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



                                   Between

                                 SAFIA AMAN
                                 NAJAN AMAN
                             MOHAMMAD OMAR AMAN
                                 SITARA AMAN


                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Pickering of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The first named appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan  who  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 24th October, 2009.   She was born on 11th March,
    1972 and left Afghanistan on 11th October, 2009 and flew to India.  She
    left New Delhi on 14th October,  2009  and  flew  to  Dubai  where  she
    transited briefly before flying to the United Kingdom and  arriving  on
    14th October, 2009. The first named appellant claimed  asylum  on  19th
    October, 2009. The other three appellants are her  three  children  who
    travelled with her and arrived in the United Kingdom on the same day.

2.   The respondent refused the appellant's  application  and  directed  the
    appellant's removal from the United Kingdom. This resulted in an appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal which was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Cope sitting at North Shields on 11th February 2010.  He dismissed  the
    appeals  of  the  first  appellant  on  asylum  grounds,   humanitarian
    protection grounds and on human rights grounds and concluded that there
    were no valid appeals before him in respect of the  second,  third  and
    fourth appellants.

3.   Further submissions were made on behalf of the appellant  as  a  result
    of which the respondent accepted those submissions as a fresh claim for
    asylum. The respondent considered, but rejected the claim and  on  18th
    October,  2011  decided  to  remove  the  appellants.   The  appellants
    appealed and their appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Caskie
    in a determination promulgated following a hearing  on  26th  November,
    2012.  The judge allowed the appellant's  appeal  on  refugee  grounds,
    dismissed it on humanitarian protection grounds and allowed it on human
    rights grounds on the basis that the appellant's Article 3 rights would
    be breached on her removal to Afghanistan.

4.   The  respondent  appealed  this  decision  and  challenged  it  on  two
    grounds, the first on asylum grounds in finding that  the  first  named
    appellant would be at risk on return to Afghanistan as a single  female
    without male support, given the judge's findings at paragraphs 36,  37,
    70 and 73 that he did not accept the assertions made by the first named
    appellant that she did not know where her husband was.   The  Secretary
    of State suggested that in the light of any clear findings  as  to  his
    whereabouts or as to whether he could  provide  male  support  for  the
    appellant and her children on return to Afghanistan, the  determination
    was defective and the judge's findings  inadequate.   Additionally  the
    Immigration Judge found that the appellant's  elderly  relatives  could
    not provide the kind of male support  in  Afghanistan,  but  the  judge
    fails to give any adequate reasons for reaching such a finding.

5.   The second challenge is on the basis that  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's asylum claim was lacking in credibility, but it was said he
    materially erred by failing to given adequate reasons for finding  that
    the appellant would be at risk of  persecution  in  Afghanistan,  given
    that her account has been found to be lacking in credibility  and  that
    the judge has found that he has doubts as to  whether  the  appellant's
    husband has in fact returned.

6.   At the hearing before  me,  Mr  Kingham  for  the  respondent  drew  my
    attention to paragraphs 73 and  74  of  the  determination.   The  last
    sentence of  paragraph  73  poses  the  question  whether  or  not  the
    appellant's husband has returned to Afghanistan.  At 74 the judge  says
    he thinks  that  the  appellant's  husband  probably  has  returned  to
    Afghanistan, but he cannot on  the  evidence  before  him  exclude  the
    serious possibility  or  risk  that  he  has  not.   Having  made  such
    contradictory findings the judge went on to say that he  was  satisfied
    "by the very narrowest margins that  she  would  not  be  returning  to
    Afghanistan to join her husband there".

7.   Counsel sought to persuade me that the  determination  was  sound,  but
    having heard the Presenting Officer's submission and having  considered
    what the judge said at paragraph 74, agree that there are  difficulties
    with that the judge has found.

8.   I have concluded that the determination does contains errors of law  in
    that the judge has very clearly made findings that the appellant is  in
    contact with her husband  and  then  makes  contradictory  findings  in
    paragraph 74, by suggesting that her husband "probably has" returned to
    Afghanistan and then finding that he  could  not  exclude  the  serious
    possibility or real risk that he has not.

9.   I was told by Counsel that there were in fact two refugee  claims  made
    by the appellant, the first based on political reasons and  the  second
    based on the fact that on return to Afghanistan the appellant would  be
    a single female returning without male support.  It was agreed that the
    findings made by the judge at paragraphs 34, 36 and 37 to and including
    73 would all be preserved.  The questions to be determined are  whether
    on return to Afghanistan the first named  appellant  would  be  a  lone
    female without male support in Afghanistan on  which  she  could  rely.
    Clear findings on whether on the evidence the appellant's  husband  has
    returned  to  Afghanistan  or  whether  if  he  is   not  currently  in
    Afghanistan he could  return to Afghanistan in readiness  to  meet  the
    first named appellant and her children on  her  return  to  Afghanistan
    needs to be made, as does a finding as to whether or not the  appellant
    may have other male family members who might be in a position to  offer
    her support.

10.  Paragraph 7 of the Senior President's Practice Directions  provides  as
    follows:

         "7.1  Where under Section 12.1  of  the  2007  Act  proceedings  on
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the Upper  Tribunal  finds  that
             the making of a decision concerned involved the making  of  an
             error on a point of law the Upper Tribunal may set  aside  the
             decision and if it does must either  remit  the  case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal under Section 12(2)(b)(i)  or  proceed  in
             accordance with the relevant practice directions to remake the
             decision under Section 12(2)(b)(ii).


         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to remake the decision instead of remitting the  case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that (a) the effect of the error has been  to deprive a  party
             before the First-tier Tribunal of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
             opportunity for that party's case to be put to and  considered
             by the First-tier Tribunal, or (b) the nature or extent of any
             judicial fact finding which is  necessary  in  order  for  the
             decision in the appeal to be remade is such that having regard
             to the overriding objective in Rule 2  it  is  appropriate  to
             remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


         7.3  Remaking rather than remitting  will  nevertheless  constitute
             the normal approach to determining  appeals where  an error of
             law is found even if some further fact finding is necessary."

11.  I indicated to the representatives earlier today that it  is  difficult
    for me to rearrange a hearing in North  Shields,   because  of  listing
    difficulties and because I am not going to be available from the end of
    October for an uncertain period.  I reminded them of the provisions  of
    the Senior President's Practice Directions and both were  in  agreement
    that this was a suitable case, given the length  of  time  the  parties
    would have to wait, for the matter to be relisted before  me  in  North
    Shields were I to remit the appeal  for  rehearing  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal before a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other   than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Caskie.

12.  In view of the overriding objective informing  the  onward  conduct  of
    this appeal I have decided that it will be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Clear findings are  needed  as  indicated  above  and  clear
    findings  would  also  of  course  be  necessary  in  respect  of   the
    appellant's Article 8 appeal.





Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

