

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: AA/09222/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 February 2015             |On 5 March 2015                 |
|Prepared on 26 February 2015    |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    B. R.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Vidvadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Respondent is a citizen  of  Bangladesh,  now  aged  18.  He
           entered the UK in August 2008 as a visitor at  the  age  of  12,
           using what he accepts was a legitimate Bangladesh  passport  and
           visa for entry to the UK, issued in his own name. He  says  that
           the individuals with whom he travelled were not related to  him,
           although  they  were  represented  at  the  time  of  the   visa
           application, and at the date of entry, to be his father,  mother
           and younger sister.
        2. The Respondent says that he was housed and cared for as  an  act
           of charity by a Bangladeshi family from the date  of  his  entry
           into the UK until mid 2010. He denies that he is related to  any
           member of that family, or that they  were  anything  other  than
           strangers that he had approached by chance for assistance.
        3. In mid 2010 the Respondent was referred to  East  Sussex  social
           services, and thereafter he has been  a  "looked  after"  child,
           housed with foster parents.  He  was  enrolled  in  school  upon
           arrival in the UK in 2008, and he is presently  studying  for  A
           levels which ordinarily he would sit in May 2015.
        4. In July 2010 an application was made by the  Respondent,  or  on
           his behalf, for asylum. That application was  refused,  although
           in accordance with the  Appellant's  policy  he  was  granted  a
           period of three  years  discretionary  leave  to  remain  as  an
           unaccompanied minor until  November  2013.  That  leave  expired
           without an application being made for its variation.
        5. On 14 April 2014 the Respondent made an application for a  grant
           of leave to remain based upon his Article 8 rights, but this was
           refused on 29 September 2014, and in consequence a decision  was
           made by the Appellant by reference  to  s47  to  remove  him  to
           Bangladesh. Although it is not clear, it is  possible  that  the
           Appellant accepting that the Respondent was still a child,  took
           no point in relation to the expiry  of  the  previous  grant  of
           leave.
        6. The Respondent's appeal against those immigration decisions  was
           heard on 5  December  2014.  It  was  dismissed  on  asylum  and
           humanitarian  protection  grounds,  but  allowed  on  Article  8
           grounds, in a Decision promulgated on 30 December 2014 by  First
           Tier Tribunal Judge Shanahan.
        7. By a decision of First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Simpson  dated  19
           January 2015 the  First  Tier  Tribunal  granted  the  Appellant
           permission to appeal on the basis it was arguable the Judge  had
           erred in his approach to the Article 8 appeal;  having  arguably
           embarked upon a "free wheeling approach", having failed to apply
           s117B(5) of the 2002 Act, and having failed to identify  why  in
           the context of the findings of fact that he had made the removal
           to Bangladesh would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
           for the Respondent.
        8. Thus the matter comes before me.
        9. The Respondent is not legally represented as a result of his own
           choice. As a "looked after" child he believes that  he  has  the
           right  to  require  the  local  authority  to  provide  suitably
           qualified and experienced legal representation for him,  but  he
           told me that he wished  to  make  his  own  arguments  upon  his
           appeal. I was content for him to do  so,  and  I  then  had  the
           benefit of well prepared, pertinent,  and  succinct  submissions
           upon the nature of his life in the UK, and the use that  he  had
           made of the opportunities that had been extended to him.

      The unchallenged findings of primary fact
       10. The Respondent has brought no cross appeal against the rejection
           of his asylum, Article 3, and humanitarian protection appeals.
       11. There is no challenge from either party before me in relation to
           the Judge's findings upon the  following  matters,  which  I  am
           satisfied were well open to him to make on the  evidence  before
           him, and which were adequately reasoned by him;
                     i) Although the Respondent  might  believe  that  there
                        existed some danger for him in Bangladesh he had  no
                        well founded fear of persecution  in  the  event  of
                        return [29].
                    ii) The Respondent was not the  subject  of  threats  of
                        kidnapping in Bangladesh in order  to  extort  money
                        from  his  father  prior  to  his   departure   from
                        Bangladesh [33].
                   iii) Even if the Respondent was now an atheist  he  would
                        not suffer persecution as a result of those views in
                        the event of return to Bangladesh [50].
                    iv) The Respondent had not  told  the  truth  about  his
                        parents having cut  off  contact  with  him,  either
                        before, or  after,  his  departure  from  Bangladesh
                        [30].
                     v) The Respondent had not  told  the  truth  about  his
                        abandonment by an agent upon arrival in the UK,  and
                        then his ability to find  by  chance  a  Bangladeshi
                        family who were strangers to him, who would care for
                        him for so long. In turn he had not told  the  truth
                        when  he  had  claimed  to  have  subsequently  lost
                        contact with that family [32].
                    vi)  The  Respondent  was  brought  to  the  UK  at  the
                        direction of his parents, even if that was  effected
                        by agents rather than them in person, and  had  been
                        placed with the family with whom  he  had  initially
                        lived in the UK. Those  steps  were  taken  for  the
                        purpose of his educational  and  economic  advantage
                        [33].
                   vii) The Respondent did not satisfy the  requirements  of
                        paragraph 276ADE, and did not otherwise qualify  for
                        a grant of leave to  remain  under  the  Immigration
                        Rules, or Appendix FM thereto; either  when  he  had
                        made his applications for leave, or, when his appeal
                        was heard by the Tribunal.
       12. It is a necessary consequence of his  findings  that  the  Judge
           made the adverse finding that the Respondent  was  in  truth  in
           contact with the members of his extended  family,  and  that  he
           could therefore be reunited with them upon return to Bangladesh,
           notwithstanding the fact that he had as  yet  not  provided  the
           details that would allow his family to be traced and identified.
       13. These findings should have been the context in which the Article
           8 appeal was considered by the Tribunal outside the  Immigration
           Rules.
       14. It was not suggested before the Tribunal that  the  decision  to
           remove the Respondent to Bangladesh posed an interference in any
           "family life" established by  the  Respondent  in  the  UK  with
           either relatives (that would of course have  been  contradictory
           to his case about having no contact  with  them),  or  with  the
           members of his foster family. The  appeal  was  therefore  quite
           properly considered by the Tribunal solely on the basis that the
           removal decision constituted interference  in  the  Respondent's
           "private life".


      Error of Law?
       15. The Judge did accept that  there  was  an  established  "private
           life" in the UK [41] and that the removal decision would  amount
           to an interference in it to such an extent that it would  engage
           his Article 8 rights. The decisions under  appeal  were  however
           properly  made  pursuant  to  the  Immigration  Rules.  Thus  he
           considered that the outcome of the appeal turned upon the  issue
           of the proportionality of the removal decision.
       16. In consequence of his acceptance  that  this  was  only  ever  a
           "private life" appeal, the Judge ought to  have  considered  the
           issue of proportionality in the light of the  terms  of  ss117A-
           117D of the 2002 Act, and, the  guidance  to  be  found  in  the
           decision of the Supreme Court in Patel [2013]  UKSC  72.  Whilst
           s117B is set  out  in  full  within  the  Decision  (even  those
           subsections that have no obvious relevance to the appeal), I  am
           not satisfied that there is an adequate analysis of the evidence
           in the light of the relevant statutory provisions, and  thus  it
           is not possible from the Decision  to  see  how  the  Judge  has
           applied the relevant provisions to the evidence  before  him  in
           the light of the adverse findings of fact that he made. There is
           also no reference in the Determination to  the  guidance  to  be
           found in Patel, although the following statements  of  principle
           were in my judgement relevant to the evidence before him;
                 "a near-miss under the rules cannot provide substance to  a
                 human rights case which  is  otherwise  lacking  in  merit"
                 [56].


                 "It is important to  remember  that  article  8  is  not  a
                 general dispensing power. It is to  be  distinguished  from
                 the Secretary of  State's  discretion  to  allow  leave  to
                 remain outside the rules, which may  be  unrelated  to  any
                 protected human right. The merits  of  a  decision  not  to
                 depart from the rules are not reviewable on appeal: section
                 86(6). One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call in  Pankina
                 for "common sense" in  the  application  of  the  rules  to
                 graduates who have been studying in the UK for  some  years
                 (see para 47 above). However, such considerations do not by
                 themselves provide grounds of appeal under article 8, which
                 is concerned with private or family life, not education  as
                 such. The opportunity for a promising student  to  complete
                 his course in this country, however  desirable  in  general
                 terms, is not in itself a right protected under article 8."
                 [57]
       17. In my judgement, although the Judge's initial  approach  to  the
           Article 8 appeal was quite properly to direct himself  that  the
           Respondent could not meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration
           Rules for a grant  of  leave  to  remain,  and  that  "there  is
           significant  weight  on  the  Secretary  of  State's  case   for
           removal", he nonetheless fell into error in his approach to  the
           proper context in which that Article  8  should  be  considered.
           Article 8 did not afford either the Respondent, or the Tribunal,
           the opportunity to simply side-step, or to otherwise ignore, the
           consequences of the adverse findings of fact that  he  had  made
           earlier. The proper factual  context  in  which  the  Article  8
           appeal should have been considered were the findings that led to
           the rejection of the asylum and Article 3 appeals.
       18. It followed that the proper context  was  that  this  young  man
           could be returned to Bangladesh in safety,  and,  since  he  had
           never lost contact with his family, that he  could  be  reunited
           with them upon return.
       19. Whilst the Respondent had been cared for, and educated,  in  the
           UK at considerable public expense as a result of the actions  of
           his parents, the fact that he wished to  continue  to  be  cared
           for, and to continue to further his education, at further public
           expense was not a good reason for the Appellant  being  required
           to facilitate that desire. As the Court of Appeal pointed out in
           EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 the UK cannot  be  expected
           to educate the world, any  more  than  it  can  be  expected  to
           provide health care facilities to the world. The Respondent  had
           no right, or  legitimate  expectation  to  education  at  public
           expense in the UK.
       20. It is plain from the Decision, even when it is read as a  whole,
           that this was not the context in which the Article 8 appeal  was
           considered. On the contrary great weight  was  attached  by  the
           Judge to the  success  that  the  Respondent  had  made  of  the
           opportunities that he had been given in the UK, and particularly
           to his interest in cricket, and to his assimilation into British
           culture. Thus very significant weight was given to the  "private
           life" established in the UK, despite the clear terms of s117B.
       21. Moreover, inconsistently with his findings in paragraphs 30,  32
           and 33, the Judge in the course of his discussion  in  paragraph
           51, appears  to  have  considered  the  proportionality  of  the
           removal decision on the basis that the Respondent  was  a  young
           man who had enjoyed no contact with his family since his arrival
           in the UK in 2008 at the age of 12, and who would have no family
           support system that he  could  access  in  Bangladesh  upon  his
           return. It was simply not open to the Judge to  change  tack  in
           that way, and the clear impression is given that  he  overlooked
           the adverse findings of fact he had earlier made in  the  course
           of his rejection of the asylum appeal.
       22. Even if it were open to the Judge to find that a young  man  who
           had lived in Bangladesh to the  age  of  12,  and  then  with  a
           Bangladeshi family to the age of 14, could genuinely  have  lost
           fluency in Bengali by the age of 17 (as  the  Judge  appears  to
           have found in the course of paragraph 50) - even the  Respondent
           accepted in the course  of  his  oral  evidence  that  he  could
           acquire full spoken fluency upon return to Bangladesh,  although
           it would take him longer to attain written fluency.
       23. Accordingly I am satisfied that the Judge considered the Article
           8 appeal in the wrong  factual  context.  Thus,  the  Tribunal's
           decision on the Article 8 appeal must be set aside and remade.


      The decision remade
       24. If that were my decision the parties were agreed that I could go
           on and remake the decision upon the Article 8 appeal without the
           need to hear any further evidence, or to revisit the findings of
           primary fact. There was no material change in  circumstances  on
           the Respondent's part since the date of the hearing. The parties
           were content that I should give written reasons for  the  remade
           decision.
       25. There is no need  to  repeat  the  immigration  history  of  the
           Respondent, or the adverse findings of fact made in relation  to
           him by the Judge.
       26. The Respondent is now an  adult,  having  attained  the  age  of
           eighteen before the appeal hearing in the First  Tier  Tribunal.
           Even if he had remained a child, the Tribunal's  approach  would
           have to be consistent with the  guidance  to  be  found  in  the
           decision in EV. Thus the assessment of his best interests  would
           have to be made in the context that he is a Bangladeshi national
           with no right to remain in the UK, and whose parents are  either
           in the UK illegally with no right to remain, or  in  Bangladesh.
           He is in contact with them  and  thus  has  the  ability  to  be
           reunited with them in Bangladesh.  He has  benefited  from  both
           care and education at public expense in the UK since arrival. He
           has no right, or legitimate expectation to continue  to  receive
           education at public expense in the UK, and he would face no lack
           of safety in the event of return to Bangladesh.
       27. I bear in mind that the Respondent is the majority  of  the  way
           through working towards  his  A  level  examinations.  There  is
           however no evidence that would permit a finding  that  he  could
           not  complete  his  preparation  for  those  examinations   from
           Bangladesh, or that he  could  not  sit  those  examinations  in
           Bangladesh. Indeed, as things stand at present he is  unable  to
           sit those examinations in the UK because  he  has  no  leave  to
           remain.
       28. To the extent that the Respondent has  hopes  for  a  University
           education in the UK, he acknowledges that he has not yet applied
           for a place at University, because he has no  leave  to  remain,
           and, is unable to finance such study privately.
       29. It  obviously  would  be  open  to  the  Respondent  to  seek  a
           University place in Bangladesh, relying upon the  qualifications
           he has obtained to date, and those he hopes  to  obtain  in  the
           future. If he had access to  the  requisite  funds  through  his
           extended family (and he has consistently claimed that his family
           is wealthy) then he could even apply for entry  clearance  as  a
           student in order to allow him to study further in the UK.
       30. The Respondent is plainly a talented cricketer,  but  Bangladesh
           is a nation in which that sport is held in  high  regard.  There
           are opportunities there for him to pursue his love of that game,
           even to the extent of making a living from it, should he  choose
           to do so.


      Sections 117A, 117B of the 2002 Act
       31. Since I am remaking the decision after 28 July 2014 I  must  (in
           particular) have regard to the considerations listed in s117B to
           the 2002 Act when considering whether  an  interference  with  a
           person's right to respect for private life  is  justified  under
           Article 8(2).
       32. I note that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is
           in the public interest; s117B(1). I also note that little weight
           should be given to a "private life" established by a person when
           their immigration status is precarious, or they are  in  the  UK
           unlawfully; s117B(4)(5). I am satisfied  that  at  all  material
           times the Respondent has either had a lawful immigration  status
           that is nonetheless "precarious" within the  meaning  of  s117B,
           or, that he has been in the UK  unlawfully.  Since  this  appeal
           only concerns his "private life" Parliament has  concluded  that
           the effect is the same, whether  he  had  a  lawful  immigration
           status or not.
       33. The fact that the Respondent speaks  writes  and  reads  English
           fluently does not mean that he enjoys thereby a right to a grant
           of leave to remain  that  he  does  not  otherwise  qualify  for
           pursuant to the Immigration Rules. Nor  does  that  factor  give
           substance to an Article  8  appeal  that  is  otherwise  without
           merit.
       34. The Respondent  is  not  financially  independent.  Although  he
           believes his family to be a wealthy one, he  is  dependent  upon
           public funds.


      Conclusions
       35. In my consideration of the  Article  8  appeal  pursued  by  the
           Appellant I have to determine the following separate questions:
            . Is there an  interference  with  the  right  to  respect  for
              private life (which includes the right to physical and  moral
              integrity) and family life?
            . If so  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
              gravity as to potentially engage Article 8?
            . Is that interference in accordance with the law?
            . Does that interference have legitimate aims?
            . Is the interference proportionate in a democratic society  to
              the legitimate aim to be achieved?
       36.  This  is  an  appeal  that  turns  upon  the   issue   of   the
           proportionality of the decision to remove. I note  the  guidance
           to be found upon the proper approach to a "private life" case in
           the decisions of Patel, and Nasim [2014] UKUT  25.  I  note  the
           public interest in removal; the following passage in Nasim  sets
           out the relevant principles;
          14. Whilst the concept of a "family life"  is  generally  speaking
              readily identifiable, the concept of a "private life" for the
              purposes of Article 8 is inherently less clear. At one end of
              the "continuum" stands the  concept  of  moral  and  physical
              integrity  or  "physical  and  psychological  integrity"  (as
              categorised by the ECtHR in eg Pretty v United Kingdom (2002)
              35 EHRR 1) as  to  which,  in  extreme  instances,  even  the
              state's interest in  removing  foreign  criminals  might  not
              constitute a proportionate response. However,  as  one  moves
              down the continuum, one encounters aspects  of  private  life
              which, even if engaging Article 8(1) (if not alone,  then  in
              combination with other factors) are so far removed  from  the
              "core" of Article 8 as to  be  readily  defeasible  by  state
              interests, such as the importance of maintaining  a  credible
              and coherent system of immigration control.
           15. At this point on the continuum the essential elements of the
              private life relied upon will normally  be  transposable,  in
              the sense of being capable of replication in their  essential
              respects, following a person's return to their home  country.
              Thus, in headnote 3 of MM (Tier 1 PSW; Art 8;  private  life)
              Zimbabwe [2009] UKAIT 0037 we find that:-
               "3. When determining the issue  of  proportionality  ...  it
               will always be important  to  evaluate  the  extent  of  the
               individual's  social  ties  and  relationships  in  the  UK.
               However,  a  student  here  on  a  temporary  basis  has  no
               expectation of a right to remain in order to  further  these
               ties and relationships if the criteria of  the  points-based
               system are not met. Also, the character of  an  individual's
               "private life" relied upon is ordinarily by its very  nature
               of a type which can  be  formed  elsewhere,  albeit  through
               different social ties, after the individual is removed  from
               the UK."
           16.  As  was  stated  in  the  earlier  case  of  MG  (assessing
              interference with private life) Serbia and Montenegro  [2005]
              UKAIT 00113:-
               "A person's job and precise  programme  of  studies  may  be
               different in the country to which he is to be  returned  and
               his network of friendships and other acquaintances is likely
               to be different too, but his private life will  continue  in
               respect of all its essential elements."
           17. The difference between these types of "private life" case and
              a case founded on family life is instructive. As was noted in
              MM, the relationships involved in  a  family  life  are  more
              likely  to  be  unique,  so  as  to  be  incapable  of  being
              replicated once an  individual  leaves  the  United  Kingdom,
              leaving behind, for example,  his  or  her  spouse  or  minor
              child.
           18. In R (on the application of the Countryside Alliance)  v  AG
              and others [2007] UKHL 52, Lord Bingham, having described the
              concept of private life in Article 8 as "elusive", said that:
               "... the purpose of the article is in my view clear.  It  is
               to protect the individual against intrusion by agents of the
               state, unless for  good  reason,  into  the  private  sphere
               within which individuals expect to be left alone to  conduct
               their personal affairs and live their personal lives as they
               choose" [10].
           19. It is important to bear in  mind  that  the  "good  reason",
              which the state must invoke is not a fixity. British citizens
              may enjoy friendships, employment and studies that are in all
              essential respects the same as those enjoyed by persons  here
              who  are  subject  to  such  controls.  The  fact  that   the
              government  cannot  arbitrarily  interfere  with  a   British
              citizen's enjoyment of those things, replicable  though  they
              may be, and that, in practice, interference is likely  to  be
              justified only by strong reasons, such as imprisonment for  a
              criminal offence, cannot be used to restrict the government's
              ability to rely on the enforcement of immigration controls as
              a reason for interfering  with  friendships,  employment  and
              studies enjoyed by a person who  is  subject  to  immigration
              controls.
          20. We therefore agree with Mr  Jarvis  that  [57]  of  Patel  and
              Others is a significant exhortation from the Supreme Court to
              re-focus attention on the nature and  purpose  of  Article  8
              and, in particular, to recognise its limited  utility  to  an
              individual where one has moved along the continuum, from that
              Article's core  area  of  operation  towards  what  might  be
              described as its fuzzy penumbra. The limitation arises,  both
              from what will at  that  point  normally  be  the  tangential
              effect on the individual of  the  proposed  interference  and
              from the fact that, unless there are  particular  reasons  to
              reduce the public interest of enforcing immigration controls,
              that interest  will  consequently  prevail  in  striking  the
              proportionality  balance  (even  assuming   that   stage   is
              reached).
           21. In conclusion on this first general matter, we find that the
              nature of the right asserted by each of the appellants, based
              on their desire, as former students, to undertake a period of
              post-study work in the United  Kingdom,  lies  at  the  outer
              reaches of cases  requiring  an  affirmative  answer  to  the
              second of the five "Razgar" questions and that, even if  such
              an affirmative  answer  needs  to  be  given,  the  issue  of
              proportionality is to be resolved decisively in favour of the
              respondent, by reference to her functions as the guardian  of
              the system of  immigration  controls,  entrusted  to  her  by
              Parliament.
       37.  To  the  extent  that  the  Respondent  relies  upon  his  good
           character, and his desire to complete his education  within  the
           UK the following passage in Nasim is applicable;
          25. A further seam running through the appellant's submissions was
              that, during their time in the United Kingdom, they had  been
              law-abiding,  had  not  relied  on  public  funds   and   had
              contributed to the United Kingdom  economy  by  paying  their
              students' fees. Their aim  was  now  to  contribute  to  that
              economy by working.
           26. We do not consider that this set of  submissions  takes  the
              appellants' cases anywhere. It cannot rationally be contended
              that their Article 8 rights have been  made  stronger  merely
              because, during their time in this  country,  they  have  not
              sought public funds, have refrained from committing  criminal
              offences  and  have  paid  the  fees  required  in  order  to
              undertake their courses. Similarly,  a  desire  to  undertake
              paid employment in the United Kingdom  is  not,  as  such,  a
              matter that can enhance a person's right to  remain  here  in
              reliance on Article 8.
           27. The only significance of not having criminal convictions and
              not  having  relied  on  public  funds  is  to  preclude  the
              respondent from pointing to any public interest in respect of
              the appellants' removal, over and above the basic  importance
              of maintaining a firm  and  coherent  system  of  immigration
              control. However, for reasons we have already enunciated,  as
              a general matter that  public  interest  factor  is,  in  the
              circumstances of these cases, more than  adequate  to  render
              removal proportionate.
       38. To sum up then, the appeal does not rely upon the core  concepts
           of moral and physical integrity. In my  judgement  the  evidence
           relied upon does not establish that  there  are  any  compelling
           compassionate circumstances that mean the decision to remove the
           Respondent  to  Bangladesh,  leads  to  an  unjustifiably  harsh
           outcome.


   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      30 December 2014 did not involve the making of an error of law in  the
      decision to dismiss the asylum and humanitarian protection appeals and
      that decision is accordingly confirmed.


       The Determination did however involve the making of an error  of  law
      in the decision to allow the  Article  8  appeal  that  requires  that
      decision to be set aside and remade. I remake that decision so  as  to
      dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal directs  otherwise  the  Respondent  is
        granted anonymity in the interests of his son. No report  of  these
        proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify any member of the
        family. This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the
        Respondent. Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to
        proceedings being brought for contempt of court.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 26 February 2015
