
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/09242/2014
                                                               AA/09247/2014
                                                               AA/09249/2014
                                                               AA/09250/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 January 2016                    |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                   MS CHAHRAZAD SAHRAOUI (FIRST appellant)
                   MR AHMED ALI ACHOUR (SECOND appellant)
                      MR YASIN ACHOUR (THIRD appellant)
                     MR YOUCEF ACHOUR (FOURTH appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms P Solanki, Counsel instructed by Bindmans LLP
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



The History of the Appeals

1.   The Appellants, who are a mother and her three children,  are  citizens
    of Algeria.  They appealed against a  decision  of  the  Respondent  to
    remove them from the UK as illegal entrants.  Their appeal was heard on
    29 April 2015 at  Taylor  House  by  Judge  Coll.   Both  parties  were
    represented, the Appellants by Ms Solanki.  In a decision of  29  June,
    promulgated on 7 July, 2015, the appeals were  dismissed  on  political
    asylum, humanitarian protection and Articles 2, 3 and  8  human  rights
    grounds and under the Immigration Rules.

2.   Permission to appeal was refused on 31  July  2015  by  Judge  McClure,
    essentially on the basis that the judge had  given  sufficient  reasons
    for her conclusions.  On second application permission was  granted  on
    16 September 2015 by Judge Smith in the following terms:
         "1.  The Appellants appeal against the Respondent's decision  dated
             22 October 2014 refusing Ms C S's asylum claim  and  directing
             the  Appellants'  removal  to  Algeria.   Their  appeals  were
             dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Coll  in  a  decision
             promulgated on 7 July 2014 ("the Decision").
         2.   In light of the asserted basis of the  asylum  claim  and  the
             involvement of minor Appellants,  I  have  made  an  anonymity
             direction in relation to all Appellants.
         3.   In relation to ground two, although the findings  in  relation
             to risk to the Appellants as a lone mother with young children
             are  detailed,  a  number  of  those  findings  appear  to  be
             speculative and inconsistent with the documentary evidence  of
             the witnesses.  The Judge has also arguably failed to properly
             analyse and apply  the  objective  evidence.   The  Judge  has
             arguably erred in her consideration of this issue.  This issue
             is linked also to ground  five  which  deals  with  the  human
             rights claim based on the First  Appellant's  situation  as  a
             lone mother on return to  Algeria.   The  Judge  has  arguably
             erred in her consideration also of that issue.
         4.   I would not have granted permission on grounds three and  four
             but the findings in  relation  to  those  issues  may  have  a
             material bearing  on  grounds  two  and  five  and  I  do  not
             therefore restrict the grant of permission".

3.   The Respondent submitted a Rule 24  notice,  essentially  arguing  that
    the  judge  gave  cogent  reasons  for  her  conclusions,  which   were
    sustainable  from  the  evidence,  and  that  the  grounds  of   appeal
    represented disagreement with them.

4.   The first Appellant, together with her solicitor,  attended  the  error
    of law hearing, which took the form of submissions.  I have taken these
    into account, together with the very detailed grounds  of  application.
    I reserved my decision.

Decision

5.   The permission application is based upon a  number  of  grounds,  which
    were developed by Ms Solanki at the hearing.  I have concluded that  it
    is sufficient for me to address one of them, which is that of  risk  on
    return, as to some extent it subsumes aspects of the others.

6.   There is much evidence, at paragraphs  13  to  22  of  the  Appellant's
    statement, of her having been subjected to  abuse,  both  physical  and
    emotional, by various members of her  husband's  family.   However  the
    judge found at paragraph 104 that on the  basis  of  her  evidence  the
    Appellant  had  experienced  problems  from  only  one  member  of  her
    husband's family.  This conclusion is not grounded in the evidence, and
    the judge does  not  explain  why  she  rejects  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant to the contrary.  She goes on to find at paragraph  120  that
    the Appellant was not at risk  from  her  in-laws  and  that  the  only
    antagonistic actions towards her came from her sister's  daughter,  and
    did not include physical abuse.  Again, this finding does not sit  with
    the evidence.

7.   The judge considered  letters  from  the  Appellant's  two  sisters  in
    Algeria, each explaining why they could not accommodate her (paragraphs
    121, 122).  Noting that neither had provided anything akin to a  signed
    witness statement attesting to the truth of the contents and  were  not
    available  for  cross-examination,  the  judge,  whilst  not   entirely
    discounting the letters, could give them little weight (paragraph 123).
     There was some suggestion  that  the  sisters  would  attend  to  give
    evidence, but they did not do so (paragraph 8).  However they  live  in
    Algeria, and it was not established that they were in the  UK  at  all,
    and therefore available to give evidence.  Each has prepared  a  signed
    statement, with a certified translation.

8.   The judge considered a report by One World Research  and  Alice  Jones,
    who consulted with a number of people including a university  professor
    in Morocco and a lawyer who worked for  the  American  Bar  Association
    (paragraphs 115, 116).  The judge preferred  their  evidence  that  for
    financial reasons it would not be possible for the  Appellant  to  live
    with her sisters for longer than three to four months (paragraph  124).
    On that basis she found that the first Appellant would be able to  stay
    with each sister for three to four months, thus giving her  up  to  six
    months  minimum  in  which  to  find  herself  suitable   accommodation
    (paragraph 124).

9.   This chain of reasoning lacks logic.  Nobody except the  sisters  could
    say whether or not they were able and willing to accommodate  not  only
    the first Appellant but also her three young children, and the reasons.
     The judge had insufficient basis for rejecting their  evidence,  which
    gave the reasons why they were unable to do so.

10.  The judge found  that  the  Appellant  would  be  able  to  live  in  a
    Government-run centre or shelter for three months (paragraph 125).  The
    background evidence was that such shelters  had  limited  capacity  and
    that women who were in a serious  situation  of  threat  would  not  be
    turned away.  So she found that the Appellant and  her  three  children
    would then be able to live for up to three or four  months  in  such  a
    shelter (paragraph 126).

11.   The  judge  continued  that,   although   seeking   her   own   rented
    accommodation as a perceived single woman would be very difficult,  she
    would not discount help from either of her sisters' husbands or from  a
    male mosque member in the UK; a male relative  or  supporter  could  in
    this way secure  a  tenancy  on  her  behalf,  thus  circumventing  the
    difficulty faced by a single woman.

12.  This finding was speculative, and there was no evidence to support  it.
     One of the sisters said that her husband had refused to help the first
    Appellant (paragraph 122) and the other that the  first  Appellant  had
    been threatened by her husband's  parents  (paragraph  121).   On  that
    basis it was not reasonably likely that either of her sisters' husbands
    would be willing to help her, even if they could afford to  do  so,  of
    which there was no  evidence.   Nor  was  there  any  evidence  of  the
    availability of any other male relative or supporter from a  mosque  in
    the UK.

13.  These findings on the availability of accommodation, with each  of  her
    sisters for three to four months and then, after another three to  four
    months in a shelter, in accommodation which would  be  found  for  her,
    were speculative.  In AA (Uganda) the Court of Appeal wrote:
         "54. I consider that the Immigration Judge's decision was wrong  in
             law in at least three respects.  One  of  those  is  that  she
             proceeded on the basis that, if AA were returned  to  Kampala,
             she would be able to receive support from the church there  at
             least comparable to that which she has been  able  to  receive
             from a particular  church  in  this  country.   There  was  no
             evidence to support that conclusion; it was pure  speculation.
             I agree with Lord Justice Buxton's judgment at  paragraphs  11
             to 14 as to the significance of that error".

14.  Based upon the evidence, the judge found that  two  men  who  had  been
    supporting  the  Appellants  financially  would  continue  to   do   so
    (paragraph 131).  However, in the face of  the  letters  from  the  two
    sisters effectively to the contrary, the judge found that there  was  a
    degree of family feeling  and  sympathy  between  the  two  sisters  in
    Algeria and the first Appellant, which might lead them to  provide  her
    with outgrown clothing, books, school equipment and food.  Again,  this
    finding was speculative.  Drawing all of this together, the judge found
    that there was no real  risk  of  homelessness  for  the  Appellant  in
    Algeria, and that she would therefore be safe and free from the risk of
    ill-treatment for a substantial period of time (paragraph  134).   This
    conclusion was partially  reached  in  the  face  of  evidence  to  the
    contrary and was partially speculative.

15.  It follows that the judicial conclusions upon the absence  of  risk  of
    return are flawed and cannot stand.  Thus  the  decision  must  be  set
    aside and remitted for rehearing.  Both parties  agreed  that  in  that
    event it should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

16.  The original decision contains an error of law and is set aside.

17.  The appeal is to be reheard on all issues in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    at Taylor House by any judge other than Judge Coll.

18.  Anonymity direction not made.


Signed   Dated: 11 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis
