
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09005/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 May 2015                        |On 18 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                SOHAIL BANAEI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, counsel instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
    in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in
    the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Herwald promulgated  on
    23 January 2015 which allowed the Appellant's appeal against a  refusal
    of asylum.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 19 March 1969 and is a national of Iran.

 4. On 16 February 2014  the  Appellant  applied  for  asylum  having  been
    encountered at Gatwick Airport travelling on a stolen GBR passport. The
    Appellant's claim was based on his assertion that he  was  at  risk  on
    return as he had converted from Islam to the Yaresan  religion  and  he
    would be at risk from having left Iran illegally  and  returning  as  a
    failed asylum seeker.

 5. On 20 October 2014 the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) The Appellant's nationality was accepted.

      b) The Appellant's conversion to the Yarsan religion was not accepted.

      c) The Appellant's failure to  claim  asylum  in  Italy  was  said  to
         undermine his credibility.

      d) There was no reference to or assessment of  the  Appellant's  claim
         that he had left Iran illegally.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Herwald ("the Judge") allowed the appeal against the Respondent's
    decision.

 7. The Judge found :

      a) He took into account all of the documentary evidence before him and
         heard oral evidence from the Appellant.

      b) He did not find that the Appellant's claim that he was a convert to
         Yarsan was credible.

      c) Given that he had previously recorded that the Respondent  did  not
         deny that the Appellant had left Iran illegally the  expert  report
         from  Dr  Kahkhi  suggested  that   the   circumstances   in   Iran
         underpinning the conclusions of the court in SB  (risk  on  return-
         illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053 for which  he  provided  a
         report had  changed  to  such  an  extent  that  having  left  Iran
         illegally and returning as a failed asylum  seeker  would  put  the
         Appellant at risk on return.

 8. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that:

      a) The Judge had made adverse credibility findings in respect  of  his
         religious conversion he had failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for
         accepting tht the Appellant had left Iran illegally.

      b) The Respondent had implicitly not accepted that the Appellant  left
         Iran illegally because what it did and did not accept was  set  out
         in the refusal letter at paragraphs 37-39.

      c) The Judge failed to give adequate reasons for going behind  the  CG
         case of SB.

 9. On 12 February 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly gave permission  to
    appeal stating that all grounds were arguable.

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Johnstone on behalf  of  the
    Respondent that :

    (a)    The Judge made a number of adverse credibility findings  against
         the Appellant but without a positive concession the Judge took into
         account the experts report based on the Appellant's assertion  that
         he left Iran illegally.

    (b)    The expert report did not support the assertion  that  returning
         without a passport and travel documents would lead to detention.

    (c)    The Judge did not  give  adequate  reasons  for  departing  from
         country  guidance  failing  to  take  into  account  the   Practice
         Direction.

11. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Brown submitted that :

      a) The Respondent did not totally reject the  Appellant's  credibility
         in that he accepted that the Appellant left Iran via Italy.

      b) The Appellant had given an account  of  his  illegal  exit  in  his
         Screening Interview and had  asserted  that  he  had  never  had  a
         passport.

      c) The finding at paragraph 13 (3) was therefore sustainable.

      d) The Respondent was represented at the hearing. The consequences  of
         illegal departure were a major part of the  Appellant's  case.  The
         Respondent did not  address  the  report,  did  not  apply  for  an
         adjournment and did not suggest in submissions that  the  Appellant
         had not left illegally..

      e) What is written in paragraph 13(c) reflects  the  attitude  of  the
         res's representative and the  fact  that  the  refusal  letter  was
         silent on this issue.

      f) The Judge  then  had  to  consider  whether  there  was  sufficient
         evidence to justify departing from SB. The authority of SG (Iraq) v
         SSHD; OR (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940  allowed  the  court  to
         depart from the case if very strong  grounds  supported  by  cogent
         evidence were adduced justifying that course. The Judge  looked  at
         the report and gave reasons for his decision.

      g) Had the submissions made  today  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
         credibility and his illegal exit been made before Judge Herwald  he
         could be criticized but they were not.



Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. This was an application for asylum based on the  Appellant's  claim  to
    have converted from Islam to the Yarsan religion. The Judge  took  into
    account the Appellant's claim as set out in  his  screening  interview,
    asylum interview,  chronology  and  rebuttal  statement  all  of  which
    included an unequivocal assertion  that  he  had  left  Iran  illegally
    without a passport and travelled via Turkey and Italy  and  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom using a stolen British passport.

14. Aspects of his claim, his  identity,  nationality,  the  fact  that  he
    travelled via Italy and travelled on a stolen passport were accepted by
    the Respondent .The fact that the  Appellant  was  encountered  with  a
    stolen British passport was  acknowledged  in  the  refusal  letter  at
    paragraph  15.  The  fact  that  he  travelled  via  Italy   was   also
    acknowledged in paragraph 35 by way of an adverse inference for failing
    to claim asylum there. The refusal letter  however  neither  explicitly
    nor implicitly referred to his mode of departure from Iran and I do not
    accept that the Judge was obliged to read into it that  the  Respondent
    did not accept that he left illegally.

15. The Judge had before him the documents that explicitly made his illegal
    exit part of his case. Indeed the Judge makes no reference to  the  CMR
    dated 14 November 2014 but the fact that this was central to  his  case
    was identified as the CMR document records  that  an  expert  would  be
    relied on in relation to 'illegal exit from Iran.' The full hearing was
    originally scheduled for 5 December 2014 and there is on  the  file  an
    adjournment request on the basis that the expert  report  was  not  yet
    available from Dr Kakhi who would comment on 'the  risk  faced  by  the
    Appellant on return based on his  religious  beliefs  and  his  illegal
    exit.'

16. The Judge recorded the Appellant's oral evidence at paragraphs 10  (a)-
    (m) and  that  he  left  Iran  illegally.   The  Judge  summarised  the
    Respondent's case at paragraph 11 which he said had been 'amplified  by
    the Respondent's representative' although I  note  that  this  did  not
    include any challenge to the Appellant's assertion  that  he  had  left
    Iran illegally recorded in the decision or  indeed  in  the  record  of
    proceedings that I have read.

17. The Respondent's representative Mr Cliff in final submissions relied on
    the reasons for refusal letter and said nothing about the expert report
    or illegal exit and this was noted by the Judge at paragraph 13(b).  Ms
    Khan who represented the Appellant addressed the Judge at length  about
    his conversion and his illegal exit.

18. It is against this factual background of the unchallenged  evidence  of
    the Appellant that he  had  left  Iran  illegally  that  the  Judge  at
    paragraph 13(c)records what I am satisfied was an  entirely  reasonable
    conclusion that was open to him in relation what he  understood  to  be
    the view of the Respondent's view as reflected by Mr Cliff:

         " ..the very fact that he appears illegally to have exited Iran(and
         this was not denied by the Respondent  )  would  mean  he  must  be
         granted asylum.'

19. I do not accept that simply because the  Judge  made  adverse  findings
    against the  Appellant  in  respect  of  his  religious  conversion  it
    immediately followed that he had to reject  the  claimed  illegal  exit
    both because while it was always central  to  his  case  it  was  never
    challenged but also because the Respondent had accepted limited aspects
    of his case including that fact that he travelled via Italy and arrived
    in the United Kingdom using a stolen United Kingdom passport.

20. Having accepted that the Appellant had left Iran  illegally  the  Judge
    was bound to consider whether he was at risk on return and  had  before
    him a report from Dr Kakhki who had also been the expert in  SB.  I  am
    satisfied on the basis of SG (Iraq) v SSHD; OR  (Iraq)  v  SSHD  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 940 that the Judge was entitled to  depart  from  the  country
    guidance in the appropriate circumstances: the  Court  of  Appeal  said
    that the CG procedure was aimed at arriving at a reliable and  accurate
    determination and it was for those reasons, as well as the desirability
    of consistency, that decision-makers and tribunal judges were  required
    to take country guidance determinations into  account,  and  to  follow
    them unless very strong grounds  supported  by  cogent  evidence,  were
    adduced justifying their not doing so (paras 43 - 50).

21. The report in this case was compelling given that it was written by the
    same expert as that in SB so it seems there is  no  one  better  placed
    than Dr Kakhki to identify the change in  the  material  on  which  the
    assessment of risk is based. The Judge  identified  the  report  as  so
    vital that he appended pages 21-36 of the report to his  decision.  The
    Judge quoted from the expert's report where he had stated that  he  had
    not been asked in SB to address whether the risk on return was enhanced
    by being a failed asylum seeker and that the issue of  risk  on  return
    was not the focal point of his report in SB.

22. It is clear however that the Judge was not being asked  to  come  to  a
    different conclusion based on the same material as was before the court
    in SB but rather Dr Kakhki was identifying  changes  that  changed  the
    assessment of  risk.  The  Judge  summarises  the  new  information  at
    paragraph 13(c) that was not before the court in SB that leads  him  to
    the conclusion that the Appellant was at risk  on  return:  firstly  he
    specifically identifies an amendment to the passport law that  occurred
    in 2010 that requires Iranians to return either with a  valid  passport
    or a travel document issued by the Iranian embassy called a Barge Obour
    which the Appellant could not obtain as the Iranian Embassy has limited
    functionality since the breakdown of diplomatic relations with  the  UK
    which post dates SB; the second change which the  Judge  summarises  by
    reference to page numbers in the experts report in essence  relates  to
    more recent evidence of the changed attitude of the Iranian authorities
    to failed asylum seekers since SB and the  pages  referred  to  by  the
    Judge cite a number of returned failed  asylum  seekers  who  were  the
    subject of persecutory treatment and the experts  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk of similar treatment.

23. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge had clearly  demonstrated  that
    there were very  strong  grounds  supported  by  cogent  evidence  that
    allowed him to depart from the general guidance given in SB that simply
    being a failed returning asylum seekers was not a risk factor

24. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

25. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

26. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 12.5.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell


