
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/09461/2014
                                                               AA/09462/2014
                                                               AA/09463/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 10 April 2015                      |On 22 April 2015                      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KAK
                             + 2 minor children
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr I Macdonald QC, instructed by Ferani Javid
Taylor, solicitors

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Respondents  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them individually or as a member of their family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondents.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondents

 1. The Respondents, to whom I shall refer as the Applicants, are a  mother
    and her two minor children.  All three are citizens of Pakistan.   On 1
    June 2014 they arrived with entry clearance as family visitors.   On 16
    July 2014, before expiry of their  leave,  they  claimed  international
    surrogate protection on account of their fear on return to Pakistan  of
    persecution or ill-treatment because the lead  Applicant,  the  mother,
    being the widow of an officer in the armed forces who had  been  killed
    in a terror attack on the base where he worked and held  a  senior  and
    important position would be at risk.  He had also been prominent in his
    local Shi'ite community.  The mother herself had  worked  on  the  same
    base as a civilian doctor.

 2. While in the United Kingdom she had received a  communication  from  an
    officer colleague of her late husband stating he had learned  her  late
    husband had been followed for six months before he  had  been  murdered
    and described in brief the manner in which he had  been  followed.   In
    the light of this information the lead Applicant realised she had  been
    followed in the months before she had left Pakistan and  subsequent  to
    the death of her husband. This had triggered her claim for  asylum  for
    herself and her children.

The Original Decision and Appeal

 3. On 27 October 2014 the Appellant (the  SSHD)  refused  the  Applicants'
    claims for international surrogate protection and  proposed  directions
    for their removal,  presumably  to  Pakistan  although  the  notice  of
    decision is silent  on  the  removal  destination.    Reasons  for  the
    decision were given in a letter of the same date (the reasons  letter).
    The  SSHD  set  out  the  basis  for  the  claim  and  the  Applicants'
    immigration history.  The  SSHD  accepted  the  lead  Applicant's  late
    husband had been an officer in the Pakistani Armed Forces and had  been
    killed but doubted the claim that he had been killed by extremists  as,
    although she asserted the armed forces had initiated  an  investigation
    and reported the matter to the police, there had been no  results  from
    the investigation and no evidence to support her claim that her husband
    had been followed in the months before his murder.  Little  weight  was
    given to various documents acknowledging the violent death of the  lead
    Applicant's husband because the SSHD could not trace the  forces  which
    issued the various documents: see reasons letter  para.39.  At  para.40
    the SSHD noted the inconsistencies between the names given by the  lead
    Applicant for her husband and the names given in the press reports  and
    the inconsistency between their respective accounts of  the  number  of
    shots which had been fired. The  SSHD  rejected  the  lead  Applicant's
    claim that her husband had been killed by extremists.

 4. The SSHD noted there was no evidence to support  the  lead  Applicant's
    claim that subsequent to the death of her husband she had been followed
    and so also rejected this aspect of her claim.

 5. The SSHD considered the Applicant as a Shia  Muslims  could  return  to
    Karachi and would not be at risk.  The lead  Applicant  had  not  given
    sufficient information or explanation why she should  consider  herself
    at risk from extremists. She could return to Pakistan and her  previous
    employment in her home area or elsewhere.  Reference was  made  to  the
    background information whether there was a  sufficiency  of  protection
    available from the Pakistani authorities and referring to the  judgment
    in Januzi v SSHD [2006] UKHL 5 and AH (Sudan) v  SSHD  [2007]  UKHL  49
    concluded that the Applicants could relocate within Pakistan.  The lead
    Applicant was in good health, spoke Urdu and  English,  had  spent  her
    life in Pakistan and had previously  lived  in  Lahore,  Islamabad  and
    Karachi and, further, was a qualified medical doctor and  could  return
    to a civilian post within the armed forces' medical services.

 6. The SSHD went on to consider whether the  Applicants'  claim  could  be
    based on their private and family life and looked at Appendix FM of the
    Immigration  Rules  and  was  satisfied  that  none  of  them  met  the
    requirements  of  the  Rules  and  that  there  were   no   exceptional
    circumstances which would warrant consideration whether to  grant  them
    discretionary leave outside the Immigration Rules.

 7. On 12 November 2014 each of the  Applicants  lodged  notice  of  appeal
    under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as
    amended.  Leaving aside the formulaic or generic grounds,  the  grounds
    refer to the influence of Islamic extremist  groups  in  Pakistan,  the
    trauma  and  stress  suffered  by  the   minor   Applicants   and   the
    vulnerability of the family on return to Pakistan.  The grounds  stated
    that further grounds might be submitted but none have.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 8. By a decision promulgated on 13 January 2015 Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Juss allowed  the  appeal  of  each  of  the  Applicants  with
    reference to the Refugee Convention.

 9. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the Judge  had
    not given reasons for finding the lead Applicant's late husband to have
    been a prominent Shi'ite and without such a finding there was no reason
    to find that the Applicants on return to Pakistan would be  at  greater
    risk than any other Shi'ite. Further, the Judge had not given  adequate
    reasons to support his finding that the lead  Applicant's  husband  had
    been  murdered on account of his religion and not  because  he  was  an
    officer in the armed forces.

10. On 5 February 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Holmes found  there
    was an arguable error of law in the Judge's  decision  because  he  had
    failed properly to identify why the Applicants  would  be  at  risk  on
    return and  to  identify  the  reason  for  the  killing  of  the  lead
    Applicant's husband, whether it was his  rank  and  job  in  the  armed
    forces or because of his  faith, or both.   Further, the Judge had  not
    identified why the Applicants remained at real risk of  being  targeted
    by Islamic extremists, following the  death  of  the  lead  Applicant's
    husband.  It was arguable he had failed to show whether his decision to
    allow the appeal was based on the real  risk  to  all  Shi'ites  or  to
    family  members  of  the  military  or  because   of   the   individual
    circumstances of the Applicants.  The Judge had also needed to consider
    whether it would not be unduly harsh for  the  Applicants  to  relocate
    within Pakistan.

The Error of Law Hearing in The Upper Tribunal

11. The lead Applicant attended but in  the  event  took  no  part  in  the
    proceedings.  Mr Tarlow for the Appellant was missing the expert report
    of Uzma Moeen of the Asian Legal Advice Service at Appendix  2  of  the
    Applicants' bundles submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  This was  an
    important  document  since  it  formed  the  substantial  part  of  the
    reasoning given by the  Judge  for  his  decision.   A  copy  was  made
    available to him and he was given time to consider it.

12. Resuming the hearing, Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds for permission to
    appeal.  The Judge had erred in finding there was a nexus  between  the
    circumstances of the Applicants and a Refugee Convention  reason.   The
    Judge at para.24 of his decision had addressed the death  of  the  lead
    Applicant's husband and found it was connected with his position as  an
    officer in the armed forces and his particular military role as well as
    the fact he was a prominent member of his religious community.  He  had
    failed to give reasons for concluding whether the cause was any one  or
    combination of these factors and had not made sufficiently far reaching
    findings or given adequate reasons for them  and  had  then  failed  to
    assess whether the Applicants could  without  undue  hardship  relocate
    within Pakistan.

13. Addressing the issue of internal relocation, he referred to para.108 of
    the report.  This is at  the  end  of  the  section  dealing  with  the
    sufficiency of protection in Pakistan and states:-

         Therefore, in my opinion there is no realistic possibility that the
         authorities in Pakistan would be of any  meaningful  assistance  to
         (the lead applicant) against the risks to her  and  her  children's
         physical safety from the anti-Shia militants of the TTP or the  LeJ
         in Pakistan. Moreover,  the  objective  evidence  detailed  in  the
         present expert report and several country of information reports on
         Pakistan suggest consistent and targeted killings of  civilians  by
         the TTP in Pakistan and the helplessness of the State  of  Pakistan
         to maintain internal peace and provide sufficiency of protection to
         those targeted by militant religious extremists in Pakistan.

14. Mr Tarlow then turned to para.110 of the same  report  which  describes
    the "New CNIC Verification System" in Pakistan.  The system appears  to
    be a form of an internet based method of verifying a person's  identity
    and available to the public and to the  authorities  in  Pakistan.   Mr
    Tarlow  submitted  that  having  referred  to  the  ease   with   which
    individuals can be traced through this system the Judge needed to state
    whether he accepted what the expert report said about it and  how  this
    would be  likely  to  impact  on  the  assessment  of  the  ability  of
    individuals to relocate within Pakistan.

15. In short, the  Judge's  decision  was  deficient  because  it  had  not
    adequately dealt with the Refugee Convention  reasons  claimed  by  the
    Applicants for the death of the lead Applicant's husband and their fear
    of persecution on return.  Similarly, it had not adequately dealt  with
    whether the Applicants could internally relocate.

16. For the Applicants, Mr Macdonald  QC  submitted  the  grounds  for  the
    permission to appeal had failed to take account of  the  expert  report
    which explained why the lead Applicant's husband was considered  to  be
    prominent in his faith community.   This was in  part  attributable  to
    his rank in the armed forces and his particular role  at  the  military
    base where he worked and because of  his  participation  in  his  faith
    community.  At para.31 of his decision the Judge  noted  the  SSHD  had
    accepted the Appellant's husband was a high profile  Shia  officer  who
    had  been  targeted  and  killed  was  an  important  feature  of   the
    Applicants' claim.  Additionally it attached weight to  the  fact  that
    the military and other authorities in Pakistan had treated the  killing
    as martyrdom and had written appropriately to the lead Applicant.   The
    SSHD's grounds made no reference to any of this.

17. He continued that the Judge's reasoning  was  sufficient.   The  expert
    report set out a considerable amount  of  objective  evidence  of  both
    indiscriminate and targeted attacks on professional Shi'ites.  The lead
    Applicant herself was a professional Shi'ite.   She  had  worked  as  a
    civilian doctor on the same base as her husband. This fact amounted  to
    individual circumstances placing the Applicants at a real risk of harm.
     The last paragraph of the grant of permission to appeal had not  taken
    this point adequately into account.

18. The Judge had found the lead Applicant credible.  Paras.32 following of
    her statement of 22 December 2014 at  pages  1-16  of  the  Applicants'
    bundle explained why the Applicants would be at real risk on return  to
    Pakistan.   Additionally, there was the letter of 19 December 2014 from
    the Judge Advocate General's office in Islamabad at the  front  of  the
    Applicants' bundle.  There was ample  evidence  which  was  before  the
    Judge to support his conclusion that on return the Applicants would  be
    at real risk of persecution.   At  paras.3  and  29  following  of  his
    decision the Judge had referred to the  expert  report  detailing  both
    generally and personally why the Applicants would be at risk on return;
    in particular  but  not  exclusively  para.  91  of  the  report  dealt
    extensively with the specific risk to the lead Applicant which had been
    referred to at paras.3 and 9 of the Judge's decision.

19. On return the lead Applicant would  have  to  seek  work  in  order  to
    support herself and her children.  Her name identified her as a  Shiite
    and she would doubtless seek to work  in  her  professional  field  and
    therefore would immediately acquire at the very least a  local  profile
    and be vulnerable on her own account as a professional Shi'ite.

20. There was no substance to the grounds for permission to  appeal.   They
    amounted to no more than a disagreement with the Judge  who  had  dealt
    adequately with all matters. He had referred to the initial facts,  the
    SSHD's  basis  for  refusing  the  applications,  the   evidence,   the
    submissions made for each of the parties and had given all this careful
    consideration before reaching his  conclusion.   Further,  the  general
    situation in Pakistan was very poor.  There was no need to  identify  a
    single Refugee Convention reason and there was no need to  establish  a
    nexus with a single Refugee Convention reason.  A  refugee  could  fear
    persecution for more than one Convention reason.

21. In response, Mr Tarlow for the SSHD submitted that the  Applicants  had
    failed to address the issue raised in para.3 of the grant of permission
    to appeal and to identify why they would be at risk in their home  area
    or why internal relocation would be unduly harsh.

Findings and Considerations

22. The SSHD has not challenged the finding of  the  Judge  that  the  lead
    Applicant was a credible witness.  Similarly, neither the expert report
    nor the Judge's acceptance of and reliance on it have been challenged.

23. The Judge referred to the relevant paragraphs of the expert report  and
    other parts of the expert report throughout his decision.  It cannot be
    said he did not have the report very much to the forefront of his  mind
    when he reached at paras. 29-35 his conclusions for allowing the appeal
    on asylum grounds.  Those concluding paragraphs  also  include  several
    references to the expert report.

24. While the decision might be challenged for not having dealt more  fully
    with  the  issues  of  the  nexus  with  the  Refugee  Convention   and
    particularly with internal relocation, I do not find  it  can  be  said
    that the Judge dealt inadequately with these matters.  On the issue  of
    internal relocation especially he relied on the expert report by simply
    citing the relevant paragraph numbers.  This  does  not  amount  to  an
    error of law such that the decision should be  set  aside.   Given  the
    Judge's findings and acceptance of the expert  report  which  have  not
    been challenged by the SSHD in the appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  no
    differently  constituted  Tribunal  would  have  come  to   any   other
    conclusion.  For these reasons the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal's decision did not contain a material error  of
    law and shall stand.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 21. iv. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

