

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA099282015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 18 May 2016                                |On 10 June 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN



                                   Between



                                     A H
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S. Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Lighthouse
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant appealed against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    his protection claim. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Miles  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 01 December 2015.

2.    In a decision promulgated on 03 May 2016 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Storey
    concluded that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law and set aside the decision.  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Storey  noted  that  there  was  no  challenge  to  the  positive
    credibility findings made by the First-tier Tribunal but found that the
    judge failed to carry out a sufficiently  rigorous  assessment  of  the
    relevant factors and evidence that were material to a proper assessment
    of risk on return.

3.    At the hearing the parties  agreed  that  the  focus  of  the  resumed
    appeal is on whether the appellant would be  at  risk  on  return.  The
    First-tier Tribunal's positive credibility findings in relation to  the
    appellant's account of past events are preserved.

4.    The appellant is a Libyan national. He completed his medical  training
    and began work in Libya as a doctor in 2009. The appellant travelled to
    the UK in August 2014 with entry clearance as  a  student  visitor.  He
    wanted to improve his English with a view to doing  a  Master's  degree
    and PhD. While he was in the UK the hospital where he worked called him
    back to Libya because they were in need of medical staff.  He  returned
    to Libya in September 2014 where he worked in a field hospital as  well
    as the hospital in Bani Waleed (his home area). In December 2014 he was
    travelling to a health centre when he was stopped by a group  of  armed
    men wearing balaclavas. He believes that they were  Islamist  militants
    because they wore long beards. He had to show his ID.  When  it  became
    apparent that he was a doctor the men accused him of  treating  Qadhafi
    supporters.

5.    The appellant was detained in  a  house  at  an  unknown  location  in
    Misrata for a period of three days. During that time he was  questioned
    and beaten. On the third day a man came to speak to him  and  took  him
    out of the house. With his assistance he travelled to  the  airport  in
    Misrata and made arrangement to fly back to the UK via Turkey. When  he
    arrived in the UK he contacted his father who told him that he  paid  a
    ransom of around 100,000 Dinars for his release.  He  took  advice  and
    claimed asylum shortly after arrival in the UK.

Decision and reasons

6.    The preserved findings were  confined  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    positive  credibility  findings  regarding   past   events,   but   the
    conclusions that the judge drew from those facts have been  set  aside.
    I find that it is necessary to depart from  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    conclusion that the appellant's past ill-treatment was not sufficiently
    severe as to amount to persecution. The judge's assessment  focused  on
    the extent of the physical injuries the appellant  suffered.  Based  on
    this he concluded that he was not "very badly ill-treated". However,  a
    proper assessment of the nature of the appellant's  past  ill-treatment
    is not confined to the extent of his physical injuries.  The  appellant
    was targeted as a medic, kidnapped and held in illegal detention for  a
    number of days. He was threatened and physically ill-treated albeit not
    "very badly".

7.    In the context  of  an  internal  armed  conflict,  such  as  the  one
    currently taking place  between  various  factions  in  Libya,  serious
    violations of common Article 3 of the Geneva  Conventions  include  the
    taking of hostages and targeting of  medical  personnel.  Such  actions
    come within the definition of War Crimes outlined in Article 8  of  the
    Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. When the  appellant's
    past ill-treatment is considered in the proper context I  am  satisfied
    that the combination of him  being  targeted  as  a  medic,  kidnapped,
    illegally detained and physically ill-treated was  sufficiently  severe
    to amount to persecution within the meaning of the Refugee  Convention.
    Paragraph 339K of the immigration rules states:

           339K. The fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
           persecution or serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of  such
           persecution  or  such  harm,  will  be  regarded  as  a  serious
           indication of the person's well-founded fear of  persecution  or
           real risk of suffering  serious  harm,  unless  there  are  good
           reasons to consider that such persecution or serious  harm  will
           not be repeated.

8.    AT and Others (Article 15c; risk  categories)  Libya  CG  [2014]  UKUT
    00318 is the most recent country guidance. Upper Tribunal Judge  Storey
    made clear that the risk categories identified by the tribunal in  that
    case were not exhaustive. He also pointed out that,  in  confining  his
    assessment to the risk categories in  AT  and  Others,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge failed to take into account the fact that there had been
    "considerable changes" in the situation in Libya since  AT  and  Others
    was heard in November 2013. While the First-tier Tribunal  was  correct
    to note that the appellant does not come within  any  of  the  specific
    risk categories identified in that case no consideration was  given  to
    whether the appellant's particular circumstances might give rise  to  a
    real risk of serious harm in light of the current evidence.

9.    In assessing whether there is a real risk on return I have taken  into
    account the background  evidence  before  the  tribunal.  The  evidence
    includes a UN Report  on  the  Human  Rights  Situation  in  Libya  (16
    November 2015), the UNHCR Position on Returns to Libya (October  2015),
    the US State Department Report on Libya (13 April 2016), a Foreign  and
    Commonwealth  Office  update  on  Libya  (December  2015),  an  Amnesty
    International report on civilian abductions in Libya (August  2015),  a
    Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations  Support  Mission
    in Libya (25 February 2016) and a CNN news article reporting the kidnap
    of 20 medical workers by ISIS in Libya (17 March 2015). The reports are
    broadly consistent as to the overall political and  security  situation
    in Libya at the current time.

10.   The UN Report on the Human  Rights  Situation  in  Libya  provides  an
    accurate summary  of  the  situation  as  outlined  in  the  background
    evidence:

            "Libya continues to be embroiled in deadly violence and multiple
           armed  conflicts,  non-international  in  character,   affecting
           several regions, and contributing to a general breakdown of  law
           and order. All parties  to  the  conflicts  continue  to  commit
           violations of international human rights and  humanitarian  law,
           and  abuses  of  human  rights,  including  indiscriminate   and
           disproportionate attacks; summary executions and other  unlawful
           killings; arbitrary deprivations of  liberty;  and  torture  and
           other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment (ill-treatment).


            During the reporting period, the violence in Libya  has  led  to
           hundreds of  deaths  and  mass  displacement,  with  an  ongoing
           humanitarian crisis in many areas. Refugees, asylum-seekers  and
           migrants were increasingly vulnerable to  abuses.  Human  rights
           defenders, humanitarian workers  and  media  professionals  also
           faced violent attacks and intimidation. Thousands of individuals
           were held in prisons  and  other  detention  centres  under  the
           official oversight of the Ministries  of  Justice,  Defense  and
           Interior as well as in facilities run directly by armed  groups,
           amid frequent reports of torture  or  other  ill-treatment.  The
           justice system, where  it  was  functioning,  failed  to  ensure
           accountability, while abuses by armed groups  continue  to  take
           place with impunity." [pg.12 AB1]

11.   Ms Iqbal was unable to refer me to specific evidence  to  support  her
    statement that the UN includes medical personnel in its  definition  of
    "human rights defenders". However, I find that, in general terms, it is
    reasonable  to  conclude  that  medical  personnel  are  likely  to  be
    perceived as a form of human rights defenders or humanitarian  workers.
    There are a number of references to  medical  personnel  and  hospitals
    being targeted by factions on all sides of the conflict. The fact  that
    medical personnel are amongst those who are  deliberately  targeted  is
    borne  out  by  the  appellant's  own  experience  and  the  background
    evidence.

12.   The appellant has produced several pieces of evidence  from  Libya  to
    support his claim that he and his family may have become  the  specific
    target of armed groups. A  letter  purporting  to  be  from  the  Zawia
    Military Council dated 03 September  2015  threatened  the  appellant's
    father if he  didn't  reveal  his  whereabouts  after  the  appellant's
    "sudden disappearance from our detention centre". The letter could have
    been written on  a  standard  word  processor.  The  fact  that  he  is
    described as having disappeared from detention doesn't, on the face  of
    it, square with the appellant's claim that his father paid a ransom for
    his release. However, I do not exclude the possibility that  money  may
    have been paid to a particular person who  assisted  the  appellant  to
    escape and that other members of the group might not have been aware of
    the bribe.

13.   A medical report dated 07 September 2015 sets  out,  in  English,  the
    nature of gunshot wounds suffered by  the  appellant's  brother.  Given
    that there is an internal armed conflict in the  country  there  is  no
    reason to doubt the fact that his brother Ahmed  may  have  been  shot.
    Taken alone this evidence does not  necessarily  demonstrate  that  the
    appellant's family was specifically targeted.

14.   The appellant also  produced  a  handwritten  report  described  as  a
    "Prosecutor's report". The translation contains  an  error  because  it
    refers to an incident on "07/07/16". The exact date of the incident his
    father reported to the prosecutor in Bani Waleed is therefore  unclear.
    The report was made on 09 September 2015. The report states  that  four
    young men carrying Kalashnikov rifles came to his house  and  shot  his
    son Ahmed before trying to set fire to the house. He reported that they
    were wearing masks. He thought that they belonged to an  Islamic  group
    because they were using religious language similar to  the  people  who
    attacked his farm in Tripoli. He was asked who he accused of the crime.
    In answer he said that the only people he could think  to  accuse  were
    the "Islamic fanatics who are after my son the doctor Ali".

15.   If the medical and prosecutor's report are read together I  find  that
    it is reasonable to infer  that  his  father  was  reporting  the  same
    incident in which Ahmed was shot on 07 September 2015.  Although  there
    are some question marks over the letter purporting to make a threat  to
    the appellant's father it is dated only a few days before the shooting.
    To that extent the three pieces of evidence appear to hang together  to
    support the appellant's claim that his brother  Ahmed  was  shot  in  a
    separate incident after he left the  country.  The  appellant  was  not
    called to give evidence so the reliability of the  documents  have  not
    been tested in cross-examination. While there is nothing on the face of
    the evidence that is inconsistent with the background evidence, or  the
    appellant's account of past events, I find that it simply doesn't  take
    the issue of risk on return much further. It seems quite clear that his
    father didn't know who the men were who attacked the  house.  He  could
    only guess that they might have been connected to the previous incident
    when the appellant was taken hostage.

16.   I am satisfied that  the  combination  of  (i)  the  appellant's  past
    experience of being targeted as a doctor; (ii) the background  evidence
    showing that medical personnel are being targeted by all sides  in  the
    conflict; and (iii)  the  other  evidence  produced  by  the  appellant
    (whatever its weaknesses), is sufficient to show that there are no good
    reasons to suppose that the appellant would not be a  risk  of  similar
    ill-treatment if returned to Libya. The appellant does not have to show
    with any certainty that he is at risk. I am satisfied that the evidence
    before me shows that there are serious grounds for believing that he is
    likely to be at risk as a doctor in his home area at the current  time.



17.   Mr Bramble argued that the appellant would  be  able  to  relocate  to
    Tripoli. I bear in mind that the tribunal in AT  and  Others  concluded
    that, in certain cases, internal relocation might  be  available.  That
    assessment was made on the evidence as it stood in  November  2013.  In
    this case I find that  the  current  evidence  indicates  that  attacks
    against medical and other humanitarian workers are  being  carried  out
    across the country. The evidence does not identify a  safe  area  where
    medical personnel might be able to  operate  without  fear  of  attack.
    Although major fighting in most parts of Tripoli is said to have ceased
    the background evidence describes the situation as  extremely  fragile.
    Clashes continue to occur in the suburbs of Tripoli. There are  reports
    of abductions in the capital. The overall situation  in  Libya  remains
    highly volatile.

18.   In assessing whether internal relocation would  be  available  to  the
    appellant I also take into account the UNHCR  position  on  returns  to
    Libya, which states:

           "Given the volatility of the  situation,  the  fragmentation  of
           control and the plethora of armed groups, UNHCR considers  that,
           in the current circumstances, the relevance  and  reasonableness
           criteria for an internal flight or  relocation  alternative  are
           unlikely to be met." [pg.58 AB1]

19.   After having considered all the  evidence  in  the  round  I  conclude
    that, as a doctor,  there  continues  to  be  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that the appellant has a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
    for reasons of his attributed political opinion and that  there  is  no
    safe area that he would be able to relocate to in Libya.


DECISION

I re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeal


Signed   [pic]   Date 09 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








