
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09541/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26 October 2015                   |On 30 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                      HOCINE MOHAMED ZINEDINE BELGROUNE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K H Forrest, Advocate, instructed by McGlashan
                    MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss S Aitken, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria, born on 30 September  2014.   He
    sought asylum on the basis of an arrest warrant  issued  after  he  was
    discovered to be homosexual; fear of the family of the boyfriend of his
    identical twin, who is also homosexual; fear of society in general; and
    fear of Islamic terrorists.

 2. The respondent refused the claim by letter  dated  30  September  2014.
    The respondent:

         did not accept the appellant's account of events (paragraphs 5-16);

         left  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  homosexual  in  the  balance
         (paragraph 17-20);

         gave little weight to the arrest warrant, in context, and for  lack
         of explanation how his family living  1800  kilometres  away  could
         have heard about it or received it, and how it came to  be  in  the
         appellant's possession (paragraphs 21-23);

         accepted that homosexuality is penalised in Algeria, but relied  on
         country guidance that prosecutions are extremely  rare,  and  found
         that "as a general matter, societal  and  familial  disapproval  of
         male gay identity does not reach the required thresholds"; and

         held that even if the account were taken at highest, the  appellant
         has the option of relocating to another area of Algeria (paragraphs
         30 and 31).

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Balloch was not satisfied that the  appellant
    had made out his case to the lower standard of proof, and dismissed his
    appeal by determination promulgated on 27 May 2015.

 4. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal are on  these  lines.   The
    judge  rejected  the  respondent's  submission  that  credibility   was
    adversely affected by the appellant not having submitted a claim  based
    on his sexuality until a relatively late stage.  The judge did not find
    it inherently implausible that he would not have mentioned it  earlier.
    Dealing with the summons [or warrant] and an expert report thereon, the
    grounds point out that the expert at paragraph 4.30 of his report found
    "no reason to conclude that the summons is not genuine".   However,  at
    paragraphs 98 to 101 "the judge concludes that because a line  in  [the
    summons] is incomplete, it should  be  disregarded".   Having  accorded
    weight to the report of the expert, it was  not  rational  and  was  an
    error in law to effectively dismiss the summons and report on  no  more
    than a technicality.  Having regard to the standard of proof in  asylum
    cases and the duty to examine  documents  with  anxious  scrutiny,  the
    judge's decision was not one open to her.

 5. In submissions, Mr Forrest accepted that the judge made  other  adverse
    observations on credibility, apart from the question of the summons.

 6. The appellant's criticism focuses on paragraph 97 of the determination:

         "... I give weight to ... the expert report regarding the  summons.
         It does not however refer to what  appears  to  be  a  gap  in  the
         summons.  According to the translation, on the first line  ...  the
         name is requested and is stated, on the second line the address  is
         requested and is stated.  On the third line it states: "Holder of:"
         and there is then what appears to be  a  blank  space  followed  by
         "number:" and what appears to be a blank space.  This line  of  the
         summons does not appear to have been completed.  The  summons  then
         goes on to set out the charge, the law and the date  to  appear  in
         court.

         98.      It does seem ... that the summons is not entirely complete
         in detail.  The incomplete line appears to  refer  to  a  document,
         possibly a passport or identity card.  It does  not  appear  to  be
         just a matter of translation as the blank spaces are evident on the
         Arabic document.  It would have been of assistance if this had been
         commented on."

 7. Mr Forrest said that this  issue  was  no  more  than  a  technicality.
    Although there was an apparent omission, it  could  be  safely  assumed
    that if the omission implied any possible problem  with  the  document,
    the expert would have commented.  Absence  of  comment  signified  that
    there was no issue.  The effect  on  the  determination  was  material.
    This was an error which might have made a difference  to  the  outcome.
    The determination should be set aside, and the  case  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 8. In a Rule 24 response the respondent argues that it  was  open  to  the
    judge to give weight to the expert report, but the fact  was  that  the
    summons had information missing  from  it,  which  detracted  from  its
    credibility, and the finding was open to her.  It was to be taken  into
    account in the round with all the other negative credibility aspects.

 9. Ms Aitken submitted further as follows.  The omission in  the  document
    may have been technical, but  that  was  only  one  point  against  the
    appellant.  The judge properly considered the summons in the round  and
    in context of all the other evidence.  She gave  numerous  reasons  for
    declining to accept the appellant as a credible witness, in  particular
    at paragraphs 93-101.  Her decision was not based simply on information
    missing from the summons.  It was  not  accepted  the  judge  made  any
    error, but if she did, it was unimportant.

10. Mr Forrest in reply accepted that the  determination  does  give  other
    reasons,  but  submitted  that  the  genuineness  of  the  summons  was
    nevertheless material.

11. I reserved my determination.

12. I accept that it was a central issue in the appeal whether the  summons
    was a genuine and reliable document.

13. Although in the Rule 24 response  and  in  submissions  the  respondent
    accepted that the omission in the summons was part of the reasoning for
    dismissing the appeal, I am not persuaded that the judge went that far.
     The judge quotes from the expert report  and  gives  it  weight.   She
    examines the matter carefully and thoroughly.  She notes  the  omission
    for herself, and accurately.  All she then says is that it  would  have
    been of assistance if this had been commented on.  I do not think  this
    feature had even a minimal impact on the decision.  It was not close to
    decisive.  It is the only feature of the  determination  criticised  in
    the grounds.  This is no  more  than  a  minor  and  partial  point  of
    disagreement.

14. The judge's essential reasons for declining to accept the  evidence  as
    credible have very little (I think nothing) to do with the omission  on
    the face of the document.  Some points are resolved largely  in  favour
    of the appellant, for example, at paragraphs 89 and  93.   The  adverse
    points mentioned include the non-emergence of the claim in response  to
    obvious  questions  at  an  early  stage;  absence  of   a   reasonable
    explanation why the appellant came initially for a  short stay, and did
    not return with his father; the unlikelihood of  the  appellant  simply
    staying in Glasgow indefinitely in hope of  encountering  his  brother,
    and without status; a sudden plan (rapidly abandoned) to marry  and  to
    regularise his status on that basis; no clear explanation  of  how  the
    copy summons was obtained; and absence of information  on  consequences
    of failure to attend court and subsequent  events,  matters  which  the
    appellant would have tried to explore if he believed  that  he  was  at
    real risk, or that his partner in Algeria had been arrested.   None  of
    these reasons has been subjected to any criticism.  The one point which
    has been extracted is very particular, and does not amount to much.   I
    am not persuaded that any error has been shown, and in any event  I  do
    not find that even at highest this is an error which might entitle  the
    Upper Tribunal to set aside the determination.

15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

16. No anonymity order has been requested or made.




                    [pic]


                    Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
                    29 October 2015


