
IAC-TH-LW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09989/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 8 October 2014                 |On 11 December 2014               |
|and 11 November 2014              |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

                          Vithyavarun Patkunalingam
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Mallick
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka who was born on 23 July  1987.
    He applied for a Tier 4 Student visa on 22 November 2010 and was issued
    with it on 17 January 2011.  He came from Sri Lanka  to  the  UK  on  a
    direct flight on 6 February 2011.  He made an asylum claim on  14  July
    2011 but this was refused on 19 August 2011 and a decision was made  to
    remove him.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal but his appeal  was
    dismissed.  Since then there has  been  a  lengthy  history  concerning
    these appeal proceedings.  Finally a consent  order  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal of 7 January 2014 ordered that the  appeal  be  allowed  to  the
    extent  that  the  matter  be  remitted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal   for
    reconsideration in  respect  of  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    refusal of asylum and humanitarian  protection  in  the  light  of  the
    findings of the Upper Tribunal in the country guidance determination in
    GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  319
    (IAC).

 2. The conclusion leading to the consent order as was cited in that  order
    is that the parties agreed that the Upper Tribunal  misdirected  itself
    in law in relying on TP (Credibility) Zimbabwe [2004]  UKAIT  00159  to
    determine the credibility of the appellant and furthermore the  UT  did
    not give sufficient reasons for its findings on credibility.

 3. The appeal therefore came before me for a fresh hearing.   The  hearing
    on  8  October  was  adjourned  part-heard  to  11  November  for  oral
    submissions to be made.

The Written Evidence

 4. There are a large number of  documents  before  me  but  the  essential
    documents comprise:- the respondent's refusal bundle;  the  appellant's
    "review" bundle and objective  bundle;  skeleton  arguments  from  both
    parties and written submissions; a bundle comprising letters  from  the
    ICPPG and Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam; letters relating  to
    the medical situation of the appellant's  daughter  and  the  Court  of
    Appeal case of MP & Anor v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 829.

 5. The appellant has made various statements.   These  statements  are  in
    addition to the information that he gave in answer to questions put  to
    him at an interview in 2011.  His statements  are  dated  22  September
    2011, 13 November 2012 and 2 October 2014.  He also gave oral  evidence
    before me in Tamil through an interpreter.  The  appellant  was  cross-
    examined by Mr Melvin on  behalf  of  the  respondent.   The  appellant
    married in Sri Lanka and his wife now lives with him in  the  UK.   She
    arrived after him and is a dependant on  his  application  for  asylum.
    The appellant's wife has made a witness  statement  that  is  dated  15
    November 2012.  She also gave oral evidence before  me  in  Tamil.  The
    appellant and his wife have a daughter together  who  was  born  on  15
    October 2012. She is therefore now a little over 2 years old.

 6. In his statement of 22 September 2011 the appellant gave details of his
    family including details in relation  to  his  parents  who  were  then
    living in Kallady in Sri Lanka.  He gave  information  also  about  his
    younger brother and sister who were living at his parents'  address  as
    well as details of an older brother whose (then) current whereabouts he
    did not know.

 7. Summarising the appellant's evidence, he wrote in his  first  statement
    that in 2002 his brother joined the LTTE and left home  staying  in  an
    LTTE camp until he then left for Vanni in 2006.  The appellant  himself
    assisted his brother and his friends and other LTTE members  from  2003
    to 2009.  He helped them in Batticaloa from  2003  to  2006.   He  then
    moved to Vanni in April 2008 and assisted them there, "... because  the
    LTTE were not publicly active after  2006".   He  assisted  by  finding
    accommodation and food for members of the  organisation  whenever  they
    came to the army controlled area.  He also collected envelopes given by
    them  and  handed  them  over  to  members  coming  from  other  areas.
    Sometimes he was asked to keep parcels safe and to give them  to  their
    friends  when  they  returned.   He  did  not  know  what  the  parcels
    contained.  Later on the LTTE split into two groups.   The  appellant's
    brother stayed with the main group  rather  than  with  Karuna's  Group
    which angered the Karuna Group's people.  They started  to  harass  the
    appellant and others in 2008.  They wrote to the  appellant  requesting
    that he attend their office for enquiry, but the appellant  was  scared
    and terrified to go to see them because others who  had  done  so  were
    either forcefully asked to join them and were then taken with  them  or
    some of them ended up dead.

 8. In March  2008  the  mobile  passport  office  of  Sri  Lanka  came  to
    Batticaloa. Because of the severe  harassment  by  Karuna's  Group  and
    their associates the appellant decided to apply for a passport in  case
    he had to leave Sri Lanka to escape them.  On 29 March 2008 he went  to
    the mobile unit and applied for his passport which was then  posted  to
    him in May 2008. When it arrived the appellant's father signed  for  it
    on his behalf.

 9. On  9  April  2008  a  number  of  Karuna  Group  members  visited  the
    appellant's home and  asked  for  him  but  he  was  not  there.   They
    questioned the appellant's father and threatened to kill the  appellant
    if they caught him.  They assaulted the appellant's father  who  warned
    the appellant not to come home but to go and stay in his aunt's  house.
    His father came to his aunt's house with some of his clothes  and  told
    the appellant that they were  going  to  travel  to  Vavuniya.   Having
    arrived there they stayed in a lodge for the night and he then went  to
    Omanthia the following day.  His brother met him there and took him  to
    Nedunkeni and arranged with a friend of his brother's for the appellant
    to stay.  He was able to move freely and independently as at that point
    he was in an LTTE controlled area.  Whilst there  he  attended  courses
    and classes given by the LTTE on how to treat the wounded and help  the
    aged.  He was not a member of any fighting  unit.   Nevertheless  there
    were a small number of people who  were  against  LTTE  and  they  were
    members of PLOTE or EPRLF.  Those people later  identified  people  who
    were working for the LTTE.

10. In May 2009 the war was coming to an end and people began to move  back
    to the army controlled area and surrendered to the army.  The appellant
    did so on 10 May 2009.  He was then detained at Veppankulam  Camp.  The
    authorities became aware of the appellant's brother's involvement  with
    the LTTE and how the appellant himself was helping  that  organisation.
    He was detained at the camp between 10 May 2009 until 25 December 2009.
     He became aware of the practice of officials accepting bribes  from  a
    relative of a detainee and then releasing them.

11. The appellant gave details of how he was tortured at the  camp  in  his
    statement of 22 September 2011.  The authorities called it  "inquiries"
    but they bullied and tortured him.  He was asked to sign  blank  papers
    which he at first  refused  to  do.   He  was  then  asked  to  sign  a
    confession that he was an LTTE member and when he refused to do  so  he
    was branded with a hot iron and with his  continuing  refusal  to  sign
    they branded him more.  He realised that they were not going  to  leave
    him alone until he signed so he did so. They told him that  if  he  did
    not behave that would be the end of him.  After that  incident  he  was
    only very seldom taken for "inquiry".  During his detention his torture
    also included hanging him upside down and immersing his head in  water.
    He was beaten with iron pipes and almost suffocated.  During one of his
    sessions his shoulder was dislocated and he  still  has  problems  with
    that shoulder as a result.

12. The appellant became "slightly friendly" with a Muslim officer who told
    the appellant that people were leaving the camp by paying a bribe.  The
    officer contacted the appellant's father.  The officer came after a few
    days and told the appellant that on Christmas Day there would be drinks
    and good food for the guards and if arrangements were made for that day
    to organise the appellant's release "it would be easy to keep  some  of
    the guards who were not party to this by making them drunk".   Although
    the majority of Sri Lankans are not  Christians  it  does  not  prevent
    others from celebrating Christmas also.

13. On 25 December the appellant was led through a back door and taken in a
    van to Madawachi.  From there his father took him to Colombo  where  he
    stayed the night with a Catholic priest.  The next day he was taken  to
    Negombo and introduced to a man who became his agent.  That agent tried
    to send him to India but was unable to do so.  He tried to send him  to
    other countries but failed and then said that there was only one way he
    could get the appellant out of the country which  was  by  obtaining  a
    student visa to the United Kingdom and arrangements were then made.

14. When he was in Batticaloa the appellant became friendly with  a  person
    who became his wife and arrangements were made for them to marry before
    he left.  They married on  30  January  2011  and  the  appellant  then
    returned to Negombo.  The agent was influential at  the  airport.   The
    appellant followed his instructions and did not have any  trouble  with
    immigration at the airport.  His wife phoned him after his  arrival  in
    the UK and said that she had been visited  by  members  of  the  Karuna
    Group and the CID who were asking for him.  She  was  harassed  to  the
    point that she even contemplated suicide.  The appellant spoke with his
    father and arrangements were made for the appellant's wife to  come  to
    the UK as his dependent. She arrived on 20 May 2011.

15. In his statement of 13 November 2012 the appellant expanded  upon  some
    of the matters made in his earlier statement.   He  has  not  seen  his
    elder brother since December 2008 and does not  know  if  he  is  still
    alive.  He confirms that his younger brother and sister have never been
    involved in politics or the LTTE.  He had not been able to contact  his
    parents for the last six months so did not know if the family still had
    a home in Batticaloa to where they had moved  in  December  2006.   His
    father always supported the LTTE "as far as I can remember".

16. In a later statement the appellant states that  he  fears  that  if  he
    returns to Sri Lanka they will know who he is  and  will  kill  him  or
    torture him again.  He signed a statement  there  and  even  though  he
    signed it under torture they would use that to torture him  again.   He
    fears for the safety of his wife and daughter.

17. In the appellant's latest statement dated 2 October 2014 he  says  that
    he continues to fear returning to Sri Lanka for all the  reasons  given
    previously, but also as a result of what he has been doing  in  the  UK
    since his arrival here.  He no longer telephones  his  parents  because
    the CID continue to visit the family home looking for the appellant and
    he fears that his calls may be monitored which has led to his  decision
    that he should stop calling until  circumstances  improved.   The  last
    time he knows the CID visited was towards the end of last  year.   They
    continue to look for him because of the outstanding warrant  they  have
    in his name.  His wife has also cut off contact with her family for the
    same reason.

18. As to his activities in the  UK  the  appellant  states  that  what  he
    suffered in Sri Lanka has not lessened his motivation but  has  spurred
    him on to seek Tamil freedom more than before.  He  has  continued  his
    political views  and  become  even  more  politically  aware.   He  has
    participated in protests in central London since 2011 and  pictures  of
    him at a protest have been published in a  Sri  Lankan  newspaper.   He
    attended meetings and demonstrations organised  by  the  British  Tamil
    Forum (BTF).  Initially he was not a member because he could not afford
    the fee.  The appellant used to go with a friend who kept  him  updated
    with details of the organisationm's activities.  The appellant is now a
    full member of BTF.  He volunteered to assist in  the  event  organised
    for the remembrance of the dead on 18  May.   More  than  1,000  people
    attended at the demonstration in Trafalgar Square and his role was  "to
    speak to people to explain the significance of that date, 18  May,  and
    also to try and recruit new members for the BTF".  He also participates
    in events and activities organised by other  groups  and  organisations
    such as one seeking to boycott Sri Lankan goods.   He  is  still  being
    treated  by  the  Medical  Foundation  and  has  been  invited  to   be
    interviewed by the UN in connection with what happened to  him  in  Sri
    Lanka.  He has agreed to be interviewed.

19. The appellant continued that he has settled here as part  of  a  family
    and being in the UK and safe is something that has helped him  a  great
    deal in coming to terms with what happened to him in Sri Lanka.  He has
    not fully recovered and the thought of being forced to  return  to  Sri
    Lanka makes things very difficult for him.

20. The statement from the appellant's wife is dated 15 November 2012.  She
    confirms that she has no immediate family other than  her  husband  and
    daughter.  She is an only child and after her  mother  passed  away  in
    2005 from a heart attack she lived  alone  at  the  family  home.   She
    worked for a Swiss NGO in Batticaloa  which  arrived  there  after  the
    tsunami to help the children affected by it.  The witness worked  as  a
    teacher and carer of those children.  She  met  the  appellant  at  her
    mother's first cousin's house. She has four daughters and one son.  The
    son's name is Uthayakanthan and he fled Sri Lanka to go to Saudi Arabia
    in early 2008 because Karuna's men were looking for him.   On  9  April
    2008 the appellant called her to say that he had problems and  that  he
    was leaving for Vanni, although he did not tell her what  the  problems
    were.  She was upset and worried for him and  she  only  spoke  to  him
    twice when he was in Vanni.  The next time she spoke to him was when he
    was in Negombo on 1 January 2010.  She had no idea what had happened to
    him before he called her on New Year's Day.  He told her  that  he  was
    living in Negombo and that he could not come  back  to  the  Batticaloa
    area because of his problems.  He said also that he could not  stay  in
    Sri Lanka and that he was planning on leaving to go to a  foreign  safe
    country.

21. In January 2011 the appellant told her that he had managed to obtain  a
    visa to go abroad and that he was leaving  Sri  Lanka.   She  was  very
    upset about this and ultimately they agreed to marry. He could not come
    to Batticaloa but told her that she should go to Ampara and they  would
    marry there.  The whole marriage was carried out in secret  but  people
    came to know about it.  She maintained a relationship with her  in-laws
    and went to see them four or five times and they also visited her,  but
    not very often.

22. About two weeks after the appellant came to the UK  Karuna's  men  came
    looking for the appellant.  When they did not find him they warned  the
    witness that they knew he was there and that when he came home  he  had
    to see them.  They returned and when they did  not  find  him  she  was
    threatened. They feigned to hit her and  verbally  abused  her.   As  a
    result of this she was very scared to stay where she was  and  used  to
    stay with neighbours at night.  People  began  to  distance  themselves
    from her because they knew that Karuna's men had visited  her  at  home
    and these people did not want  to  get  into  trouble.   She  told  the
    appellant about this and he said that he would try to help her.   There
    was a third visit from these men  and  before  they  arrived  she  left
    through the back door and went to a neighbour's house.  A  message  was
    left with a  neighbour  that  the  witness  should  go  and  see  them.
    Arrangements were then made for her to leave the country.   She  stayed
    with friends  a  little  distance  away  from  her  home  whilst  those
    arrangements were made.  She already had a passport  because  when  she
    was working for the NGO she had a chance to go to India with  them  and
    needed a passport for that purpose.

23. It was only once the witness came to the UK that she found out what had
    happened to her husband in  Sri  Lanka.   He  still  suffers  from  his
    shoulder injury and chest pains.  She  knew  that  he  had  trouble  in
    sleeping and would often get up in the middle of  the  night  and  stay
    awake, although there has been  an  improvement.   She  did  not  claim
    asylum herself in the UK because she had  no  difficulties  other  than
    were caused by reason of her relationship to her husband.

The Oral Evidence

24. In oral evidence before me the appellant confirmed the contents of  his
    statements to be true, and he was then cross-examined by Mr Melvin.  He
    was asked if he had any evidence that the Sri  Lankan  authorities  are
    looking for him, to which he responded that his  father  had  told  him
    that there was an arrest warrant and that is why the CID had  continued
    to come to the house and search it.  His father told him about this  at
    the  end  of  last  year.   Since  then  the  appellant  has   had   no
    communication with his  father  because  it  could  be  risky  for  his
    parents' lives if he did get in touch with  them.   The  CID  told  his
    father that they would harass him if the appellant did not return.

25. In 2008 the Karuna Group sent letters telling the appellant to come and
    see them and told the appellant's father that if the appellant did  not
    do so, when they did meet up  with  him  they  would  shoot  him.   The
    appellant said that they first threatened to kidnap his father in 2011.
     When asked why there was any change between 2011 and 2013 which led to
    the appellant stopping communicating with his parents he said that they
    were tapping the telephone.  He knows that his father  has  been  taken
    "for enquiry"  and  he  believes  that  he  has  been  kidnapped.   The
    appellant was told by his mother that his father  had  been  taken  for
    questioning. Mr Melvin made  the  point  that  the  appellant  did  not
    mention that in his most recent statement.  The appellant  then  denied
    that he was making up evidence about the kidnap.   He  has  never  said
    that his father was kidnapped, only that he has  been  taken  away  for
    questioning, but he believes that he has been kidnapped.

26. When it was pointed out that the statement did not even  say  that  his
    father had been taken for questioning the appellant responded  that  he
    had clearly told everything to his lawyer.  His father did not  say  if
    he had seen the arrest warrant, but if they  are  looking  for  someone
    they must have had one, otherwise there would be no reason for them  to
    come.  He did not know if his family had instructed a lawyer to act  on
    their behalf.  He confirmed that in 2013 his younger brother and sister
    were still living with his parents.

27. The appellant continued to respond in cross-examination to say that  he
    was released from custody by paying a bribe.  He confirmed that it  was
    only he who escaped on 25 December and that there was a team of  people
    who arranged for him to leave.  Asked to describe how  he  got  outside
    the camp perimeter the appellant said that he was  instructed  to  open
    the back door.  The door was left unlocked for him. He then had to pass
    out through an iron gate which had a fence around the  camp  on  either
    side of it.  There were no guards on the gate at the time.

28. The appellant then went on to confirm that he  used  his  own  passport
    when leaving Sri Lanka and that for travelling purposes before he  left
    he used a Muslim person's ID card provided by the agent.  When he  went
    to college in the UK  there were lots of Sri Lankans and students  from
    other countries.  He did not ask about asylum as he  was  worried  that
    others would come to know of his problems and if the Sinhalese came  to
    know there would be problems for him.  He  did  not  know  who  to  get
    advice from but eventually at his church he was  told  that  he  should
    seek a lawyer's advice.

29. The appellant then gave details of what  he  has  been  doing  in  this
    country in relation to the British Tamil Forum.  He said  that  he  was
    working  as  a  volunteer.  He  explains  to  people  the  reasons  for
    demonstrating; he puts up banners and holds placards.  He was not  able
    to  say  if  he  was  named  in  any  literature.   He  did  speak   at
    demonstrations with a megaphone.  An article appeared with his photo in
    it in the Tamil Guardian, although his name did not appear or say  what
    role he had.  He accepted that he only became a member some three weeks
    before the demonstration but he had worked with the organisation  since
    2011.  He could not join them earlier because he was unable to pay  the
    membership fee which at the time was �100.  In 2014 it was  reduced  to
    �20.  He did not have evidence from senior members that  would  confirm
    what activities he undertook for them.  He went on to say  that  he  is
    due to give evidence as a person affected by what went on in Sri  Lanka
    and this was in relation to the investigation of war  crimes.   As  for
    injuries he was not taking any medication now.  He  described  how  his
    daughter has problems walking and there is an appointment next year  to
    go to the hospital.

30. In re-examination the appellant said that his parents' phone  might  be
    tapped and so that is why he stopped phoning.  During 2012  his  mother
    clearly explained and he also heard news that phones were being  tapped
    and he was worried about this.  When he talked to his mother  she  said
    that they  had  taken  his  father  for  questioning  and  if  he,  the
    appellant, did not give himself up then they would detain  his  father.
    Asked to explain what he  meant  by  his  father  being  taken  by  the
    authorities as if he had been kidnapped  he  responded  that  they  had
    taken his father away and therefore the appellant thought  of  this  as
    being kidnapped.  He thought that they would not question him  at  home
    because they would be able to "attack him" once he had  been  detained.
    He confirmed that he has been receiving counselling  from  the  Medical
    Foundation since 2011 and last attended on 6 October 2014.

31. I then heard evidence from the appellant's wife who explained that  she
    and her husband decided to marry ahead of him coming to the UK  because
    she would have been living alone in  Sri  Lanka  and  people  would  be
    talking badly about her as they knew that she had been with  him.   She
    said also that her daughter had an appointment in  May  2014  regarding
    her leg problem and she has another appointment in May next year.  With
    regard to the British Tamil Forum she knows that her husband is working
    with them but does not know what he is doing for them.

32. As mentioned previously I  have  before  me  the  respondent's  written
    submissions.  I noted down Mr  Melvin's  verbal  submissions  and  have
    taken them into account.  The  skeleton  arguments  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant were relied on by Ms Mallick and she made verbal  submissions
    also which, again,  I  have  taken  into  account  in  arriving  at  my
    conclusions.

The Burden and Standard of Proof

33. The burden of proof is on the appellant to establish  that  substantial
    grounds have been shown that there is  a  real  risk  or  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood of him suffering persecution in Sri Lanka for  one
    of the reasons set out in the Refugee Convention which, on his case, is
    that of actual or imputed political opinion.  I  have  considered  also
    whether the appellant may  be  entitled  to  a  grant  of  humanitarian
    protection pursuant to paragraph 339C  of  HC  395  (as  amended).   In
    relation to the asylum, humanitarian protection and Articles 2, 3 and 8
    of the ECHR claims I have considered the circumstances at the  date  of
    the hearing.

My Findings

34. There are some parts of the appellant's evidence that I accept and some
    parts that I do not.  Generally speaking he has been  consistent  about
    the background facts relating to his family.  I find that  his  parents
    still live in Sri Lanka in their own home with the appellant's  younger
    brother and sister.  The appellant has  also  been  consistent  in  his
    evidence at interview and subsequently that his  brother  was  fighting
    with the LTTE, and that the appellant does not know what has become  of
    him because there has been no contact between them for many years.

35. From the evidence given,  both  oral  and  written,  I  find  that  the
    appellant became enmeshed in the civil war along with most if  not  all
    of his countrymen and women  of  Tamil  ethnicity.  He  was  a  student
    through much of the relevant time and was more interested  in  studying
    for his O level exams which he took in 2003, and  later  his  A  levels
    that he failed in 2006 but which he re-sat in 2007,  than  helping  the
    LTTE. The activities that he undertook for the LTTE were  of  the  sort
    that were carried out by tens of thousands of other Tamils  during  the
    civil war by those who were not  directly  involved  as  fighters.  "My
    brother and the LTTE members asked me to help them" (Q. 53). He  was  a
    school prefect and as such said that he had to make  speeches.  He  was
    asked about his role in the organisation of the Pongu Thamil and Heroes
    Day celebrations in 2005 and 2006 and what  specifically  the  speeches
    were about that he delivered to the students. I found that  his  answer
    namely that "we are all Tamil people and we have an organisation for us
    -- we shouldn't give up our rights" even as  a  summary   are  not  the
    words of a political activist with firmly held beliefs in the  LTTE  or
    Tamil cause.

36. In marked contrast to his description of the speeches that he gave  was
    the detailed one given of his own movements throughout  the  period  of
    the remainder of his stay in Sri Lanka, even to  the  point  of  giving
    specific dates on which they took place. The appellant in his statement
    of 2 October 2014 wrote that since being in the UK he has continued his
    political views and has become even more politically aware. However,  I
    do not find that he was politically involved or held  strong  political
    beliefs in Sri Lanka and neither do I find that he is involved  in  any
    serious way with the British Tamil Forum given his description  of  his
    activities in the  UK.   He  has  exaggerated  his  importance  to  the
    movement.  I accept that he has been working as a volunteer as no doubt
    many hundreds, if not thousands, of others have also.

37. In the documentation before me there is said to be  one  photograph  in
    which the appellant features that appeared in the "Tamil  Guardian"  in
    May 2013 but whether it is the appellant I could not tell  and  he  has
    not been named  in  the  publication.  There  are  a  small  number  of
    photographs in the bundle that  appear  to  show  the  appellant  at  a
    gathering, that the appellant says was  a  protest.  In  two  of  those
    photographs he is holding a flag of some sort. I take all of this  into
    account when considering what, if any, danger he may face on return  to
    Sri Lanka.

38. On my finding it is very unlikely  that  the  appellant  would  have  a
    political profile which makes him of adverse interest of the Sri Lankan
    authorities.  He was primarily a student in Sri Lanka  who  helped  the
    LTTE for a period of the civil war. He had no strongly  held  political
    beliefs and since his arrival in the United Kingdom has been present at
    one or more protests but as a  fact  he  has  no  current  deeply  held
    political beliefs either.

39. It is known that in May 2009 the civil war was coming to an  end.   The
    appellant maintains that he moved back to the army controlled area with
    thousands of other Tamils as hostilities ceased.  This  fits  with  the
    background information and it is likely, I find, that  along  with  all
    other young men he was detained for screening and investigation  as  to
    his participation in the LTTE movement.  It is credible that because he
    moved into the army controlled area without a family and was  therefore
    on his own that he was picked out for particular attention.

40. I find that the appellant was tortured during the period  that  he  was
    detained.  Although the respondent  at  paragraph  22  of  the  refusal
    letter seeks to suggest that, as  is  set  out  in  paragraph  21,  the
    appellant inflicted wounds on himself  in  order  to  create  scars  to
    support his story, I am unimpressed  with  that  argument.   There  has
    never been any good  evidence  to  show  that  the  practice  has  been
    widespread and it has not been supported in subsequent cases where that
    matter has been raised.  It is also the case  that  the  appellant  has
    been diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder in the reports  that
    I have before me and it is difficult to see why he would suffer in that
    way if the wounds were self-inflicted.  Furthermore, I  cannot  believe
    that the Medical Foundation, with all its experience, would be spending
    time counselling the appellant unless his problems were worthy of  that
    organisation's continuing attention, even though I have not heard  from
    them.

41. I have heard what the appellant has to say  about  how  he  escaped  on
    Christmas Day 2009 from the interrogation camp some months after he was
    detained there.  However, I do not believe that events unfolded in  the
    manner asserted.  The Muslim CID officer who allegedly helped  him  was
    from Ampara which is not far from Batticaloa where the appellant lived.
     This led to a form of friendship.  The officer told him that he  could
    not help because he might or would lose his job.  Despite that concern,
    according to the appellant, and presumably because of  the  bribe  paid
    and the friendship, he agreed to organise  the  appellant's  escape  on
    Christmas Day.   Both  at  interview  and  before  me  the  appellant's
    description of how he escaped seemed to me unlikely.  His cell door and
    the gate, or one of the gates, to the camp was  left  open  which  then
    enabled the appellant to walk out to a van, which van was driven by the
    Muslim officer.  Although accepting that  money  could  have  been  his
    motivation, it seems to me a very unlikely risk that the officer  would
    take by behaving in this way. He  may  have  gained  money  but  risked
    losing his job and being punished, one surmises,  whether  bribes  were
    paid to others or not. As  the  respondent  points  out,  additionally,
    given that Christians make up only 8% of the predominantly Buddhist and
    Hindu Sri Lankan population, it is implausible that the majority of the
    camp staff would be drunk because it was Christmas Day or alternatively
    that a number of prison guards were part of  the  plot  to  secure  the
    release of the appellant.

42. More likely, I find, is that the appellant was of no lasting concern to
    the authorities.  He was detained and  tortured  but  revealed  nothing
    that was of particular interest and  he  was  released.   It  would  of
    course support the appellant's case to have been released in the manner
    that he asserts because this provided the reason for the issue  of  the
    arrest warrant that he mentions for the first time in his statement  of
    2 October 2014.  However, the appellant has not  provided  any  written
    evidence that the Sri Lankan authorities are looking for him,  although
    he maintains that his father told him that there was an arrest warrant,
    which is why the CID continued to come to the house.

43. The appellant says that  he  is  not  communicating  with  his  parents
    anymore because it would put them in danger, although it  is  difficult
    to see why that should be the case when he is in the United Kingdom and
    his parents are in Sri Lanka. If their phone is being tapped  then  the
    authorities would know that to be the position. The  explanation  given
    by the appellant that his parents would be in  danger  if  he  contacts
    them of course provides the reason why the appellant would be unable to
    ask his father anything about the arrest warrant or obtain  a  copy  of
    it. I do not accept that I have been told the truth on the matter.

44. In oral evidence the appellant referred to his father being "kidnapped"
    by the authorities but then admitted that he does  not  know  what  has
    happened to his father. The only  explanation  he  could  give  for  no
    mention being made in his latest statement about his father being taken
    for "inquiry" or having been kidnapped was that he had told  everything
    to his lawyer, the  implication  being,  presumably,  that  the  lawyer
    should have set this out in the statement but failed to do so.  As  the
    appellant himself gave evidence that he  agreed  the  contents  of  his
    statement and signed it after  it  had  been  explained  to  him  in  a
    language that he understood, I  do  not  believe  that  he  would  have
    allowed something as important as his father being taken for  "inquiry"
    or having been kidnapped to be omitted from that statement.

45. At this point I refer to the evidence given by the appellant's wife.  I
    find that on most matters of importance she is not able to help provide
    corroborative evidence.  Indeed, according to her, the appellant kept a
    lot from her, including what happened to him in prison.  She  has  done
    her best to be supportive of him and she knows little  about  his  work
    with the British Tamil Forum.

46. The marriage took place when the appellant had been trying to leave Sri
    Lanka for a considerable time, on his evidence,  and when he was in the
    hands of the agent and under his control. The appellant's wife was very
    concerned and upset when she found out that the appellant was about  to
    leave Sri Lanka without marrying her. They then agreed to marry. It may
    have been easier to organise the wedding at short notice in Ampara than
    in Batticaloa.  The elaborate description by the appellant  as  to  how
    the arrangements were made and how the wedding itself  took  place  may
    have been as much to protect the agent as the appellant says it was  to
    protect him. The appellant had been staying  with  the  agent  and  his
    family for a long time in Colombo and it is reasonable to suppose  that
    the agent needed to ensure  that  the  appellant  did  not  become  the
    subject of interest at any road block that might be encountered on  the
    way to the venue at a time when the agent was accompanying him.

47. In paragraph 36 of the  appellant's  wife's  written  statement  of  15
    November 2012 her evidence is that  she  had  no  difficulties  herself
    "other what is related to my husband".  The alleged visits by  Karuna's
    men to her following the marriage provides the reason for  arrangements
    being made for her to leave Sri Lanka and shows that the appellant,  in
    2011 at least, was still of interest to the authorities.  According  to
    the appellant's wife there were three visits in total.  On  the  second
    visit she was threatened and the men feigned to hit  her  and  verbally
    abused her warning that if the appellant did not report they would take
    her in. She explained in her statement  that  she  used  to  stay  with
    neighbours at night but people then started to distance themselves from
    her and so she returned home.  The men returned a third  time  but  she
    managed to escape.

48. It seems to me that anyone who was threatened with being taken in would
    not have stayed at home on their own  but  would  have  done  what  the
    appellant's wife eventually said that she did which was  to  stay  with
    friends "a little distance away from home". While  accepting  that  she
    did not want to or she felt unable to stay at any one place  for  long,
    if she worried that the men were likely to carry out their  threat  she
    would surely have been less vulnerable anywhere than in her  own  home.
    Either, therefore she was not that concerned about Karuna's men  coming
    after her in spite of their  threat  otherwise  she  would  have  moved
    elsewhere, or what she says happened to her is an invention. I  am  not
    persuaded to the relevant standard that she was visited and  threatened
    by Karuna's men in the manner described or at all. Had the threat  been
    real she would have moved away from her home before the third visit.

49. I take into account that the  appellant  did  not  claim  asylum  until
    approximately five months after he arrived in the United  Kingdom.   He
    began studying and  only  stopped  doing  so  shortly  before  claiming
    asylum. That I find is inconsistent with his claim to have travelled to
    the United Kingdom specifically to seek  protection.   His  explanation
    for not revealing that he was looking for asylum to others  at  college
    does not ring true, and  nor does his claim that he did not know who to
    get advice from. In oral evidence he said that there were other  Tamils
    and Sinhalese also at college and he thought there  would  be  problems
    him if the Sinhalese came to know about him and they would be a  danger
    to him. He is not uneducated and is clearly  not  unintelligent  and  I
    find that I have not been told the truth by him on the point. There was
    undoubtedly advice available had he wished to obtain it.

50. The much more likely explanation for not claiming asylum soon after  he
    arrived in the UK is that this was a deliberate move by  him  to  delay
    doing so until after his wife's arrival here. In cross-examination  the
    appellant denied that this was what happened. However,  if  he  claimed
    asylum at an earlier date and before arrangements had been made for his
    wife to come it is reasonable to  suppose  that  she  would  have  been
    refused a visa, or at least entry to the United Kingdom, as  a  student
    dependant.  Although it is perfectly understandable that he would  wish
    to have his wife join him and would therefore  wish  to  avoid  such  a
    situation arising, it would have been easy enough for him to admit that
    this was his intention rather than give the reasons that he did for not
    claiming asylum earlier, which reasons I reject, as explained above.

51. I observe also that the appellant appears to  have  made  no  enquiries
    about the situation of his family during 2014.  It seems unlikely  that
    there would not be other family members or friends  of  whom  he  could
    make enquiries.  If he was truly concerned that  his  father  has  been
    kidnapped, it is reasonable to suppose that he would be very anxious to
    know what has happened to him.  Although again it may be  a  matter  of
    funding, or rather lack of it, there is no  evidence  either  that  the
    appellant has approached a lawyer in Sri Lanka to make enquiries  about
    his family or to establish whether  there  is  an  outstanding  warrant
    against the appellant.  These are not the actions of a  genuine  asylum
    seeker.

52. There is also a point at paragraph 5 of the  latest  statement  of  the
    appellant dated 2 October 2014 where the appellant says that  his  wife
    has also cut off contact  with  her  family  because  of  the  fear  of
    monitoring by the authorities. However, the appellant's wife has always
    maintained that she has no immediate family left in Sri Lanka. She  was
    not asked about this at the hearing so I  feel  unable  to  attach  any
    significant weight to the statement.

53. I have taken into account in my overall consideration  of  this  appeal
    the other documents produced, the most relevant of which  would  appear
    to be those  allegedly  from  the  TVMP  in  2008  demanding  that  the
    appellant come to see them and making threats when he  did  not.  These
    letters are certainly capable of corroborating the appellant's evidence
    to some extent but although they appear to have been  written  on  some
    form of headed notepaper - only a photocopy was produced - the contents
    are handwritten and would be very easy to manufacture.  Without  better
    knowledge of their provenance I find that I am unable to give them  any
    significant weight.

My Deliberations

54. The case of KV (scarring - medical  evidence)  Sri  Lanka  [2014]  UKUT
    00230 (IAC) deals with a number of issues concerning  medical  evidence
    and in particular the issue of whether doctors and/or decision  makers,
    when assessing claimants who have  scarring  which  they  attribute  to
    torture, need to consider the possibility that they  have  deliberately
    had their scarring  inflicted  by  a  third  party  acting  with  their
    consent.  In this case the medical report from Zacharias Costa is dated
    14 August 2011 and is referred to in the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    that is dated 18 August 2011.  In that refusal letter the matter of the
    possibility of "SIBP" (self-infliction of injuries  by  proxy,  meaning
    injuries caused by a third party at a person's invitation,) was  raised
    (para 21).  At paragraph 22 of the RFRL the point is made that Dr Costa
    fails to explain how the size, position, form  and  characteristics  of
    the scars do not in his opinion appear to have been caused by  accident
    or indeed to have been self-inflicted.  Another criticism of the report
    is that no attempt has been made to date the scarring.  KV  found  that
    whilst the medical  literature  continues  to  consider  that  scarring
    cannot be dated beyond six months from when it was inflicted, there  is
    some medical basis for considering in  relation  to  certain  types  of
    cases that its age can be determined up to two years.

55. It would have been helpful for further medical evidence  to  have  been
    provided which dealt with such matters as it  may  have  made  my  task
    easier in establishing not only the cause of the scarring but also more
    certainly how and by whom the injuries were inflicted, and also the age
    of the scars.  I understand well that the matter of  funding  may  have
    been an issue preventing such a report being obtained, but lack of such
    an amending or further report is regrettable.

56. There is also the psychological report from Georgia Costa that is dated
    14 August 2011.  Included is her professional opinion that removal from
    the UK and return to Sri Lanka would  have  a  significant  deleterious
    effect on the appellant's mental state and he is likely to become  even
    more depressed and retraumatised.  She states that it is highly  likely
    that the appellant would be at greatly increased risk of suicide  as  a
    result of the retraumatisation and the loss of hope for the future.

57. That report is now more than three years old.   There  is  no  updating
    report.  I have not seen any  submission  from  the  appellant  in  his
    interview, statements or at the hearing relating to  suicidal  ideation
    and if this were truly a matter of concern I would  surely  have  heard
    about it.  I have not and therefore I reject any  suggestion  that  the
    appellant has ever or would now be at risk of taking his own life.   He
    has given evidence that  he  has  been  receiving  treatment  from  the
    Medical Foundation since 2011.  Additionally there is  no  report  from
    the Medical Foundation which might have shed some light on  matters  of
    concern such as suicidal ideation.

58. The leading country guidance case in relation to Sri Lanka  is  GJ  and
    Others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319
    (IAC).  I have also read and had regard to the later case of MP and  NT
    [2014] EWCA Civ 829 where certain aspects of GJ were challenged.

59. The headnote in GJ and Others states as follows:-

         "(1) This determination replaces all existing country  guidance  on
             Sri Lanka.

         (2)  The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern  has  changed
             since the civil war ended in May 2009. The LTTE in  Sri  Lanka
             itself is a spent force  and  there  have  been  no  terrorist
             incidents since the end of the civil war.

         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
             activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism
             and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state  enshrined  in
             Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in  1983,  which
             prohibits the 'violation  of  territorial  integrity'  of  Sri
             Lanka.  Its focus is on preventing both (a) the resurgence  of
             the LTTE or any similar Tamil separatist organisation and  (b)
             the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka.

         (4)  If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  security  services
             there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring
             international protection.

         (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri  Lanka  for  a
             person at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the
             government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils  are
             required to return to a named address  after  passing  through
             the airport.

         (6)  There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
             whose names appear on a 'stop' list will be detained from  the
             airport. Any risk for those in whom the Sri Lankan authorities
             are or become interested exists not at the airport, but  after
             arrival in their  home  area,  where  their  arrival  will  be
             verified by the CID or police within a few days.

         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.



             (b)  Journalists (whether in print or other  media)  or  human
                  rights activists, who, in either case, have criticised the
                  Sri Lankan government,  in  particular  its  human  rights
                  record, or who are associated with  publications  critical
                  of the Sri Lankan government.

             (c)  Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
                  Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the  Sri
                  Lankan security forces, armed forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities in alleged war crimes.  Among  those  who  may
                  have   witnessed   war   crimes   during   the   conflict,
                  particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only  those
                  who have already  identified  themselves  by  giving  such
                  evidence would be known to the Sri Lankan authorities  and
                  therefore only they are at real risk of adverse  attention
                  or persecution on return as potential or actual war crimes
                  witnesses.

             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised 'stop' list
                  accessible at the airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on a 'stop'  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant.

         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
             intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in
             the diaspora. The Sri Lankan authorities know  that  many  Sri
             Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and  also
             that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had  some  level  of
             involvement with the LTTE  during  the  civil  war.  In  post-
             conflict Sri Lanka,  an  individual's  past  history  will  be
             relevant only to the extent that it is perceived  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government.

         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
             'watch' list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is
             not reasonably likely to be detained at the airport  but  will
             be monitored by the security services after his or her return.
              If that monitoring does not indicate that such a person is  a
             Tamil activist working to destabilise the unitary  Sri  Lankan
             state or revive the internal armed conflict, the individual in
             question is not, in general, reasonably likely to be  detained
             by the security forces. That will be a  question  of  fact  in
             each case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out by
             such an individual.

         (10) Consideration must always be given to whether, in the light of
             an individual's activities  and  responsibilities  during  the
             civil war, the exclusion clauses are engaged  (Article  1F  of
             the Refugee Convention and Article 12(2) of the  Qualification
             Directive).  Regard  should  be  had  to  the  categories  for
             exclusion set out in the 'Eligibility Guidelines For Assessing
             the International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from  Sri
             Lanka', published by UNHCR on 21 December 2012."

60. The risk factors identified which have or may have  relevance  in  this
    appeal are:-

      a) Whether the appellant is or  would  be  perceived  to  be  a  Tamil
         activist in the diaspora who was working for Tamil  separatism  and
         to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state, bearing  in  mind  the
         Sri Lankan state's focus on preventing both (a) the  resurgence  of
         the LTTE or any similar Tamil separatist organisation and  (b)  the
         revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka.

      b) Whether if the appellant is detained by  the  Sri  Lankan  security
         forces he is at  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or  harm  requiring
         international protection.

      c) Whether his name is on a "stop  list"  such  that  he  risks  being
         detained at the airport?  If not, are the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
         interested in or may they become interested in him after arrival in
         his home area where his arrival would be verified  by  the  CID  or
         police within a few days

61. I am unable to conclude that the activities of this  appellant  in  the
    United Kingdom either constitute, or would be perceived to be, a threat
    to the integrity  of  Sri  Lanka.   This  appellant  does  not  have  a
    significant  role  in  relation  to  post-conflict  Tamil   separatism.
    Although he has given evidence that  he  has  taken  part  in  lots  of
    activities between 2011 and 2014, the details given were scant  and  on
    any  view  he  did  not  and  does  not   take   part   in   organising
    demonstrations, although I accept that he has been present  at  one  or
    more of them.  It is perhaps a measure of his  lack  of  commitment  as
    well as lack of funds that he says that he did not apply for membership
    of the British Tamils Forum until April 2014, some three years after he
    arrived in the United Kingdom.  As was set out in paragraph 336  of  GJ
    and Others the Upper Tribunal found:

         "We do not  consider  that  attendance  at  demonstrations  in  the
         diaspora alone is sufficient to create a real risk or a  reasonable
         degree of likelihood that a person will attract  adverse  attention
         on return to Sri Lanka."

    And at paragraph 351:

         "Attendance at one, or even several demonstrations in the  diaspora
         is not of itself evidence  that  a  person  is  a  committed  Tamil
         activist seeking to promote Tamil separatism within Sri Lanka."

62. As was said in paragraph 24 of MP and NT the issue here is not that  of
    the politically indifferent who seek to  bolster  an  asylum  claim  by
    opportunist participation in sur place demonstrations in  the  hope  of
    being photographed and perceived as suspicious (as to which,  see,  for
    example, KS (Burma) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
    EWCA Civ 67), the concern is with genuine  diaspora  demonstrators  who
    may be put at risk on return as a  result  of  surveillance  and  video
    recording or photography.

    At paragraph 25 of MP and NT:-

         "There was evidence before the UT of such intelligence gathering by
         the Sri Lankan authorities and that  it  has  reached  a  level  of
         sophistication.  However, it did not take  the  form  of  a  cogent
         correlation between mere participation in such  demonstrations  and
         persecution  on  return.   Nor,  for  that  matter,  do  the  UNHCR
         Guidelines put it  so  low.   The  reference  to  LTTE  'propaganda
         activists and those with, or perceived as having had, links to  the
         Sri Lankan diaspora that provided funding and other support to  the
         LTTE' seems to assume a higher level than mere participation in one
         or more demonstrations.  No doubt it can form a part of the picture
         but I do not consider that it was legally erroneous of  the  UT  to
         conclude that it needs more  to  qualify  as  a  risk  category  or
         operative risk factor ..."

63. Not nearly enough good evidence has been  put  before  me  to  allow  a
    finding that the appellant's name would appear on a computerised "stop"
    list.  Such a list would comprise those against whom there is an extant
    court order or arrest warrant.  For reasons that I have  already  given
    there is no evidence to which I  can  give  weight  that  leads  me  to
    suppose that  there  is  such  a  court  order  or  arrest  warrant  in
    existence.

64. I have already found  that  the  appellant  participated  in  low-level
    activities for the LTTE.  As GJ and Others found in  post-conflict  Sri
    Lanka, an individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent
    that it is perceived by the Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
    present risk to  the  unitary  Sri  Lankan  state  or  the  Sri  Lankan
    Government.

65. It is possible that the appellant would appear on a watch list.  He has
    taken part in one or more  demonstrations  at  which  several  thousand
    other Tamils demonstrated also.  It is a matter  of  conjecture  as  to
    whether he would therefore appear on such a list.  As a fact I  do  not
    find that he has deep-rooted political beliefs indicating that he is an
    activist working to destabilise the Sri Lankan state, or that he  hopes
    to revive the internal armed conflict.   On  the  assumption  that  the
    computerised intelligence led watch list leads to the same  finding  he
    is not reasonably likely to be  detained  by  the  security  forces  on
    return.

66. I pause here to make the point that the  appellant  at  interview  when
    asked about his brother's role in the LTTE  responded  that  he  was  a
    fighter and he heard that he was a Colonel (questions 27 and 28).  I do
    not accept that he was a Colonel as there is nothing  else  to  suggest
    this, and even the form of the appellant's reply to  the  question  was
    such that he appeared unsure about it.

67. On the evidence that I accept therefore the appellant is not related to
    a (former)  high-ranking  LTTE  member  and  nor  does  he  have  other
    connections,  familial  or  otherwise,  that  might  indicate  to   the
    authorities in Sri Lanka that he either is or would be seen as a threat
    to the integrity of the state.  Although the appellant claims  that  he
    was released upon payment of a bribe and escaped, I have  not  accepted
    that he escaped, and particularly not in the manner  claimed.   I  have
    accepted that he was tortured at the end of the war at a time when  the
    authorities were seeking to establish the part  that  Tamils  may  have
    taken in the civil war. I  have  also  taken  into  account  that  past
    behaviour is often a good indicator of what may occur in the future.

68. The appellant could have signed a confession letter as he claimed,  but
    viewed overall his credibility is damaged by matters set out earlier in
    this determination such as I find that he did not do so.   It  is  more
    likely, because of my findings as to his lack of credibility on certain
    matters that having been tortured the information revealed was not such
    as led to any real further interest in him  and  he  was  released,  or
    remained detained, until an opportunity arose to extract a bribe from a
    family member which led to his release at a later date.

69. It is for these reasons that I am not satisfied that even applying  the
    lower standard of proof that this appellant risks persecution from  the
    Sri Lankan authorities if returned to Sri Lanka.

Human Rights

70. With regard to other matters the appellant is married and has  a  young
    daughter.  Her medical problems are  not  such  as  require  urgent  or
    continuing treatment.  She is being  monitored  having  regard  to  the
    problems that she does display.  Undoubtedly  her  best  interests  lie
    with being with both parents and she would be returning  to  Sri  Lanka
    with them.  The appellant and his wife have now been here for more than
    three years.  The appellant himself ostensibly arrived as a student and
    his wife as his dependant.  There is no good reason to doubt that  they
    would return as a family to live with the appellant's parents or  would
    find their own accommodation.  Such family and  private  life  as  they
    have built up in the United Kingdom has only been since around the time
    of claiming asylum and may be enjoyed in  Sri  Lanka.   The  Article  8
    claim  was  not  pursued  with  any  relish  and  on  the  facts   such
    interference as there would be in the family and private lives  of  the
    appellant, his  wife  and  child,  is  entirely  proportionate  in  the
    interests of effective immigration control.  I conclude therefore  that
    the appellant does not succeed in his human rights claim either.

Notice of Decision

71. For the  reasons  already  given  I  dismiss  this  appeal  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

72. I do not make an anonymity direction.  None was sought  and  I  see  no
    need for one in the particular circumstances.



Signed        Date 11 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
