
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09632/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9th November 2017                         |On 14 November 2017            |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                   miss DM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonavero, Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a  national  of  Albania,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision by the Secretary of State of 17  June  2015
    to refuse her application for asylum in the  UK.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Davidson dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated  on  18th
    May 2017.  The Appellant  appeals  to  this  Tribunal  with  permission
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever on 12th September 2017.

 2. The issue in this appeal is a narrow one and is based on  paragraph  33
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge where he said:-

         "Following the decision in  Devaseelan  I  find  that  I  take  the
         Decision by the NRM (National Referral Mechanism)  as  my  starting
         point, and have not heard anything to persuade me that is (sic) not
         a reliable report and decision.  I therefore find that there is  no
         evidence that the Appellant was a victim  of  trafficking  for  the
         purposes  of  prostitution.   Because  of  the  contradictions  and
         inconsistencies  referred  to  above,  I  find,  on  a  balance  or
         probabilitie (sic), that the Appellant is not credible and was  not
         confined in the way she claims and exploited for  the  purposes  of
         prostitution, and therefore is not a Member  of  Particular  Social
         Group for the purposes of the Asylum Convention,  and  dismiss  her
         claim on that ground".

 3. It is contended in the Grounds of Appeal that the judge erred  in  this
    paragraph in that the principles set out  in  the  case  of  Devaseelan
    [2002] UKIAT 00702  do not apply in this case as those principles apply
    only to previous  judicial  decisions  and  not  to  an  administrative
    decision made by the  Secretary  of  State.   The  second  main  ground
    contends that the judge applied the wrong standard of proof in that  it
    appears that in determining the credibility of the Appellant's  account
    the judge made the decision on the balance of probabilities rather than
    applying the lower standard applicable to asylum cases.

 4. The Secretary of State submitted a Rule 24 response on 3rd October 2017
    in which it  was  stated  that  the  Respondent  does  not  oppose  the
    Appellant's application  for  permission  to  appeal  and  invited  the
    Tribunal to determine the appeal with a fresh  continuance  hearing  on
    the basis that the judge applied the wrong standard of proof and made a
    mistaken approach to the National Referral Mechanism decision.

 5. It is clear to me that at paragraph 33 the  judge  set  out  the  wrong
    standard of proof in relation to  the  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    credibility. Although the judge had set out  the  correct  standard  of
    proof at paragraphs 6 to 10 of the decision, these are clearly standard
    paragraphs. However paragraph 33 reflects the judge's approach to  this
    particular case.

 6. If, as it appears, the judge applied the wrong  standard  of  proof,  a
    standard which goes to the very heart of the assessment of evidence  in
    an asylum appeal, this  amounts  to  a  material  error  such  that  it
    undermines all of the findings made by the judge  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's credibility. As the Appellant's credibility is  central  to
    the determination of the issues  in  this  appeal,  that  error  is  so
    fundamental that it undermines the entire decision.

 7. The error is compounded by the approach to the  NRM  letter  under  the
    principles of Devaseelan which have no application to a  decision  made
    by the Secretary of State.  The guidance in that case applies to second
    appeals where the decision made by the previous Tribunal should be  the
    starting point and should stand as the authoritative assessment of  the
    Appellant's status at the time of the previous appeal.

 8. A reading of  paragraphs  32-33  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's
    decision indicates that the decision  made  in  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism letter, forming the starting point for the  judge,  played  a
    significant role in  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  evidence.  This
    further undermines the findings in relation to credibility.

 9.  In  these  circumstances  the  judge's  findings   are   fundamentally
    undermined and cannot stand.  Accordingly I set aside the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

10. I agree with the parties that the remaking of  this  decision  requires
    fresh findings of fact. Therefore, in line  with  paragraph  7  of  the
    Tribunal Practice statement, in light if the nature or  extent  of  the
    judicial fact finding required in order to re-make the decision, having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule  2,  it  is  appropriate  to
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law.

12. I set that decision aside.

13. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

14. An anonymity direction is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 13th November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 13th November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

