
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09992/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 25th August 2016                  |On 26th August 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  ANWAR [M]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K H Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Neil Barnes,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Fox, promulgated on 19th May 2016, dismissing his asylum  appeal.   The
    judge accepted that the appellant is a national of Eritrea and would be
    at real risk of persecution if removed there.  However, the judge  also
    said that the appellant would not be  at  risk  upon  return  to  Saudi
    Arabia, where he lived from birth until he travelled to the UK in 2015.

 2. Upper Tribunal Judge Allen granted permission to appeal,  on  the  view
    that it was unclear on what basis the judge thought the appellant could
    be returned to Saudi Arabia, having made no finding  about  his  status
    there.

 3. Mr Matthews conceded that on the judge's findings of fact,  the  appeal
    should have been allowed under the Refugee Convention.   The  appellant
    had not been found to have a second nationality.   He  might  have  had
    another country of habitual residence, but that was a different matter.
     Whether the appellant is removable to Saudi Arabia is a separate issue
    for the respondent to consider once these proceedings are resolved.

 4. By agreement, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  and
    the following decision is substituted.  The appellant  has  established
    that he is a national of Eritrea, and  that  his  removal  there  would
    breach the UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention.  The  appeal,
    as originally  brought  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  is  accordingly
    allowed.


                           [pic]


                           26 August 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
