
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/09957/2015
                                                               PA/04301/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th April 2019                    |On 11th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      THE HON. MR JUSTICE ANDREW BAKER
                    (sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between
                                   A S (1)
                                   E S (2)
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, of Counsel, instructed by Raymond Saul
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  Introduction

    1. The appellants are citizens of Russia, they were formerly  a  married
       couple,  have  legally  divorced  due  to   the   first   appellant's
       difficulties in Russia but remain a couple. They have two  daughters.
       The appellants left Russia and went to Northern Cyprus  in  2011.  In
       2014 the second appellant  went  back  to  Russia  where  her  eldest
       daughter was being cared for by her parents.  In  December  2014  the
       first appellant left Northern Cyprus on  a  false  Latvian  passport,
       travelled to the UK, and claimed asylum on arrival. In December  2015
       the second appellant arrived in the UK and claimed asylum on  arrival
       in this country. Both claims were refused by  the  respondent.  Their
       appeals against the decisions were dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge A D Baker in a determination promulgated on the  24th  February
       2017.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  on
       21st April 2017 on the basis that the second and third  grounds  only
       were arguable, and thus that it  was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
       judge  had  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  consider  the  risk   of
       mistreatment or  lack  of  healthcare  if  the  first  appellant  was
       imprisoned or detained in Russia and whether this exposed  him  to  a
       real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR, and further it was
       arguable that, if the issue of  extradition  was  raised  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal, there was an  error  also  in  relation  to  the
       treatment of this issue. It was found that the first ground of appeal
       was not arguable and thus permission was not granted in  relation  to
       contended errors in relation to a claim under the Refugee Convention.

    3. A hearing was listed for August  2018  but  was  adjourned  by  Sukhi
       Bakhshi, Upper Tribunal Lawyer, on 26th July 2018, so that the appeal
       hearing would  take  place  after  the  final  determination  of  the
       extradition proceedings in relation to the  first  appellant  by  the
       High Court. The High Court gave its judgement in  Shmatko  v  Russian
       Federation [2018] EWHC 3534 (Admin) on 19th December 2018.

    4. The matter  came  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

  Submissions - Error of Law

    5. The second ground of appeal is, in summary, as  follows.  The  First-
       tier Tribunal was alerted to 11 cases of the European Court of  Human
       Rights involving  Russia  which  detailed  mistreatment  contrary  to
       Article 3 ECHR for those in pre-trial custody (SIZO) and the  neglect
       of those with medical conditions which amounted  to  Article  3  ECHR
       breaches. It had been found that the first appellant had been  beaten
       in custody. It was therefore incumbent on the First-tier Tribunal  to
       consider whether there was a future risk of such treatment if he  was
       returned to Russia. There was also medical evidence  that  the  first
       appellant suffers from pancreatitis which was accepted by the  First-
       tier Tribunal. As this is a condition which has a significant risk of
       mortality from severe attacks and requires a low-fat  diet,  and  may
       require pancreatic enzymes for treatment of  symptoms,  it  was  also
       incumbent on the First-tier Tribunal to consider the potential for an
       Article 3 ECHR risk in prison/detention in Russia on this  basis  too
       and this risk too had not been examined.

    6. The third ground of appeal is that  first  appellant  is  subject  to
       extradition by the Russian authorities and the second appellant is  a
       witness in these proceedings. The first appellant,  it  is  asserted,
       has a procedural right under Article 8 ECHR to be  present  and  give
       evidence at his extradition hearing, see RS (immigration  and  family
       court proceedings) India [2012] UKUT 00218. It is also contended that
       to remove the first appellant prior to  the  extradition  proceedings
       reaching a conclusion  would  render  null  the  protections  of  the
       Extradition Act 2003.

    7. The second ground is conceded as an error of law by the respondent in
       the Rule 24 notice of 9th May 2017. In a further Rule 24 notice dated
       19th March 2019 the respondent conceded, in light of the decision  in
       Shmatko v Russian Federation  [2018]  EWHC  3534  (Admin),  that  the
       removal of  the  first  appellant  engages  Article  3  ECHR  due  to
       prison/detention conditions in Russia.

    8. Mr Jeserum informed us that he would not be  pursuing  an  Article  8
       ECHR appeal argument on behalf of the  second  appellant,  which  had
       historically been run and which he would have re-argued before us  in
       light of the new position of the respondent in relation to the  first
       appellant, since Mr Melvin had provided an assurance that  she  would
       be granted leave in line with the first appellant by the  respondent.
       He therefore submitted that there was no need  for  us  to  hear  any
       further argument on any issues.

  Conclusions - Error of Law

    9. As the error of law on ground two is conceded it is not necessary  to
       give extensive reasons however it is clear that it was argued  before
       the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant would suffer ill-treatment
       contrary to Article 3 ECHR if returned to Russia due to detention  as
       a result of the criminal proceedings brought against  him,  and  that
       the summary decisions of the European  Court  of  Human  Rights  were
       placed before the First-tier Tribunal, see paragraphs 16  and  42  of
       the decision. It was also agreed by the  respondent  that  the  first
       appellant   would   be   subjected   to   pre-trial   detention   and
       implementation of a suspended sentence as a result of  breaching  his
       bail conditions if returned  to  Russia,  see  paragraph  48  of  the
       decision. At paragraphs 91-94 the First-tier Tribunal finds that  the
       first appellant  has  shown  that  he  was  severely  beaten  by  two
       officials in July 2010 whilst being subject  to  pre-trial  detention
       but concludes that this was "general ill-treatment" and not  targeted
       at the first appellant. The  First-tier  Tribunal  fails  to  make  a
       finding as to whether the first appellant is at  real  risk  of  such
       treatment happening again in the future on the  evidence  before  it,
       simply saying that the  country  of  origin  information  and  expert
       evidence shows that "such incidents do happen",  and  also  fails  to
       consider the European Court of Human Rights cases when  finding  that
       there is sufficiency of protection due to there  being  a  complaints
       process. The conclusion that the appeal does not succeed on Article 3
       ECHR  grounds  on  this  basis  therefore  errs  in  law  for   being
       insufficiently reasoned. There is also no consideration of the  first
       appellant's medical condition and the contention that  he  would  not
       receive the necessary treatment for  that  condition,  and  thus  the
       dismissal of the Article 3 ECHR claim errs  in  law  for  failure  to
       consider or reason the decision on this issue.

   10. The challenge in ground 3 regarding procedural breaches of  the  ECHR
       due to the extradition proceedings is no longer a live one  as  those
       proceedings have been concluded  in  the  High  Court  in  the  first
       appellant's favour.

  Conclusions - Remaking

   11. It is conceded by the respondent in light  of  the  findings  in  the
       extradition  proceedings  before  the  High  Court  that  the   first
       appellant  would  face  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3  ECHR  in
       detention and/or prison if returned to Russia. We find that the first
       appellant is at real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR  if
       returned to Russia for the reasons set  out  by  the  High  Court  in
       Shmatko v Russian Federation [2018] EWHC 3534 (Admin).

  Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.

    2. We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    3. We re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing the appeal  by  the
       first appellant on Article 3 ECHR grounds.

    4. The appeal of the second appellant was not pursued before us  at  the
       remaking stage and so is dismissed.




  Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
  (SI 2008/269) we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a
  Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
  publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the  original
  appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others,  all  parties.  Any
  failure to comply with this direction could  give  rise  to  contempt  of
  court proceedings. We do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood  of  serious
  harm arising to the appellants  from  the  contents  of  this  protection
  claim.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 9th April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


