
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09787/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14 December 2016                    |On 16 December 2016                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     BS
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Sachdev (Bury Law Centre)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

       1. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to his international protection claim.  This is  an  appeal
          by the appellant, a citizen of Iraq  against  a  decision  of  the
          respondent ('the SSHD') dated 28 July  2011,  in  which  leave  to
          remain was refused following his asylum claim.


       2. In a consent order dated 23  January  2015  the  Court  of  Appeal
          remitted the appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  statement  of
          reasons  attached  to  the  consent  order   outlines   the   only
          outstanding issue  in  dispute  to  be  that  of  the  appellant's
          internal relocation in Iraq, it having been accepted  that  he  is
          at real risk of harm in his home area of Baghdad and  in  what  is
          now known as the Kurdistan Regional Government area ('KRG').

Procedural history

       3. Having left Iraq overland unlawfully with  the  assistance  of  an
          agent on 30  April  2008  the  appellant  applied  for  asylum  on
          arrival in the UK on 14 May 2008.  This was refused  by  the  SSHD
          and the appellant appealed to the Tribunal.  In a  decision  dated
          17 December 2010, Judge Bruce found the appellant's  claim  to  be
          credible.  She concluded that he would not be safe in  Baghdad  or
          the KRG but that he could internally  relocate  to  the  south  of
          Iraq.  The appellant appealed against  this  decision  but  it  is
          only necessary to record here  that  the  SSHD  reissued  a  fresh
          decision  letter  dated  28  July   2011,   again   refusing   the
          appellant's asylum claim.


       4. The appellant appealed against the 2011 decision to the  Tribunal.
           At that hearing the SSHD's representative made it clear that  she
          did not seek to  disturb  the  positive  credibility  findings  of
          Judge Bruce.  In a decision dated 9 November  2011  Judge  Brunnen
          noted that it was not disputed that  the  appellant  was  at  real
          risk in the KRG and Baghdad and the positive credibility  findings
          would  not  be  revisited  but  that  the  question  of   internal
          relocation  to  the  south  would  be.   The  applicable   country
          guidance at the time, HM (Iraq) CG [2010] UKUT 331 was  considered
          and applied.  Judge Brunnen found that the appellant would not  be
          at risk of harm if he relocated from Baghdad to the  south.    The
          appellant appealed against this decision to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
          It  is  not  necessary  to  rehearse  the  detail  of  the   Upper
          Tribunal's findings as the statement of  reasons  makes  it  clear
          that the SSHD accepts that it  was  an  error  of  law  for  Judge
          Brunnen to conclude that  internal  relocation  was  a  reasonable
          option and for the Upper Tribunal to then uphold this decision.

       5. The matter now comes before me  for  a  full  rehearing  into  the
          issue of the appellant's  internal  relocation  to  the  south  of
          Iraq.

Hearing

       6. At the beginning of the hearing the representatives were  able  to
          agree  a  number  of  matters,  which  assisted  in   considerably
          narrowing the issues for me to  determine.   Both  representatives
          agreed to the following:


             i) The appellant remains at real risk of serious  harm  because
                of his imputed political opinion in both his  home  area  in
                Baghdad and also in the KRG.  As such there is no  need  for
                me to re-examine risk in those areas.
            ii) If I find that it  would  not  be  feasible  to  return  the
                appellant  to  Iraq  because   of   a   lack   of   relevant
                documentation,  this  does  not  preclude   his   claim   to
                international protection from  succeeding  as  the  asserted
                risk of harm is not solely based on  factors  rendering  his
                actual return unfeasible - see [169] of AA.
           iii)  The  only  identified  issues  in  dispute  are:  (1)   the
                appellant's safety in travelling from the accepted point  of
                return, Baghdad, to the southern governorates and;  (2)  the
                safety  /  reasonableness  of  this   appellant   internally
                relocating to the south.

       7. I heard oral evidence from the appellant. He confirmed  the  truth
          of an updated witness statement.   I  asked  a  few  questions  in
          clarification and the appellant was cross-examined by Mr McVeety.


       8. At the end of the appellant's evidence I  heard  submissions  from
          both representatives.  Mr McVeety accepted  the  main  overarching
          issue was a narrow one i.e. internal relocation to the south.   He
          acknowledged that the appellant has previously been  found  to  be
          credible but asked me to find that it was implausible that he  did
          not bring his identity documents with him when  he  left  Iraq  in
          2008.  He asked me to  find  that  his  mother  who  has  adequate
          resources  available  to   her   could   support   the   appellant
          financially.  He submitted that there is insufficient evidence  to
          support the proposition that Sunnis are generally  unsafe  in  the
          southern governorates.

       9. Ms Sachdev relied upon her helpful skeleton and its addendum.  She
          asked me to note that the appellant left Iraq in a hurry  in  fear
          of his  life  and  invited  me  to  accept  he  provided  credible
          evidence that he could not access identity documents.   She  asked
          me  to  find  that  the  appellant  gave  frank,   straightforward
          evidence.   Ms  Sachdev   submitted   that   when   the   accepted
          characteristics  of  this  particular  appellant  are   considered
          cumulatively, it would not be safe for him to travel from  Baghdad
          to the south or to relocate there.

      10. I reserved my decision, which I now give with reasons.

Country guidance and background evidence

      11. Both representatives agreed that the situation in  Iraq  is  fluid
          but that AA (Article 15c) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT  544  (IAC)  remains
          applicable country guidance albeit that it will  be  necessary  to
          consider more up to date evidence such as that  contained  in  the
          Home Office's 2016  'Country  Information  and  Guidance'  ('CIG')
          reports on Iraq.


      12. The appellant also relied upon a country  expert  report  dated  8
          December 2016, prepared by Ms Sheri Laizer.  Mr  McVeety  accepted
          that the report was helpful where it  addressed  specific  matters
          appertaining to this appellant  but  less  so  when  dealing  with
          general risk categories.  I am  aware  that  Ms  Laizer's  reports
          have been criticised by the Tribunal in past decisions.  I do  not
          accept all of  her  conclusions.   She  has  however  conducted  a
          detailed and very up to date assessment of matters affecting  this
          particular appellant.  I have found her  report  helpful  in  this
          regard.  Her account of the deterioration in security  for  Sunnis
          and the reasons for this,  is  broadly  consistent  with  the  CIG
          reports.  Her report is also helpful in  so  far  as  it  directly
          addresses the identified narrow issue  in  this  appeal:  internal
          relocation for this particular appellant to the south.  It  should
          be noted that AA does  not  give  any  direct  guidance  regarding
          internal relocation for  a  person  in  relation  to  whom  it  is
          accepted there is a real risk of persecution in  Baghdad  and  the
          KRG.   On  the  contrary,  AA  focuses   upon   whether   internal
          relocation to those areas is  safe  or  reasonable  and  does  not
          address internal relocation to the south in any detail.

      13. Of course, I nevertheless must apply the guidance  in  AA  insofar
          as it is relevant as well as  take  into  account  updated  cogent
          background evidence when making my findings.

Factual findings

      14. I set out the relevant factual findings below.  Those  in  italics
          originate from Judge  Bruce's  decision.   For  the  avoidance  of
          doubt, having heard the  appellant  give  evidence  I  agree  with
          Judge Bruce's  observations  regarding  credibility.   I  entirely
          accept that he has provided credible, straightforward evidence  in
          a frank manner.  His evidence has been internally  consistent  and
          is also consistent with the background  evidence.   I  accept  the
          appellant's evidence in its entirety.


          a) The appellant is the only son of a mixed marriage.  He has  one
             sister.  His father was Arab and his mother  is  Kurdish.   The
             appellant speaks Kurdish Sorani and  Arabic.   He  is  a  Sunni
             Muslim.
          b) The appellant's father was a member of Saddam's  feared  secret
             police, the mukhabarat.
          c) In 2008 the appellant was approached and threatened  by  former
             associates of his father connected with a group  known  as  Al-
             Awda (with links to former Baathists and ISIS), who wanted  him
             to produce propaganda for them.  At the time  he  ran  his  own
             shop providing services in the recording and  taping  of  music
             and speech.  The appellant did not wish to support any Baathist
             revival and reported this  incident  to  the  police  who  were
             unable to protect him.  As Judge  Bruce  found,  the  appellant
             "was in very real danger when he left Baghdad...for reasons  of
             his imputed political opinion".  It is not  disputed  that  the
             appellant would not currently be safe in  Baghdad  even  though
             these events took place in 2008.
          d) The appellant would not be safe in the  KRG  because  the  fact
             that his mother was married to a member of the mukhabarat would
             be known in the Kurdish community there.  It  is  not  disputed
             that the appellant remains at risk in the KRG.  I note that  in
             AA the Upper Tribunal did not consider relocation to the KRG to
             be reasonable for non-Kurds [172].  Although this appellant  is
             Kurdish on his maternal side he will be viewed as  an  Arab  by
             many and with a great degree of  enmity,  because  of  who  his
             father was and what he did.
          e) The appellant was in contact with  his  immediate  family,  his
             mother and his sister, up until October  2016.   The  appellant
             was candid in accepting  that  his  mother  was  able  to  cope
             financially as a result of the ownership of property  from  the
             time when her husband was a member of the mukhabarat.
          f) I accept the appellant's evidence that his  mother  and  sister
             resided with an old neighbor of  theirs  on  the  outskirts  of
             Baghdad city where they lived in 'hiding' i.e. they  restricted
             their movements to the local shops.  I accept the appellant has
             lost contact with them and does not know where  they  currently
             are.  The situation in Iraq including the outskirts of  Baghdad
             (where they were living) is very fluid and unstable, and it  is
             entirely plausible that they have lost touch recently.
          g) The appellant's father died in 2007 and he has never been close
             to extended family members  on  either  side  as  a  result  of
             attitudes toward his parents' mixed marriage.  He is  therefore
             the only surviving male in his family.  He  has  no  family  to
             turn to in any part of Iraq apart from his mother  and  sister,
             but  he  does  not  know  where  they  are  and  any  potential
             assistance from them would be very  limited  because  they  are
             female and will find it very difficult to travel  beyond  their
             immediate environs.  I accept  the  appellant's  evidence  that
             they were living a very sheltered  existence  and  did  not  go
             beyond the local shops.  The appellant has been outside of Iraq
             since 2008 and has no friends to turn to in Iraq  for  support.
             The appellant's employment experience has been very limited and
             specialised and he is unlikely to be able to access any form of
             employment in the current climate, given his lack of meaningful
             support and connections in Iraq, together with  his  particular
             characteristics.
          h) The appellant's mother and sister left the family  home  a  few
             days after the appellant in April 2008 and have  not  returned.
             I accept that this home was based in a  well-known  residential
             area for people who were involved in the Baath party.
          i) I accept that the appellant left his identity card at his  home
             address and it has been too unsafe for his  family  members  to
             return  there  to  retrieve  it.   The  appellant   left   Iraq
             unlawfully with the assistance of an agent via Turkey.  He  has
             never  had  an  Iraqi  passport.   Having  considered  all  the
             relevant evidence and the guidance in AA I accept Ms  Sachdev's
             submission that the appellant is not in possession of a current
             or expired Iraqi passport or a laissez passer, and will not  be
             able to obtain one.

Assessment of risk

Feasibility of return / identity documents

      15. The appellant will not be returnable to Iraq because he is not  in
          possession of a current or expired Iraqi passport  or  a  laissez-
          passer.   This  appellant  has  never  had  a  passport.   I  have
          considered whether or not he can obtain a laissez-passer in  light
          of the guidance in AA at [170-186].  Mr McVeety acknowledged  that
          if I accept the appellant to be entirely  credible  regarding  the
          circumstances of his mother  and  sister  (which  I  do)  then  it
          followed that they are in no position to take any steps to  assist
          him in obtaining the relevant information that  is  necessary  for
          him to obtain a CSID.  I entirely accept that the  appellant  left
          Iraq in a desperate hurry and there has been no practical  way  of
          retrieving the identity documents he left behind, and there is  no
          current means of obtaining a CSID for him.  The appellant  has  no
          means of knowing the page and volume number of  the  book  holding
          the relevant information.


      16. It follows that I must examine risk upon return  in  the  southern
          governorates on the basis that the appellant will  have  no  CSID.
          As set out above it was no part of Mr McVeety's  case  that  if  I
          found return not to be feasible that I should not go on to  assess
          internal relocation and therefore  risk  on  return.   Mr  McVeety
          entirely accepted that this appellant's asserted risk of  harm  is
          not solely based on lack of documentation  that  currently  render
          his return unfeasible (see [169] of AA and  [9]  of  AA  (Iraq)  v
          SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 779).   This  appellant's  asserted  risk  of
          harm is based upon a number of factors unrelated to  his  lack  of
          documentation:  his   ethnicity   and   religion,   his   father's
          employment and the past threats he experienced.

Travel from Baghdad to the south

      17. There was little evidence available in AA to  support  an  absence
          of  safety  of  road  travel  from   Baghdad   to   the   southern
          governorates [117], hence the conclusion set  out  at  16  of  the
          headnote.  It is however important to note that the  appellant  is
          not an ordinary civilian fearful  of  generalised  violence.   His
          profile and background is such that  he  fears  that  he  will  be
          viewed with heightened suspicion and seriously harmed.


      18. It is reasonably likely that the  appellant  will  be  stopped  at
          checkpoints when making his way from Baghdad through  and  to  the
          mainly Shia southern governorates - see 7.5 of the  CIG  on  Sunni
          Muslims dated August 2016 and 8.2.1 of the  CIG  on  the  security
          situation in Baghdad, the south and the KRG dated August 2016.

      19. At  those  checkpoints  he  will  be  asked  questions  about  his
          background.  His mixed ethnicity is  likely  to  arouse  immediate
          suspicion.  I note that many may perceive him as a Sunni Arab,  as
          ethnicity is said to be derived  from  the  father.   However  the
          appellant views himself as  Kurdish  and  Kurdish  Sorani  is  his
          first language.  It is reasonably likely that he  will  be  viewed
          not just as Sunni but as a Sunni  with  a  highly  suspicious  and
          unusual background.  Sunnis are  also  inspected  more  thoroughly
          than Shias (7.5.1).  His last known address  in  Iraq  was  in  an
          area known  to  be  Baathist  and  particularly  close  to  Saddam
          Husain.  His father worked within the mukhabarat structure  -  the
          internal secret service apparatus as a  paid  functionary  with  a
          house  provided.   He  therefore  comes  from  a  senior  Baathist
          background and a relatively wealthy family. As noted by Ms  Laizer
          and undisputed by Mr McVeety the mukhabarat was widely feared  and
          many of the names of former  operatives  have  been  published  or
          have become known to Shia militias - see paras 3xi, 3xxxiv and  4i
          of Ms Laizer's report.  In addition to  this  there  is  a  widely
          held view that many Baathists are linked to ISIS (see para 5.1  of
          the CSI on Baathists dated November 2016), thereby increasing  the
          likelihood of suspicion.  When all these  factors  are  considered
          together it is  reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant  will  be
          perceived  to  have  Baathist  loyalties  by  many  in  Iraq,   in
          particular aggrieved Shias.

      20. The appellant has not been in Iraq  since  2008.   Conditions  for
          Sunnis  have  shifted  dramatically  since  then,  as   have   the
          demarcation of lines of influence and  control  (see  Ms  Laizer's
          report at para 3xxi).  The appellant will have to make his way  to
          the south unaware of the sectarian  lines  and  in  an  atmosphere
          where there is a high degree of suspicion  and  corruption  (paras
          3xxiv and xxviii of Ms Laizer's report).  It is reasonably  likely
          that the appellant's background  and  profile  will  come  to  the
          attention  of  Shia  checkpoints  somewhere  along  the  way  from
          Baghdad to the south and he will be targeted for ill treatment  on
          the part of Sunni militias or corrupt individuals.

      21. In addition it is also important to note, as Ms  Sachdev  reminded
          me, that current risk to the appellant  in  Baghdad  is  accepted.
          Given the difficulties  with  checkpoints,  blurred  and  changing
          sectarian lines, it is very difficult to  see  how  the  appellant
          will obviate the real risk of persecution accepted to  be  present
          in Baghdad when he tries to navigate his way out of Baghdad.

Internal relocation to the south - risk analysis

      22. The CIG on Sunni Muslims dated August 2016 states:


                "2.2.5 A Sunni may be able to demonstrate  a  real  risk  of
                     persecution or serious harm from the Shia militia, but
                     this will depend on their personal profile,  including
                     their family connections, profession and origin.
                  6.   Sunni  Internally  Displaced  Persons  (IDPs),   who
                     generally lack support networks  and  economic  means,
                     are more vulnerable to suspicion and  abuse.  Decision
                     makers need to consider each case on its merits.
                  7. There are a few reports that Sunnis experienced  human
                     rights abuses at the hands of Shia militia or  unknown
                     perpetrators  in  the  southern  governorates  (Babil,
                     Basra, Kerbala, Najaf,  Missan,  Muthanna,  Qaddisiya,
                     Thi-Qar and Wassit).
                  8. However,  it  does  not  appear  to  form  part  of  a
                     consistent or systemic risk to Sunnis. Whilst decision
                     makers must consider  each  case  on  its  merits,  in
                     general,  a  Sunni  will  not  face  a  real  risk  of
                     persecution  or   serious   harm   in   the   southern
                     governorates."


      23. This is based upon an increase in the targeting of Sunni Arabs  on
          the part of the Shia militias (7.1.1-7.7.2).


      24. I accept the guidance that Sunnis will not in general face a  real
          risk in  the  south.   I  must  however  consider  the  individual
          characteristics of this particular  appellant.   The  CIG  reports
          recommend this approach for Sunnis  (see  above)  and  those  with
          Baathist links (see 3.1.2 of the CIG on Baathists  dated  November
          2016).  This appellant's personal profile, family connections  and
          origin (see para 19 above) make it reasonably likely that he  will
          be targeted for  serious  harm  if  he  relocates  to  a  southern
          governorate, given the prevailing climate  and  the  attitudes  of
          many Shia individuals and Shia militia.

      25. In the event that my risk analysis is  incorrect  I  now  turn  to
          consider whether it would  be  reasonable  for  the  appellant  to
          relocate to the south.

Internal relocation to the south - reasonableness analysis

      26. As  set  out  in  AA  at  [152]  a  CSID  is  required  to  access
          income/financial assistance, employment, accommodation  etc.   The
          appellant will not have access to a  CSID  making  his  access  to
          basic facilities next to impossible.


      27. I do not accept that the appellant will have access  to  alternate
          adequate support mechanisms in Iraq.  There is  no  viable  family
          for him to turn to and he has no friends in Iraq.  This is  likely
          to make relocation particularly difficult in  circumstances  where
          displaced persons often find it  very  difficult  to  gain  lawful
          entry to territory - see the  CSI  on  internal  relocation  dated
          August 2016  at  9.2.1.   Even  if  the  appellant  re-establishes
          contact with his mother and sister it is  very  difficult  to  see
          how they would be able to make  resources  available  to  them  in
          Baghdad available to the appellant  in  another  governorate.   AA
          emphasises  that  careful  consideration  must  be  given  to  the
          ability of family members to accommodate the appellant  [197].   I
          am  satisfied  on  the  evidence  currently  available  that   the
          appellant will not have access to family members or  resources  to
          enable him to obtain accommodation.  As set out in AA [202]  those
          without family connections are  more  vulnerable.   The  appellant
          has no connections, family or otherwise in the  south.   There  is
          little evidence regarding organisations operating in the south  to
          provide assistance to  displaced  persons.   Mr  McVeety  did  not
          direct my attention to any such evidence and the evidence  in  the
          materials before me focused on Baghdad and the KRG.


      28. The appellant is also from a minority community in the sense  that
          he is of mixed ethnicity.  I note that many may perceive him as  a
          Sunni Arab as set out above but  his  situation  is  unusual.   He
          will still be most unlikely to access community support.   I  bear
          in mind factors in the appellant's favour: he has worked  in  Iraq
          in the past, he speaks Arabic and he is not a lone female.

      29. This  appellant  is  reasonably  likely  to  face  many  different
          serious challenges as a  result  of  his  particular  profile.   I
          agree with Ms Laiser's summary of these difficulties at para 6ii.

      30. On the evidence available to me I  accept  that  as  a  person  of
          mixed ethnicity with a background that  will  be  viewed  with  at
          best suspicion and enmity by most, and who  is  unable  to  access
          any meaningful family or other support in the south and  who  also
          does not have a CSID and cannot obtain one reasonably  soon  after
          arrival it will be unreasonable and unduly harsh to expect him  to
          relocate to a governorate in the south.   He  will  be  unable  to
          access the  most  basic  forms  of  employment,  accommodation  or
          support.  He will also live in a state of  constant  anxiety  that
          his background will be discovered and that he will  be  harmed  or
          threatened with harm as a result.

      31. It is noteworthy that AA does not set out the factors to be  taken
          into account when assessing reasonableness of  relocation  to  the
          south.  I have however considered  all  relevant  factors  in  the
          round, including those listed at 15 of the headnote.


Conclusion

      32. I accept that the appellant faces a real risk of  persecution  for
          reasons relating to his imputed political  opinion  combined  with
          his ethnicity and religion in his home area of  Baghdad  and  that
          he cannot internally relocate to the KRG  or  any  other  part  of
          Iraq.  It follows  that  he  is  also  at  risk  of  serious  harm
          contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.   Having  made  these  findings
          there is no need for me to consider Article 8.


      33. There is also no need for me to consider Article 15c but  for  the
          avoidance of doubt I do so succinctly and in accordance with 4  of
          the headnote of AA.  The appellant's  individual  characteristics,
          as particularised above, are such that they put him at  real  risk
          of Art 15c harm in all the  relevant  parts  of  Iraq  identified,
          including the southern governorates.



Decision

      34. I allow the appellant's appeal and find  that  his  removal  would
          breach the Refugee Convention and Article 3 of the ECHR.



Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
16 December 2016

