
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09742/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 22nd August 2016                  |On: 22nd September 2016              |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     QM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Markus, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The Appellant is a male national of Pakistan born in 1971. This  appeal
    concerns his claim for international protection. The  Appellant  claims
    to have a well-founded fear of persecution in Pakistan for  reasons  of
    his religious belief. He is a Christian.




    Anonymity

 2. Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity
    Orders I consider it appropriate to make  an  order  in  the  following
    terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background to Appeal

 3. The Appellant claims to have last entered the United Kingdom in  August
    2014, affecting illegal entry concealed in a lorry. He  claimed  asylum
    on the 24th September 2014.

 4. The Appellant asserted that he has been Christian since birth and  that
    that he formerly acted as the Deacon in  St.  Saviour's  Church,  in  a
    village in Gujra.  He claims  to  have  suffered,  in  his  home  area,
    persecution for reasons of his religious belief including  being  badly
    beaten with sticks by a gang who had surrounded and attacked the Church
    in  2006.   The  Appellant  was  seriously  injured  in  this  assault,
    sustaining permanent  damage  to  his  eye  and  ear.   His  assailants
    thereafter made repeated threats towards him. The threats prompted  the
    Appellant and his family to  move  to  Karachi  for  some  time  before
    eventually returning to their home town.  In  2014  the  Appellant  was
    there asked to offer assistance to an eloping couple.  The  man  was  a
    friend of the Appellant's, called [D].  [D] was  a  Christian  but  his
    fianc� [S] was a Muslim. The Appellant declined to help them because he
    knew the problems that this could cause for him. On the 10th  May  2014
    the Appellant was abducted by four men who drove him to a remote  area.
    They tortured him and asked him questions about where  the  couple  had
    gone. One of the man identified himself as [S]'s father.   After  about
    six days the gang released the Appellant on the condition that he  help
    find the couple and that he himself convert to  Islam.   The  Appellant
    immediately left with his family. They went first to Ghotky and then to
    the Appellant's family home. His father told  him  that  he  could  not
    leave his wife and children there as there could be trouble, so he took
    them to Lahore to stay with her brother. The Appellant found  an  agent
    in Lahore and managed to arrange passage out of  Pakistan.   After  his
    arrival in the UK he was informed  by  a  friend  that  the  police  in
    Pakistan have been looking for him  in  connection  with  a  charge  of
    blasphemy against Islam.  He believes  that  this  is  a  false  charge
    brought by the people who blame him for some involvement in the  escape
    of [D] and [S].

 5. The Respondent's refusal  letter  is  dated  18th  June  2015.   It  is
    accepted that the Appellant is Pakistani, and  that  he  is  Christian.
    The remainder of the Appellant's claim is rejected. The  Appellant  had
    submitted a 'First Information Report' (FIR) purporting to show that he
    was wanted for blasphemy. A verification check conducted by the British
    High Commission in Islamabad had shown this document not to be genuine.
      The Appellant's reliance on this  forged  document  impacted  on  the
    assessment of his overall credibility as a witness and  the  Respondent
    could not be satisfied that any  of  the  account  was  true;  this  is
    despite the fact  that  objective  country  information  supported  the
    account of a mob  attacking  St.  Saviour's  Church  on  the  dates  in
    question.

 6. The Respondent further noted that the latest country guidance from  the
    Upper Tribunal has found that  whilst  Christians  in  Pakistan  suffer
    discrimination, this does not in general  reach  levels  of  sufficient
    severity to be classed as  persecution:  AK  &  SK  (Christians:  Risk)
    Pakistan (CG) [2014] UKUT 00569.  The  Tribunal  found  that  blasphemy
    charges can be brought against individuals of any  religion,  but  that
    the smaller the minority the more difficult it will be for the  accused
    to establish his innocence. A blasphemy allegation, without more,  will
    not generally  be  enough  to  make  out  a  claim  under  the  Refugee
    Convention. It has to be actively followed by charges.  If  it  appears
    that the charge is to be actively pursued, there will  generally  be  a
    risk of harm and a failure of state protection.  If  such  charges  are
    actively pursued there is no internal flight alternative.

 7. The Appellant lodged an appeal with the First-tier Tribunal.  When  the
    matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge the  Appellant  gave
    oral evidence. He adopted his witness statement dated 27th January 2016
    in which he accepted the Respondent's conclusions that the  FIR  was  a
    forgery. He however maintained that he was wanted on blasphemy  charges
    in Pakistan.  He explained that his friend Christopher had supplied him
    with the FIR and other documents and suggests that perhaps  Christopher
    had obtained it in a misguided attempt to assist him.    The  Appellant
    relied on a medical report by a Consultant Psychiatrist Dr  FE  Winton.
    Dr Winton took an account directly from the  Appellant,  evaluated  his
    claimed symptoms against the diagnostic criteria and found  him  to  be
    suffering from depression, anxiety and Post Traumatic  Stress  Disorder
    (PTSD).  From the historical reporting made by the Appellant Dr  Winton
    opined that he had developed these symptoms after the attack  in  2006,
    but made a reasonable recovery after a year. The attack in May 2014 led
    to  a  marked  deterioration  in  his  mental  health  which  has  been
    reasonably good until that  point.  The  Appellant  reports  additional
    symptoms following that incident which lead  Dr  Winton  to  concluding
    that he was also suffering from Obsessional Compulsive Disorder  (OCD).
    Dr Winton finds that the Appellant's separation from his family has led
    to an intensification of  his  symptoms.   Dr  Winton  noted  that  the
    Appellant was often in tears during the interview  and  commented  that
    there was a "sense of desolation" about him.

 8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge rejected the Appellant's account in its
    entirety. In respect of the 2006 incident he  accepted  that  there  is
    objective country information to say that  an  attack  did  take  place
    against  St.  Saviour's  Church  but  found  "nothing  to  support  the
    contention that he was personally attacked" [23]. In particular,  there
    was no documentary evidence such  as  confirmation  from  a  doctor  or
    optician that the Appellant was treated for injuries to his eye at that
    time [29]. In respect of the 2014 incidents the Tribunal finds it to be
    implausible that the gang would abduct the Appellant  and  torture  him
    because they could not find the man who had eloped with the Muslim girl
    [25]. There is no medical  evidence  to  support  the  claims  of  ill-
    treatment. As for the FIR it is accepted that it is a forgery: "it must
    therefore follow that the other documents, the arrest warrant and fatwa
    are also not genuine".  The Tribunal rejects on "common sense"  grounds
    the suggestion that Christopher went on a frolic of his own  to  obtain
    false documents. The Tribunal considers it far  more  likely  that  the
    Appellant himself asked for these documents to be created.

 9. Having set out its findings on credibility the Tribunal  turns  to  the
    report of Dr Winton, and finds that it cannot attach any  great  weight
    to it evidentially. Two reasons are given. First,  Dr  Winton  did  not
    have access to the interviews  or  Respondent's  refusal  letter:  this
    would have informed his assessment of  credibility.  Two,  the  eminent
    doctor has based his conclusions solely on what  he  was  told  by  the
    Appellant.

10. The appeal was thereby dismissed.

11. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  which
    was granted[1] on the 22nd March 2016.  The matter came before me at  a
    hearing in Stoke-on-Trent on the 16th May  2016.   The  Respondent  was
    represented by Senior Presenting Officer Mr Mills and the Appellant  by
    Mr Markus. In a written decision  dated  19th  May  2016  I  found  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge to contain  errors  of  law
    such that it should be set aside in its entirety. My  reasons  are  set
    out below. The hearing resumed on the 22nd August 2016 when  I  had  an
    opportunity to hear oral evidence from the Appellant and  hear  further
    submissions from the parties. I reserved my decision which I now give.




    Errors of Law in the First-tier Tribunal Determination

    The Grounds

12. The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  the
    following material respects:

      i) Failure to give reasons

             The  finding  that  the  account  of  the   2014   attack   is
             "implausible"  is  not  supported  by  reasons.  The   country
             evidence  supports  the  proposition   that   Christians   are
             vulnerable to attack in such circumstances. There was  nothing
             inherently implausible in the account. Reliance is  placed  on
             HK v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2006]  EWCA
             Civ 1027.

     ii) Failure to take material evidence into account

             The evidence was that the Appellant was friends with the  [D],
             the Christian man. [D] had approached him for help. He was not
             therefore a random stranger behind a  random  door.  The  gang
             approached him because of his connection with  [D]  and  there
             was nothing implausible in that.

    iii) The Tribunal has failed to consider the evidence in the round

             The medical evidence is addressed only after the Tribunal  has
             reached adverse credibility findings. Reliance is placed on  R
             (on the application of Minani) v Secretary of  State  for  the
             Home Department [2004] EWHC 582 (Admin) the ratio of which  is
             expressly approved by Sedley LJ at  paragraph  12  of  Y  (Sri
             Lanka) v Secretary of State [2009] EWCA Civ 362.

     iv) Mistake of Fact

             At paragraph 33 the Tribunal finds that it "cannot attach  any
             great weight" to Dr Winton's report because he  did  not  have
             sight of evidence from the Respondent, such as the  interviews
             conducted by immigration officers during  the  course  of  the
             protection investigation. This is a mistake of fact: Dr Winton
             expressly  states  that  he  has  had  regard  to  the  asylum
             interview and indeed the Respondent's refusal letter.

    The Response

13. For the Respondent Mr Mills opposed the  appeal  on  all  grounds.   He
    accepted that implausibility is not,  in  general,  a  good  basis  for
    rejecting evidence in asylum cases. There  was  however  in  this  case
    there was good reason to doubt the Appellant's evidence: he had  relied
    upon forged documents. He started at the bottom of a big  hill:  not  a
    level playing field.    The Tribunal found that the Appellant cannot be
    devoid of responsibility for the submission of  those  documents:  that
    was a finding open to him on the  evidence.    The  Respondent  submits
    that the Tribunal has not misunderstood  the  evidence.  It  understood
    that [D] and Appellant were friends, but there was no evidence that the
    Muslim gang would have known that. The finding was  therefore  open  to
    the Judge.

14. In respect of the medical evidence Mr Mills pointed out that the  order
    in which the determination is written is not relevant. Something has to
    come first.  The  determination  expressly  states  "in  reaching  that
    conclusion I have had regard to the psychiatric report". This indicates
    that the credibility findings have been reached  taking  that  evidence
    into account.  All the psychiatrist did was to say that  this  man  was
    suffering from PTSD. It took his case only a little way.  PTSD  is  not
    an unusual condition in asylum seekers. This is a man who has left  not
    only his home country but his wife and children. There  would  be  good
    reason to find him traumatised.   The  psychiatrist  himself  considers
    that the 2006 incident could give rise to trauma [at 7.31]. The  report
    was not therefore probative in any way  of  the  2014  incident  having
    occurred: this was the core of the claim.  Mr Mills accepted  that  the
    Tribunal makes a mistake of fact  in  respect  of  what  documents  the
    doctor had sight of. However, this is not material because the  report,
    even  if  accepted  in  its  entirety,  would  not  have  offered   any
    substantive weight to the Appellant's account.

    My Findings

15. Whilst acknowledging that Mr Mills made very cogent submissions  I  was
    satisfied that the determination contained errors such that it must  be
    set aside in its entirety.  I found that all of the grounds  were  made
    out.

16. In respect of ground 1 my findings were as follows. There were only two
    instances of past persecution which required a  finding  of  fact.  Was
    there a alleged attack in 2006, and  was  the  Appellant  abducted  and
    tortured in 2014.  The determination deals  with  the  2006  attack  at
    paragraphs 22-24. I cannot discern a reasoned finding on whether or not
    this event occurred. Paragraph 24 highlights  apparent  inconsistencies
    in the Appellant's evidence about whether he went to the  police  after
    the alleged assault, and paragraph 23 notes that there  is  no  medical
    evidence to support the allegation (for which I read  medical  evidence
    of physical injury).   Whilst these comments indicate that the Tribunal
    was veering towards disbelief, Mr Mills was unable  to  identify  where
    there was a clear finding. Given that the Tribunal also recognises that
    there was an attack on this particular church  at  the  given  time,  a
    matter patently capable of supporting his case, this is  a  significant
    omission.

17. In respect ground two, the determination  again  notes  an  absence  of
    medical evidence (for which I read medical evidence of physical injury)
    relating to the 2014 attack.  Other  than  that  the  account  of  this
    incident is found to be "somewhat implausible".  The  reason  for  that
    finding is that it is "unlikely that  a  group  of  Muslims  intent  on
    seeking retribution against [D]  would  simply  because  his  door  was
    locked go to a nearby house where the Appellant lives and attack  him".
     Mr Markus firstly points out that this is not a particularly  accurate
    reflection of the evidence. The Appellant was a friend of [D],  and  as
    members of a minority religion they were readily identifiable in  their
    community as non-Muslims. In that context it was not at all implausible
    that the gang would know, or at least suspect, that the Appellant might
    know where to find [D]. Secondly Mr Markus  relies  on  the  well-known
    dictum of Neuberger LJ in HK to the effect  that  the  Tribunal  should
    rarely if ever make findings of inherent improbability in asylum cases:



         "... much of the evidence  will  be  referable  to  societies  with
         customs and circumstances which are very different  from  those  of
         which the members of  the  fact-finding  Tribunal  have  any  (even
         second-hand) experience."

    Setting  aside   any   arguable   semantic   difference   between   the
    'implausible' and the 'inherently  improbable'  I  accept  the  central
    point made on behalf of the Appellant. That is that where the objective
    country background material is generally supportive of the notion  that
    Christians are vulnerable to attack in situations of  tension  such  as
    that described in this account, it cannot be  considered  "implausible"
    that an individual unconnected to the main events might be targeted  in
    this way.

18. Ground three concerned the medical evidence. The Appellant  had  placed
    reliance on a detailed report prepared by  a  Consultant  Psychiatrist.
    That well qualified expert applied objective diagnostic  criteria  when
    assessing the Appellant's evidence. Having done so  he  concluded  that
    the Appellant was suffering from Depression, Anxiety, PTSD and symptoms
    of OCD. Mr Mills correctly observed that the  report  itself,  and  the
    conclusions reached, were not capable of being determinative of whether
    the Appellant was telling the truth. That was not however its  purpose.
    The purpose of the report was  simply  to  state  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant was suffering from any clinically observable  sequalae  which
    would lend support - or otherwise - to his claim to have been  severely
    ill-treated on two separate occasions.  It is trite asylum law (see for
    instance Minani) that  medical  experts  are  (absent  some  particular
    reason to doubt them) to be viewed as just that: they  are  skilled  in
    their area of expertise and they are professionals who understand their
    duty to the court.  They  can  be  expected  to  have  exercised  their
    critical faculties in making their  assessment.  Put  bluntly,  if  the
    doctor suspects that he is being "spun a yarn", the Tribunal can expect
    that doctor to say so. It is not therefore satisfactory to discount the
    clinical observations and conclusions of a doctor simply because  "that
    is what he has been told".

19. A further, and significant, problem arises in respect  of  the  medical
    evidence.  This is highlighted in grounds four. The only  other  reason
    given for not accepting Dr Winton's clinical opinion is that he reached
    his conclusions without having had sight of  any  of  the  Respondent's
    material. That is an error of fact, since it is apparent from the  face
    of the report itself that the doctor had  before  him  the  substantive
    asylum interview and the reasons for refusal letter. This  mistake  was
    not irrelevant. This was the main reason given for declining  to  place
    weight on the medical evidence.

20. In his submissions Mr Mills asked me to find that if any or all of  the
    errors were as alleged, it  did  not  matter.  He  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's credibility as a witness has been fatally undermined by his
    reliance on the false FIR and that in those  circumstances  any  errors
    established by this challenge are not such that the decision should  be
    set aside. I rejected that submission.  It may be  that  in  the  final
    analysis the difficulties that the Appellant faces in establishing  his
    case prove too great a barrier for him to surmount. It remains the case
    however that he was a witness whose evidence was found  to  be  largely
    consistent, whose reported experiences were consonant with the  country
    background material and who had been found to have psychiatric symptoms
    consistent with having suffered trauma. It was already accepted that he
    was a Christian. This was  not  then  an  entirely  hopeless  case.  It
    follows that the errors in approach discussed above  are  material  and
    that the decision fell to be set aside.




    Evidence Considered in the Re-Making

    The Appellant's Evidence

21. The Appellant's evidence is set out in the following documents:

       . Screening interview dated 24th September 2014

       . Witness statement dated 10th November 2014

       . Asylum Interview dated 30th January 2015

       . Supplementary statement dated 27th January 2016

22. The account given in these written documents was  supplemented  by  the
    Appellant's oral evidence including his responses to cross examination.
    The account  is  as  summarised  above  [in  particular  at  4].  Where
    appropriate I will refer to the detail of the evidence in my  findings,
    but it is only  necessary  here  to  record  the  following  additional
    matters.

23. The Appellant was unable to say who Xavier William (the  author  of  an
    article in the Appellant's bundle). All he can say is that a friend  of
    his contacted the  organisation  'Life  for  All'.  All  of  the  other
    documents, including his father's affidavit, the police reports and the
    court order were all forwarded with the assistance of  this  NGO.   The
    letters from  the  church  in  Pakistan  are  both  from  people  known
    personally to the Appellant. The Bishop he knew because he was  in  his
    diocese and was part of his congregation. The man from St  Saviours  he
    has known a long time as that was  his  church.   Mr  Bates  asked  the
    Appellant to clarify  whether  he  was  still  relying  on  the  police
    documents. The Appellant said that he  could  not  say  with  certainty
    whether they were real or not. The fact is that he has been  told  that
    blasphemy charges have been levelled against him. On the one hand it is
    possible that they are real and that  the  Respondent  has  been  given
    false information. Police stations in Pakistan do not always follow the
    correct procedure. They may have issued the FIRs without keeping a copy
    on file as they are supposed to do. On the  other  hand,  it  could  be
    correct that they are  forged.  His  friends  in  Pakistan  might  have
    thought it necessary to help him.  As far as he is aware the documents,
    including the 'arrest warrant' issued by the court,  were  obtained  by
    his friend Christopher with the assistance of the  agent  who  arranged
    his passage to the UK.  Whatever the veracity of these  documents,  the
    Appellant knows that charges have been levelled  against  him,  because
    the NGO and the solicitor have both confirmed  that  to  be  the  case.
    'Life for All' did not just write down what the Appellant's nephew told
    them. They confirmed it by making their own enquiries.  It is a mistake
    when that letter refers to 2011.

24. The Appellant was unable to say whether an arrest warrant or  blasphemy
    charges have been  issued  against  [D].  [D]  disappeared  before  the
    Appellant was abducted so he wouldn't know.

25. Asked to explain why he did not  want  to  move  to  another  place  in
    Pakistan the Appellant said that once they are after you,  they  regard
    it as a blessing to kill you, and they are organised into an  effective
    network.  Even here in the UK he is afraid of Muslims (in  his  witness
    statement he  explains  how  he  was  afraid  to  speak  openly  to  an
    Immigration Officer who was interviewing him because  that  person  was
    Muslim).

26. The Appellant states that he is not in direct contact with his  family,
    since they would be in grave danger if he did so. He has  contact  with
    them only through an intermediary, namely a friend in the UK.

    Supporting Evidence

27. As I note  above,  the  principle  item  of  evidence  upon  which  the
    Appellant sought to rely when making his claim was the now  discredited
    FIR.   The Respondent's bundle also contains an 'arrest  warrant'  said
    to have been issued by a magistrate in Sukkur on the 5th June 2014, and
    a fatwa issued by Anjum-e Tahifzey Namosey Rasalat.  Where  appropriate
    the details of those documents are referred to in  my  findings  below.
    On appeal he has produced a number of other documents.

28. The bundle contains an affidavit that purports to be sworn  and  signed
    by the Appellant's father on the 26th January 2016.  He writes that  he
    is aware that his son  has  been  accused  of  blasphemy,  having  been
    nominated in case FIR No. 595/14 of offences under sections  295C/365-B
    and 506/34 of the Pakistani Penal Code. The  case  is  pending  in  the
    Court District of Sukkur in Sindh.  This is accompanied by  a  document
    headed 'internal supplementary report' dated 2nd June 2014 and said  to
    be from Muhamad Amjad, sub-inspector investigations officer  in  police
    station c-section in Sukkur. Officer Amjad writes that [the  Appellant]
    has aggrieved people in his locality who have accused him of blasphemy.
    He is now residing in the United Kingdom. This also  mentions  FIR  No.
    595/14.    A further document of the same date is a letter said  to  be
    from Sardar Tahir Shahbaz Khan, advocate of the Sindh  High  Court.  Mr
    Khan writes that he represented the Appellant in the district court  in
    Sukkur and that the "atmosphere is not good"  because  of  threats  and
    accusations of blasphemy made against him. The atmosphere is very  much
    bad/horrible for him and if he comes to Pakistan he will be damaged  or
    killed". Mr Khan also refers to FIR No 595/14.  The final  document  in
    this set is headed 'In the Court of District &  Session  Judge  Sukkur"
    and states that it is an Order for the arrest of the Appellant  who  is
    guilty of blasphemy following charges laid in FIR 595/14.

29. I was provided with two original letters purporting to have been issued
    by 'Life for All Pakistan'.  They are both dated the 25th January 2016.
    The first is addressed to the Respondent. The writer introduces himself
    as 'Asher John' and explains that 'Life for All' is  an  NGO  based  in
    Lahore that  serves  to  protect  the  rights  of  underprivileged  and
    marginalised communities  in  Pakistan.  Part  of  this  work  includes
    representing and advocating on behalf of Christians.  It  was  in  this
    context that the organisation was approached by the Appellant's family.
    Asher John writes that he has come to know that the Appellant was given
    a tough time in Pakistan, twice  being  targeted  by  extremists.   The
    other letter is not addressed to anyone. It is  headed  'fact  finding'
    and relates to the Appellant. It appears to  be  a  press  release.  It
    writes that the organisation was approached by the  Appellant's  nephew
    who asked if they could  assist.  It  states  that  the  Appellant  was
    attacked in 2006 and in 2011. The following information is then given:

         "[The Appellant] relocated in Karachi after the  assault  in  2006,
         later he had to move back because his wife was doing  a  government
         job in Sukkar, he resigned as a deacon of St  Savior  Church,  then
         unfortunately one of his friend eloped  with  a  Muslim  girl,  the
         girl's family tracked [the Appellant]  and  accused  him  of  being
         part of the plan to make the girl run away.

         On 14 May 2014 a group came to his house and forced him to go  with
         them, although [the Appellant] told them that he had nothing to  do
         with this incident but they brutally assaulted him because he was a
         good friend of the person who married the Muslim girl.

         [The Appellant] was taken away and tortured for several  hours,  he
         had nothing to do with the matter he even explained that  he  tried
         to convince his friend that he must  not  take  any  such  step  of
         marrying a Muslim girl  but  his  friend  did  his  will  and  [the
         Appellant] faced a hard time.

         The abductors pressurized [the Appellant] and his family to convert
         to Islam or they will all be killed. The whole family was asked  to
         convert or they would all die. The family due to the fear of  death
         had gone into hiding and seeking support".

30. The Appellant's bundle  contains  two  articles  written  in  identical
    terms. The first appeared online on a website called 'the  newshub'  on
    the 23rd January 2016. It  is  attributed  to  Xavier  William.  It  is
    entitled 'Unfortunate Family Seeks Support'. The article is a word-for-
    word replication of the Life For  All  'fact  finding'  document  cited
    above. The second article was published on the same day  on  a  website
    called 'exclusivenewsnetwork.com'.

31. The 'One in Christ' church in Nottingham has written in support of  the
    Appellant. The letter is dated 20th January 2016 and is signed  by  the
    Reverend Johnson Paul. Rev. Paul writes to confirm that  the  Appellant
    is a regular member of that church and that the congregation is praying
    for him.

32. There is also a letter from  Reverend  Muneer  Bashir  Masih  of  Saint
    Saviour's Church dated 16th September 2014 which was apparently written
    at the time that the Appellant  was  in  hospital  following  the  2014
    attack.  Reverend Masih writes that there is a false case of  blasphemy
    against the Appellant, who has been accused by the people  of  locality
    of his region. A letter from Bishop  John  Samuel  of  the  Diocese  of
    Faisalabad dated 14th September 2014 confirms that  the  Appellant  has
    been attacked and threatened by Islamic extremists.

    Medical Evidence

33. In September 2015 the Appellant was interviewed  by  Dr  FE  Winton,  a
    Consultant Psychiatrist. Dr Winton's  report  is  dated  20th  December
    2015.  Dr Winton summarises the evidence that  the  Appellant  gave  to
    him. This is consistent with the historical account given in his asylum
    claim.   Dr  Winton  assessed  the  Appellant  with  reference  to  the
    appropriate diagnostic criteria and finds him to be suffering from  the
    following psychiatric conditions:

      a) Recurrent Severe Depression

             The  Appellant  meets  the  following   diagnostic   criteria:
             persistent low mood, tearfulness,  reduction  in  interest  in
             everyday  activities,  reduced  concentration,  reduced  self-
             esteem and self-confidence, guilt and unworthiness, bleak  and
             pessimistic views of the future, ideas  of  self-harm/suicide,
             disturbed sleep, diminished appetite.

      b) Generalised Anxiety Disorder

             Symptoms exhibited include  sweating,  palpitations,  problems
             relaxing, shortness of breath.

      c) Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder

             In addition to the above the Appellant  meets  the  diagnostic
             criteria  of  intrusive  memories,  symptoms   of   avoidance,
             hyperarousal, attitudinal changes, and obsessive rituals.

34. On the basis of the symptoms  reported  by  the  Appellant,  Dr  Winton
    concludes that he was  suffering  from  depression,  PTSD  and  anxiety
    following the 2006 attack. He reports that approximately one year after
    the incident he had made a reasonable recovery.  Following the incident
    in 2014 there was a marked deterioration  in  his  mental  health.  His
    symptoms returned, accompanied by obsessive behavioural rituals.  Today
    Dr Winton found that the Appellant's fear of being murdered in Pakistan
    "came across as a deeply real concern for him".

35. The Appellant now relies on a medical  report  produced  by  Dr  Juliet
    Cohen, dated 12th  August  2016.    Dr  Cohen  is  well-known  to  this
    Tribunal as an eminent physician in her field and is accepted to be  an
    expert in the field of psychological trauma and the treatment of asylum
    seekers in general. Mr Bates took no issue with the report.

36. Dr Cohen records what the Appellant told her about  the  attack  on  St
    Saviour's in 2006. He was assaulted by a mob  who  were  attacking  the
    church and other Christians. He was bleeding from his head and  injured
    in his ear and eye. These were his worse  injuries,  but  he  was  also
    covered in bruises which healed  with  time  leaving  no  scars.    The
    Appellant states that he had surgery on his eye;  he  remembered  being
    told that his retina had become detached.  His hearing in his right ear
    was permanently damaged.  In  respect  of  the  incident  in  2014  the
    Appellant told Dr Cohen the background to the visit to his  home  by  a
    group of three men. They took him away at gunpoint and put him in a car
    with a fourth man.  They drove him to a house where he was taken inside
    and placed on a chair. They then started  to  question  him  about  the
    whereabouts of [S]. He was slapped and punched.  His  damaged  eye  was
    hit again. Then one of the men held his arms behind  his  back  and  he
    could feel himself being burned. He had noticed a small brazier on  the
    way into the house and he surmises that he was burned  using  something
    that had been heated in that fire, possibly tongs.   The  ill-treatment
    was interrupted by a telephone call. Then a man with a long white beard
    arrived who sent the others away. He gave  the  Appellant  some  water.
    The man told him that he knew that he had helped [D] and  that  he  was
    giving the Appellant and his family two days to convert  to  Islam.  He
    was driven away and dropped near his house. The Appellant's wounds were
    dressed by his wife, who is a nurse, and the decision made to leave the
    next day.

37. Dr Cohen examined the Appellant for  physical  scars.  She  did  so  in
    accordance with the Istanbul Protocol.  She found his eye to  bear  the
    signs of the assaults in 2006 and 2014. The eyesight in that  left  eye
    has been permanently damaged. The  damage  caused  is  typical  of  the
    attribution, i.e. blunt trauma.  Dr Cohen was not able  to  comment  on
    any damage that may have been caused to the Appellant's inner  ear.  On
    the Appellant's upper right forearm there is a 6cm long x 0.5  cm  wide
    scar which appears typical of its attributed cause, being  deliberately
    burned with a heated metal object in 2014.   The inside left arm  bears
    a similar scar 2.5cm x 3cm in size, and the back of his  right  forearm
    has another, 4.5cm x 3cm in size. The position of these  scars  are  in
    keeping with the Appellant's description of being  seated  on  a  chair
    with  his  arms  restrained  behind  him.   Dr  Cohen   considers   the
    possibility that these scars could have been caused in other ways,  for
    instance in cooking or occupational accidents (the Appellant was a  lab
    technician  by  profession),  but  notes  that  burns  caused  in   the
    kitchen/lab are generally found on the forearm.  These  scars  are  all
    above the elbow. The Appellant's lower legs bear two small scars  found
    to be consistent with the attributed cause, ie  being  kicked.   Having
    evaluated all of these scars together in accordance with the  Protocol,
    Dr Cohen finds them to be  strong  corroboration  of  the  attributions
    given. Dr Cohen further notes that the  Appellant  bears  eleven  other
    scars all of which he attributes to gardening accidents, or  could  not
    say how they were caused. She has accordingly not evaluated these scars
    but notes that she found no evidence of exaggeration or embellishment.

38. The bundle  also  contains  items  of  correspondence  from  Nottingham
    University Hospital  Trust  confirming  that  the  Appellant  has  been
    diagnosed with diabetes and that he is under investigation for  various
    heart complaints including Fabre's disease.  He  suffers  from  regular
    episodes  of  left-sided  chest  pain  which  can  be  associated  with
    breathing difficulties. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is  diagnosed.   He
    also appears to have been referred to a gastroenterologist.

    Country Background Material

39. The extant country guidance on Christians in  Pakistan  is  AK  and  SK
    (Christians: risk) Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT  569  (IAC).  The  case  was
    heard in June 2014.  The Tribunal  was  in  that  case  concerned  with
    appellants whose  claims  in  respect  of  past  persecution  had  been
    rejected as untrue. The question before the Tribunal was whether either
    appellant faced a real  risk  of  persecution  arising  from  blasphemy
    charges in the future.  Although  the  determination  contains  a  long
    catalogue of incidences of extreme violence (e.g. rape, arson,  murder)
    perpetrated against Christians in  Pakistan,  the  focus  was  on  that
    question.  The core guidance is as follows:

         1.   Christians in  Pakistan  are  a  religious  minority  who,  in
         general, suffer discrimination but this is not sufficient to amount
         to a real risk of persecution.

         2.   Unlike the position of  Ahmadis,  Christians  in  general  are
         permitted to practise their faith, can attend  church,  participate
         in religious activities and have their own schools and hospitals.

         3.   Evangelism by its very  nature  involves  some  obligation  to
         proselytise.  Someone  who  seeks  to  broadcast  their  faith   to
         strangers so as to encourage them to convert, may  find  themselves
         facing a charge of blasphemy. In that way,  evangelical  Christians
         face a greater risk than those  Christians  who  are  not  publicly
         active. It will be for the judicial fact-finder to assess on a case
         by case basis whether, notwithstanding attendance at an evangelical
         church, it is important to the individual to behave in  evangelical
         ways that may lead to a real risk of persecution.

         4.   Along with Christians, Sunnis, Shi'as, Ahmadis and Hindus  may
         all be potentially charged with blasphemy. Those citizens  who  are
         more marginalised and occupy low standing social positions, may  be
         less able to deal with the consequences of such proceedings.

         5.   The risk of becoming a victim of a blasphemy  allegation  will
         depend upon a number of factors and must be assessed on a  case  by
         case basis. Relevant factors will include the place  of  residence,
         whether it is an urban or rural area, and the individual's level of
         education, financial and employment  status  and  level  of  public
         religious  activity  such  as  preaching.  These  factors  are  not
         exhaustive.

         6.   Non state agents who use blasphemy  laws  against  Christians,
         are often  motivated  by  spite,  personal  or  business  disputes,
         arguments over land and property. Certain political events may also
         trigger such accusations. A  blasphemy  allegation,  without  more,
         will not generally be enough to make out a claim under the  Refugee
         Convention.  It  has  to  be  actively  followed  either   by   the
         authorities in the form of charges being brought or by those making
         the complaint. If it is, or will  be,  actively  pursued,  then  an
         applicant may be able to establish a real risk of harm in the  home
         area and an insufficiency of state protection.

         7.   Like other women in Pakistan,  Christian  women,  in  general,
         face discrimination and may be at a heightened risk but this  falls
         short of a generalised real risk. The need  for  a  fact  sensitive
         analysis is crucial in their case. Factors such as their age, place
         of residence and socio-economic milieu  are  all  relevant  factors
         when assessing  the  risk  of  abduction,  conversions  and  forced
         marriages.

         8.   Relocation is normally a viable option unless an individual is
         accused of blasphemy which is  being  seriously  pursued;  in  that
         situation there is, in general, no internal relocation alternative.



40. The Respondent has recently issued specific guidance on the position of
    Christians: Country Information and Guidance Pakistan:  Christians  and
    Christian  converts  published  in  May  2016.    This   confirms   the
    conclusions in AK & SK that Christians  continue  to  face  significant
    discrimination and instances of persecution. An appendix to the  report
    issued by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office [page  41  of  44]  notes
    simply  "violent  extremism   against   Christians   in   Pakistan   is
    commonplace". The body of the report gives the following details:

         2.2.5 Discrimination against Christians exists in many  aspects  of
         employment and education. There are reports of harassment,  threats
         and violence, including targeted  attacks  by  non-state  actors  -
         sometimes resulting in  death  -  against  Christians  as  well  as
         lawyers,   judges,   human   rights   defenders   and   journalists
         representing/defending Christians.

         2.2.6 Christians from  the  lower  classes  may  experience  higher
         levels of discrimination  than  those  from  higher  socio-economic
         backgrounds. Religious minorities are  disproportionately  affected
         by the misuse of the blasphemy laws, which are frequently used  for
         personal or political gain. Whether or not a  blasphemy  charge  is
         found to be  true,  the  whole  community  and  the  individual  in
         question may be at risk of coming under attack.

         ...

         7.1.1 The annual World Watch List 2016, published by the Open Doors
         International Research Unit, highlighted the  50  countries  where,
         according to its global survey, academic and media reports,  it  is
         most difficult to live as a Christian [a  ranking  of  1  indicated
         "Extreme levels of persecution" down  to  50  as  "High  levels  of
         persecution"]. The World Watch List is based on  a  scoring  system
         that takes into account the reality of religious freedom in various
         spheres of life: the individual,  the  social,  the  communal,  the
         legal, the national - as well as measuring levels of violence. Open
         Doors  ranked  Pakistan  at  number   six   ('extreme   levels   of
         persecution'), where the level of persecution 'increased seriously'
         (scoring 87 out of 100, an increase of 8  points  compared  to  the
         World Watch List 2015). Open  Doors  recorded  a  "minimum"  of  39
         Christians killed for their faith between 1 November  2014  and  31
         October 2015 and 17 attacks on places of worship  during  the  same
         period.

41. The CIG further confirms that there is very often a  failure  in  state
    protection for members of minority faiths in Pakistan:

         2.4.2  As  regards  protection  from  non-state   actors,   despite
         constitutional rights and a Supreme Court ruling  calling  for  the
         protection of religious minorities, many reports suggest  that  the
         government fails  to  provide  sufficient  protection  to  minority
         citizens against societal violence including  the  state's  general
         failure to bring perpetrators to justice.  Some  sources  indicated
         infiltration into the police force by extremists, who are then able
         to access individuals' personal information and thus  seek  persons
         of interest.

         2.4.3 Many reports cite a failure by  the  police  to  investigate,
         arrest, or prosecute those responsible for societal abuses  against
         religious  minorities.  There  have  been  accusations  of   police
         involvement in human rights abuses  committed  against  Christians.
         However, there is also some  evidence  of  measures  taken  by  the
         authorities to protect Christians against  incidents  of  violence.
         Some Christians reportedly feel "unsafe" in approaching the  police
         in relation to  blasphemy  charges  and  some  report  having  been
         refused support,  whilst  some  actors  involved  in  the  criminal
         justice  system  including  the   police,   lawyers   and   judges,
         demonstrate bias against those accused of blasphemy.  In  cases  of
         forced conversion and marriage,  the  police  have  at  times  been
         reluctant to intervene in such cases, or have pressured  the  woman
         to return to her husband. There are reports that the police do  not
         properly investigate, or provide adequate protection  to  Christian
         women who have faced sexual assault, rape and abduction.

         2.4.4 Any past persecution and past lack  of  effective  protection
         may indicate that effective protection would not  be  available  in
         the future. There are instances where  the  authorities  have  been
         unable  or  unwilling  to  protect  the  lives  and  properties  of
         Christians or to bring perpetrators of such violence to justice.

42. The Respondent maintains however that Christians facing  difficulty  in
    their home area can in many cases internally relocate in order to avoid
    persecution:

         2.6.2 Where the person's fear is of  ill  treatment/persecution  at
         the hands of nonstate actors, in  general  they  will  be  able  to
         relocate to escape that risk.

         2.6.3 In the case of Christians, relocation is  normally  a  viable
         option, unless, as held in the CG case AK & SK  (Christians:  risk)
         Pakistan an individual is  accused  of  blasphemy  which  is  being
         seriously pursued; in that  situation  there  is,  in  general,  no
         internal relocation alternative (paragraph 247).

         2.6.4 Whilst there are Christian neighbourhoods in some urban areas
         across Punjab and Sindh provinces such Christian  communities  have
         become increasingly  isolated  from  other  communities.  Therefore
         whilst it may be more difficult to socially exclude  and  harass  a
         Christian who lives in a larger Christian community,  it  does  not
         necessary  preclude  that  harassment,  especially  when  blasphemy
         charges have been raised.

43. The Appellant's bundle contains a number  of  other  items  of  country
    background material going to events in Pakistan in the two years  since
    the country guidance was heard.  These include a BBC report on the  mob
    killing of a Christian couple  for  allegedly  desecrating  the  Quran,
    charges said to have been framed because of an unpaid debt, and various
    articles from the website 'Christians  in  Pakistan.com'  which  detail
    numerous gruesome murders.




    The Re-Made Decision

44. I begin by reminding myself that the standard of  proof  is  relatively
    low, and that this is for good reason. The lower standard reflects  not
    only the difficulty that asylum seekers have in  proving  their  cases,
    but also the grave consequences when decision-makers get it  wrong.  In
    this case I must  first  assess  whether  the  Appellant  has  suffered
    persecution in the  past.  In  particular,  whether  he  was  viciously
    assaulted in 2006 and then again in 2014. If he establishes that  these
    events occurred, the Immigration Rules provide that  this  must  be  my
    starting point for consideration of the future risk:

         339K.  The  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject   to
         persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
         persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication
         of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
         that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated.

45. In respect of the general credibility of the  Appellant,  there  are  a
    number of competing considerations.  The Respondent asserts that he has
    used false documents in support of his claim, and if established,  that
    is a matter which would weigh heavily against him.  On the other  hand,
    the  Appellant  has  given  a  detailed  account  that  is   internally
    consistent, which is consonant with the  country  background  material,
    and which is supported in material  respects  by  external  documentary
    evidence and medical assessment. Indeed, these  are  the  factors  that
    have led the Respondent to accept the Appellant's  claimed  religion  -
    the central plank of his case. I bear all of these factors in mind when
    assessing each element of the claim.

46. I deal first with the 2006 attack. The Respondent's reasons for refusal
    letter is dated 18th June 2015. At paragraph  19  of  that  letter  the
    Respondent accepts that objective country background material indicates
    that an attack on a church called St Saviour's did take place  at  that
    time. Christians in that locality were attacked, and the church  burned
    down, very much in the manner described by the  Appellant.    That  the
    Appellant's account is corroborated by external evidence  is  a  matter
    that tends to  lend  weight  to  his  claim.   I  have  considered  the
    possibility that the  correlation  exists  because  the  Appellant  has
    framed his account to match the facts. I have however  discounted  that
    possibility. This is an attack that occurred ten years ago. There  have
    been many hundreds of vicious assaults on the Christian community since
    that time, and it can be presumed that a cynical claimant would seek to
    associate himself with an event establishing a more immediate  risk.  I
    have also taken into account the detailed and consistent nature of  the
    Appellant's evidence on this matter;  this  too  lends  weight  to  his
    claim. The medical evidence establishes the Appellant to have sustained
    permanent damage to his eye,  such  damage  being  "typical"  of  blunt
    trauma. The  designation  "typical  of"  is  defined  in  the  Istanbul
    Protocol as "this is an appearance that is usually found with this type
    of trauma, but there are other possible causes". It is one from the top
    of the hierarchy set out in the Protocol, the only designation above it
    being "diagnostic of": there is no other possible cause. The trauma  to
    the Appellant's eye is therefore a matter that can be  weighed  in  his
    favour when assessing whether the claimed events in  2006  took  place.
    Having considered all of these matters in the round, I am satisfied  on
    the lower standard of proof that the appellant was  the  Deacon  of  St
    Saviour's Church in Sindh and that in 2006 he was badly beaten during a
    mob assault on the Church. That was persecution  for  no  reason  other
    than his faith.

47. It perhaps follows that I have no  reason  to  reject  the  Appellant's
    evidence that at some point following the attack on  St  Saviour's,  he
    and his family availed themselves  of  internal  flight  and  moved  to
    Karachi. His evidence on this matter has been detailed and  consistent.
    Nor do I have any reason to doubt the Appellant's evidence  that  after
    some months he and his wife were able to return safely to Sukkur  where
    they were able to find employment (he as a lab  technician,  she  as  a
    staff nurse) and founded a home in the town.  Their  children  grew  up
    there, and other than 'routine' discrimination the  Appellant  did  not
    encounter any serious problems for a long time.

48. The next focal point in the account is in May 2014.  I  have  read  the
    Appellant's interviews and statements on this issue with care.  I  find
    there to be nothing extraordinary in the Appellant's description of the
    events that are said to have taken place in that month. He was known in
    the town to be a Christian, and as the former Deacon of  St  Saviour's,
    one with something of an elevated profile. The aggrieved  family  of  a
    missing Muslim girl come to understand  that  she  has  eloped  with  a
    Christian man. Neither the girl nor her lover are anywhere to be found.
    That the family would begin its search  by  questioning  [D]'s  friends
    appears to me to be entirely  credible.    Where  a  general  hostility
    towards Christians has been intensified by a crisis situation (such  as
    the disappearance of a young woman), it is sadly all too believable, in
    the context of Pakistan, that such questioning would be accompanied  by
    extreme levels of violence.  The account is therefore plausible in  the
    context  of  the  country  background  material.    Having  heard   the
    Appellant's evidence myself, and having read the  written  material,  I
    find the account to be consistent. Dr Cohen found the Appellant to have
    three relatively large scars which are each "typical" of the attributed
    cause, namely having been restrained and  deliberately  burned  by  the
    application of a heated linear object in 2014.   The pattern and spread
    of those scars is in keeping with the claimed  course  of  events:  the
    Appellant being forcibly restrained with his arms tethered  behind  his
    back and a heated object applied to his skin.   Dr  Winton  too,  found
    evidence that the Appellant had been assaulted at that time. He took  a
    detailed forensic history from the Appellant, who was able to  describe
    how  the  symptoms  he  suffered  after  the  2006  incident  gradually
    subsided,  but  returned  with  a  vengeance  after  2014.   It  is   a
    possibility that all of this is fiction, but I think it unlikely that a
    lab technician from Sindh  would  be  able  to  effectively  learn  and
    regurgitate the complex set  of  psychological  sequalae  necessary  to
    convince a consultant psychiatrist in the UK that this was how  he  had
    been feeling  over  an  entire  decade.   There  is  therefore  medical
    corroboration of the claimed events.   Weighing this  evidence  in  the
    round, and applying the lower standard of  proof,  I  would  ordinarily
    have no hesitation in finding the burden of proof discharged. But there
    is cause for hesitation.

49. The Appellant has placed reliance on numerous documents which he claims
    to support his  claim.  The  Respondent  has  directly  challenged  the
    veracity of one of those documents. A 'verification report' dated  11th
    February 2015 shows that a member  of  diplomatic  staff  at  the  High
    Commission in Islamabad contacted the police station in Sukkur to check
    if the 'FIR' submitted by the Appellant at his  asylum  interview  were
    genuine.  The police officer who answered  the  telephone  checked  the
    number given, 595/14, and informed the High Commission that this number
    belonged  to  an  entirely  unrelated   case.   It   is   therefore   a
    straightforward matter to reject the suggestion, made by the  Appellant
    before me, that the FIR was lodged at that police  station  but  copies
    were not kept on file. There is an FIR in the file bearing that number,
    and it has nothing to do with the Appellant.   In  those  circumstances
    the Respondent was  quite  entitled  to  reject  the  document  as  not
    genuine.  That FIR number, 595/14, appears on a  number  of  the  other
    documents. The 'arrest warrant' issued by the Magistrate in Sukkur, the
    affidavit from the Appellant's  father,   the  'internal  supplementary
    report' issued by the police station in Sukkur,  the  letter  from  the
    Appellant's lawyer, and the Order made  by  the  District  and  Session
    Judge in Sukkur. Mr Bates submitted that all of  these  documents  were
    infected by the falsehood of the FIRs. They all rest on  the  existence
    of an FIR number 595/14, which was in fact never  made  in  the  police
    station in Sukkur. I accept that submission. That has two  consequences
    for the Appellant. First, the documents are all rejected as  unreliable
    and can lend no weight to any of  his  claims.  Second,  I  must  weigh
    against him, in the assessment of his credibility  as  a  witness,  the
    fact that he sought to place reliance on them.

50. There are other documents in the bundles  before  me.   There  are  the
    letters from 'Life for All', produced before me in the original.  These
    letters contain full contact details of an organisation that is said to
    be a registered NGO in Pakistan.  Mr Bates made two  submissions  about
    this material. First, he  pointed  to  the  opening  remarks  that  the
    Appellant was attacked "again in 2011" for being a Christian.  Although
    the body of the letter goes on to detail the incident in May 2014, that
    is, in the view of the Respondent, a significant discrepancy  with  the
    chronology that we have been given. Secondly, it is unclear what weight
    can  be  placed  on  the  contents  since  it  would  appear  that  the
    information supplied has all come  from  the  Appellant's  nephew.  The
    nephew could have gone to this organisation  and  told  them  to  write
    anything.

51. I have considered these submissions, and  the  documents  carefully.  I
    note that they are in  identical  terms  to  the  articles  which  were
    published online just two days earlier: the 'Life  for  All'  documents
    are dated (in manuscript) the 25th January 2016, whereas Xavier William
    and 'exclusive news' published their articles on  the  23rd.   Although
    those dates would suggest otherwise, it appears to me that  Mr  William
    and 'exclusive news' have based their articles  on  the  press  release
    prepared by 'Life for All' (headed 'fact finding'). The  text  is  word
    for word the same over five paragraphs.   The documents that 'Life  for
    All' have provided to this Tribunal could simply have been copies which
    were sent out after the initial release to the press. That  means  that
    no additional weight can be attached to the articles  as  a  method  of
    verification, but what to  make  of  the  'Life  for  All'  letter  and
    attachment?

52. The Appellant said in his  oral  evidence  that  his  family  made  the
    initial report to the organisation  and  that  it  verified  the  claim
    before making a statement. There is no explicit confirmation of that in
    the letter itself. It is however  implicit  in  the  text.  Asher  John
    confirms that he was approached by the Appellant's nephew and wife, and
    then writes that he has "come to know" that the Appellant  has  endured
    two attacks and a "tough time" from hard-core extremists.   It seems to
    me that a  registered  NGO  working  for  marginalised  communities  in
    Pakistan would have a difficult time of it if it acted on cases  simply
    on the basis of  an  uncorroborated  report  by  people  attending  the
    office. Any reputable human rights organisation  would  take  at  least
    some steps to fact-check before becoming  involved  in  the  case,  and
    particularly before issuing a document  to  the  press  entitled  'fact
    finding'.   I also bear in mind that full contact details were provided
    on these original documents, and that it would have been a very  simple
    matter for contact to be made with 'Life for All' or indeed Asher  John
    who describes himself as an activist involved with "high profile" cases
    such as Rimsha Masih and Asia Bibi. The reference to 2011  would  seem,
    in the context of the document overall, to be a typing  error.   Having
    considered all of these matters I am satisfied that some weight can  be
    attached to the 'Life for All' documents.

53. I return then to my assessment of the 2014  incident.  The  Appellant's
    account is plausible, consistent, it  is  supported  not  only  by  the
    medical evidence but by the letter from 'Life for All'  and  the  'fact
    finding' statement attached. Against that must be weighed the fact that
    the Appellant has sought to place reliance on  at  least  one  document
    found to be false, and a number of other  documents  infected  by  that
    falsehood. Seeking to mislead decision makers is  a  matter  that  must
    weigh heavily against a claimant.    It is not a matter however,  which
    must be regarded as fatal to a claimant's credibility.  It is a  matter
    to be weighed in the round with all of the available  evidence.  Having
    done that, I am satisfied that the claimed incident  in  May  2014  did
    occur. I find as fact that the Appellant was abducted and tortured, for
    reasons of his religious belief. He was subjected to that serious  harm
    because he was assumed, as a fellow Christian,  to  know  something  of
    [D]'s whereabouts.  Dr Winton notes the fearfulness that the  Appellant
    exhibits as a result of that incident, and I accept that it  must  have
    been extremely frightening. The Appellant and his  community  had  good
    reason to fear for his life upon his release, and I bear in  mind  that
    it was against that background that the FIR and  other  documents  were
    produced.

54. I therefore accept that the Appellant is a Christian  from  Sukkur  who
    has twice been subjected to very serious harm as a direct result of his
    faith. Paragraph 339K of the Immigration rules  instructs  me  to  take
    that as my starting point. The fact that  a  person  has  already  been
    subject to persecution or serious harm, or to direct  threats  of  such
    persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication  of
    the person's well-founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering
    serious harm, unless there are  good  reasons  to  consider  that  such
    persecution or serious harm will not be repeated.

55. Are there good reasons to consider that the harm would not be repeated?
    There is nothing in the country background information to indicate that
    the situation for Christians in Pakistan has at all improved since  the
    events  described.  The  Respondent's  recent  document,  the   Country
    Information and Guidance Pakistan: Christians  and  Christian  converts
    makes it clear  that  instances  of  atrocious  persecution,  including
    murder, rape, abduction  and  arson,  continue  to  be  committed  with
    impunity against Christians in Pakistan.  I have no doubt at  all  that
    the Appellant would be in very grave danger should he try to return  to
    his home area of Sukkur.

56. The final matter  to  be  addressed  is  whether  the  Appellant  could
    reasonably be expected to  avoid  harm  in  Sukkur  by  going  to  live
    somewhere else in Pakistan. On his own evidence that is exactly what he
    did in 2006 following the attack on his church.  Mr Bates  pointed  out
    that this is what his family  are  doing  now.  The  Respondent  places
    reliance on the conclusions of the Upper Tribunal in  AK  &  SK,  which
    demonstrate that there are a number of large Christian  communities  in
    Pakistan, and that there is in general a viable relocation alternative.
     Before I consider  the  reasonableness  of  internal  flight,  I  must
    consider whether that option is safe.

57. The Appellant's case is that he has been accused of  blasphemy  by  the
    family of [S], and by extremist groups supporting their cause.  I  have
    already declined to  place  any  weight  on  the  documentary  evidence
    submitted to support that claim, and as with my foregoing assessment of
    his credibility that is a matter  that  must  be  weighed  against  the
    Appellant in the assessment of future risk.  Those documents  were  not
    however the only evidence of accusations of  blasphemy.  The  Appellant
    himself has given a vivid account of how after he  fled  his  home  his
    Muslim friend and neighbour Muhammad Sadiq informed him that a mob  had
    come to the house shouting that he was  an  infidel  and  a  blasphemer
    against the  Prophet.   In  the  context  of  the  material  before  me
    (including that reviewed in AK & SK)  that  is  an  entirely  plausible
    account.    The  material  contains  numerous   references   to   false
    accusations  of  blasphemy  being  made  against  innocent   Christians
    (amongst others)  in  the  course  of  personal  disputes.   The  "high
    profile" cases referred to by Asher John in his letter  are  all  cases
    where  vulnerable  members  of  minorities  were  falsely  accused   of
    blasphemy. All of the country background evidence indicates that it  is
    a means for Muslims to attack their Christian neighbours. Taken in  the
    round with all of the remaining evidence I am satisfied that there is a
    real risk that the Appellant has been accused of townspeople in  Sukkur
    of blasphemy.   I  am  further  satisfied  that  such  accusations  are
    motivated  partly  in  anger  at  his  perceived  involvement  in   the
    elopement, and partly because he is a Christian. Although  I  note  the
    conclusions in AK & SK [at 209] that many  blasphemy  allegations  have
    nothing to do with faith, on the particular facts of this case I find a
    nexus to the Convention ground to be clearly made out. Whilst I  accept
    that there is a real risk that such an allegation would be pursued with
    vigour by people  who  were  motivated  enough  to  get  involved  with
    abduction and torture,  it is not possible to say whether the state  is
    presently involved (that is to say whether there is a genuine  FIR  out
    there, or whether the police are actively looking for the Appellant). I
    have no information about the "reach" of [S]'s family or their  allies.
    In those circumstances, and applying the guidance in  AK  &  SK,  I  am
    unable to find that there is a real risk of harm throughout Pakistan.

58. Finally, I must decide whether in all the  circumstances  it  would  be
    reasonable for the Appellant to avail himself of internal  flight.   In
    AK & SK the Tribunal concluded that in  many  cases  that  would  be  a
    viable alternative, albeit that the Tribunal properly noted  that  this
    must be assessed on a case by case basis. This Appellant is  relatively
    well educated and has a work record of employment in Pakistan. He still
    has family members in the country and it can be assumed that  he  could
    call upon  them  for  some  degree  of  initial  financial  assistance,
    although there is no evidence that this  would  continue  in  the  long
    term.  The Appellant could choose to relocate outside of Sindh where he
    was not known. All  of  these  factors  go  to  internal  flight  being
    reasonable.

59. There are however a  number  of  other  factors  which  would  tend  to
    indicate that the Appellant will face significant  difficulties  should
    he try and establish himself in another place in Pakistan. He is not  a
    well man. His eyesight, already damaged in  the  2006  attack,  is  now
    significantly worse. He continues to suffer  serious  tinnitus  in  one
    ear. I was provided with a number of medical letters establishing  that
    he has various health complaints. Although these were not  relevant  to
    the question of risk, it is right that I must take  them  into  account
    when assessing  his  ability  to  live  a  relatively  normal  life  in
    Pakistan. As far as his physical health is concerned  he  suffers  from
    diabetes,  regular  chest  pain  and  breathlessness  and  an  as   yet
    undiagnosed (as far as I have been made aware) stomach  complaint.   In
    respect of his mental health he has, as a minimum, depression and PTSD.
    These health issues make it far more likely than not that the Appellant
    would  be  compelled  to  seek  assistance  from  co-religionists,  for
    instance in any period of unemployment or inability to support  himself
    due to illness. He would have little choice in the  long  term  but  to
    seek to integrate into another  Christian  community.   In  considering
    this scenario I have borne in mind Dr Winton's  conclusions  about  the
    Appellant's state of mental health. The Appellant is  extremely  afraid
    of return to Pakistan, and on the basis of the  evidence  that  I  have
    accepted about his past experiences, it is easy to understand why.  The
    Appellant has experienced two entirely unrelated, but equally  vicious,
    assaults. I have no doubt that on both  occasions  he  feared  for  his
    life.    I have no doubt that he will feel  himself  to  be  especially
    vulnerable as part of a 'visible' community of  Christians  in  present
    day Pakistan.   That subjective fear would be exacerbated by  the  fact
    that he would not have any Muslim  connections  in  the  new  place  of
    residence,  isolating  him  yet   further.   This   is   an   important
    consideration: in Sukkur the Appellant  had  enough  contact  with  the
    community overall (for instance his Muslim neighbour Muhammad) to  feel
    able to return there after 2006. Were he to move to another province he
    would not have the protective shield of living alongside reasonable and
    moderate Muslims whom he grew up with. He would be a  stranger  seeking
    to establish himself in a minority  community  that  already  considers
    itself vulnerable. There is also the fact that the  Appellant  and  his
    problems in Sukkur would be known to anyone  who  performed  a  cursory
    internet search on his name, since the articles by Xavier  William  and
    'exclusive  news'  remain  online.  It  is  quite  possible  that   any
    prospective employer or landlord, or even a  curious  neighbour,  could
    perform such a search. Whilst this would not necessarily give rise to a
    well-founded fear of persecution it is certainly a matter  which  would
    justifiably add to already heightened anxiety levels.

60. I find that the Appellant is a man with  significant  health  problems,
    both physical and mental, whose ability to seek and maintain employment
    is seriously compromised.   He is a man who has suffered  very  serious
    persecution in the  recent  past  and  who  suffers  the  psychological
    consequences  of  that  ill  treatment.   His  ability  to  effectively
    integrate and lead a relatively normal life would be  informed  by  his
    very real fear of renewed persecution.  For  all  of  these  reasons  I
    conclude that internal flight would be unduly harsh.




    Decisions

61. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    it is set aside.

62. I re-make the decision in the appeal as follows:

         "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

         The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

         The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because he
         is a refugee".

63. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         15th September 2016
                                                     -----------------------
[1]Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson

