
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
AA/09885/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 July 2017                           |On 19 July 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                     JK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones, of Counsel, instructed by Tamil Welfare
Association
     (Romford Road)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka  born  on  5  May  1982.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in September 2012 having left  Sri  Lanka
    and travelled via Dubai and Frankfurt.  When encountered by  police  in
    Leicester he claimed asylum and was interviewed in connection with that
    claim.

2.   On 18 October 2012  the  respondent  refused  to  grant  the  appellant
    asylum or other protection.  It is against that decision that an appeal
    was lodged.

3.   There is a somewhat protracted history relating to the progress of  the
    appeal.  It initially came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Williams
    who, in a determination dated 28 January 2013,  dismissed  the  appeal.
    Subsequently that decision was set aside and  the  matter  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Molloy on 21 November 2013.  The  appeal  was
    also dismissed.  A subsequent appeal to the Upper Tribunal  the  appeal
    was heard by Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts on 5 August 2014.  She  found
    there to be no error of law on the  part  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and therefore dismissed the challenges made to his decision.

4.   Her decision was itself the subject of challenge and by order  of  Lord
    Justice Underhill of 12 August 2016 her decision was set aside. It  was
    ordered that the appellant's  case  would  be  remitted  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for the Tribunal to reconsider the appellant's case subject to
    preserved findings.

5.   Thus it is that the matter comes before me on 6 June 2017 in effect  to
    re-determine the appeal of the appellant.

6.   I note that there is a substantial volume  of  documentation  contained
    in bundles A, A1, B and C,  together  with  a  number  of  reports  and
    freestanding  items  of  material,  together   with   photographs   and
    miscellaneous documents.  I am grateful to both  parties  for  detailed
    submissions in writing, as well as the submissions made in  the  course
    of the hearing itself.  I have made a detailed note of the  submissions
    made and have taken those into  account  in  the  preparation  of  this
    determination, whether or not they are specifically mentioned.

7.   The appellant's own account is set out in three witness  statements  of
    27 November 2012, 13 June 2013 and 5 June 2017, also in  the  interview
    for asylum itself.  He adopts  those  statements  as  his  evidence-in-
    chief.

8.   The appellant studied in Jaffna up until  1996  and  moved  from  there
    upon the army invasion of Jaffna to Vanni with his parents.

9.   His older sister joined the LTTE in 1989 and was killed  in  action  in
    1990.  Another sister  committed  suicide  because  of  the  depression
    caused by her death.

10.  His brother JK also lived in Vanni.  His other brother  JH  joined  the
    LTTE in 1990 because of his youth and was removed  from  the  LTTE  and
    sent to Colombo to live with an uncle.

11.  Whilst in Vanni his father bought farm land and he and his  brother  JK
    helped on the farm.  The appellant learned to drive and was employed as
    a mini bus driver by his uncle.  The LTTE would borrow the mini bus for
    their transportation.  He also assisted in relation to the LTTE  stores
    in Vavuniya in 2002.

12.  In 2005 he went to  Colombo  with  his  brother  and  assisted  finding
    accommodation for LTTE members coming to Colombo.  He  opened  his  own
    restaurant in Colombo and ran a beauty parlour.

13.  The appellant was first arrested in August/September  2005  for  taking
    LTTE members from Pettah to Colombo in a rickshaw  and  for  having  an
    LTTE pass.  He was fingerprinted and photographed for a  day  and  then
    released with a bribe.  He claims that during that brief  detention  he
    was tortured and beaten with a cane and a ruler to his head and stamped
    on his body.  His skull was broken as was his  thumb  and  he  was  hit
    forcibly on his eardrums.

14.   He  was  arrested  again  on  6  January  2006  when   attending   his
    grandmother's funeral.  Again, it was on  suspicion  of  being  in  the
    LTTE.  He was tortured,  beaten  and  photographed  but  released  upon
    payment of a bribe.

15.  His brother JH was arrested in Colombo and taken to  prison.   He  said
    he was arrested three times in connection with his brother, in that the
    authorities wanted more information about him as  well  as  information
    about his own involvement in Colombo.  He was interrogated  in  Colombo
    for a full day in a prison.  He was interrogated at Poosa Camp.  On the
    third  interrogation  the  CID  came  to  his  restaurant  and  he  was
    interrogated again.  After the last interrogation he went to Vanni  and
    assisted the LTTE in the last phase of war.

16.  The LTTE were defeated in May 2009 and he also  was  arrested  at  that
    time and taken to Cheddikulam Camp where his uncle bribed the ERDP  and
    secured his release.

17.  He stayed thereafter with his uncle in  Colombo,  moving  back  to  the
    Vanni area in 2011

18.  Subsequently, in 2012 he was identified by  the  ERDP  member  who  had
    accepted the original bribe in 2009 and who started a  demand  for  the
    money from him.  Thus it was that he fled Sri Lanka.  He  now  has  two
    brothers in the United Kingdom and one in Canada.

19.  It is his case that he  has  a  significant  profile,  given  that  his
    family was a prominent family in terms of supporting the  LTTE.   There
    was the sister who fought for the LTTE as well as his brother  who  has
    been granted asylum in Canada and who had escaped from bail.  That case
    it is said is still outstanding with the authorities.  He was also part
    of the famous high LTTE profile, S's family.  The  wife  of  S  is  his
    second cousin from his father's side.

20.  In his second statement the appellant expands  a  little  more  on  the
    events with the ERDP, which led to his departure from Sri  Lanka.   The
    Government gave permission for his parents  to  return  to  Vanni.   He
    stayed with his uncle  until  May  2011  and  thereafter  rejoined  his
    parents.  He started to work as a driver on his own  account.   On  the
    way from Colombo to Vavuniya one day he was identified at a  checkpoint
    as an LTTE member and two EPDP  members  visited  his  house  demanding
    money to withhold that information.   He  paid  a  bribe  to  one  EPDP
    member; the other also sought to demand money as well.   He  fled  from
    Sri Lanka on 14 August 2012.  He said that at that time his brother was
    in Canada,  the  Canadian  authorities  making  an  allegation  on  the
    internet that he had a high profile.  He maintains that his brother  JH
    continues to have a high involvement  with  the  LTTE  because  of  the
    current MV Ocean Lady smuggling case and his escape of bail.

21.  In the final witness statement he spoke of his five siblings.  His  two
    sisters died and he has two brothers in the  UK  and  one,  JH,  is  in
    Canada.  He spoke in a little bit more detail about the LTTE Commander,
    Colonel S.  His wife is under Government supervision with her  children
    and her father is in the United Kingdom.  His wife and her brothers are
    first cousins to the appellant's father.  Photographs had been produced
    showing that link.

22.  He that the second EPDP person has visited the family home on a  number
    of occasions. He was not sure of the dates.  The EPDP personnel came to
    his parents' home whilst he was in the United Kingdom seeking  to  find
    him.

23.  The appellant makes it clear at paragraph 34 "There have not  been  any
    recent  visits  or  any  visits  specifically  mentioning  my  diaspora
    activities with the TGTE".  His three brothers  are  unhappy  with  him
    about his activism as that might create difficulties for his mother.

24.  The appellant was questioned  by  Mr  Melvin  in  connection  with  the
    account which he gave.  He said he spoke to his mother over  the  phone
    through the offices of a friend.  He had last  spoken  to  her  two  or
    three weeks previously to the hearing.  He has aunts and uncles but  at
    the  current  time  no  contact  with  them.   His  mother   lives   in
    Vavvnikkunam, which is in the valley region.  He indicated  that  there
    had been no recent visits by the police or authorities to her.  He said
    that in the past there had been a number of visits  on  dates  that  he
    could not remember.

25.  He said he attended a TGTE meeting.

26.  The authorities after having seen the video visited her and  threatened
    her.  That was after the Remembrance  Day  meeting  in  May  2016.   He
    agreed that that event was not in his witness statement.   His  brother
    told him not to go to that meeting.  Because of the forthcoming hearing
    he had spoken to his mother and  had  obtained  that  information.   He
    insisted that he had not made things up.  He had not requested from her
    any confirmation of that visit.

27.  He was asked why none of his  brothers  had  come  to  the  hearing  to
    support him in his account.  He said that his mother was ill  and  they
    were angry with him for his UK activities, as they thought  such  would
    bring danger to her.  His father had had a heart attack in 2013 and  he
    was blamed by them for that as well.

28.  He said that he had attended TGTE meetings for two years and  became  a
    member in 2015.  He has applied for an identity card and is a supporter
    and helping them.  He has no letter from that organisation  to  support
    what he says and he did not ask them for one.  He just  supports  them.
    He goes to the meetings which are held once a month.  He  also  attends
    demonstrations and protests.   He  produced  a  number  of  photographs
    identifying the occasions that he had attended  public  demonstrations.
    in 2015, 2016.  He said that he addressed the crowd at the meeting on 7
    June 2016 but anybody could speak.  He  attended  an  Independence  Day
    protest on 4 February 2017 and the Heroes Days in 2015  and  2014.   He
    admitted that he was not in conversation with his brothers as they  had
    fallen out.  He said that details of the visit in May 2016  had  arisen
    from the conversation that he had had with his mother when he spoke  to
    her two or three weeks previously.

29.  By order of the Court of Appeal a  number  of  findings  of  fact  were
    preserved, those being:-

     (1) that the appellant was previously involved with, and supported  the
         LTTE;

     (2) that the appellant provided administrative and  logistical  support
         to the LTTE including arranging houses for LTTE members;

     (3) that the  appellant  came  to  the  attention  of  the  Sri  Lankan
         authorities and was questioned and physically ill-treated;

     (4) that the appellant was forced to pay a bribe to an  EPDP  personnel
         in August 2012 in order that he would not be arrested  by  the  Sri
         Lankan Army;

     (5) that a bribe was  paid  to  secure  the  appellant's  release  from
         detention;

     (6) that upon a return to Sri Lanka the appellant could  reasonably  be
         likely to be identified as someone who has never undergone military
         training but  was  involved  in  sheltering  or  transporting  LTTE
         personnel  or  the  supply  and  transport  of   goods   for   that
         organisation.

30.  A number of documents were presented to  amplify  some  of  the  detail
    which had been set out.  There was a document, dbsjeyaraj.com, dated  6
    June 2017 giving some detail concerning Sea Tiger Commander S.  He  was
    a former Commander of the Naval Division of the LTTE.   He  fought  but
    died in May 2009.  The article generally set out some  of  the  details
    about his life and experiences.  There were passages involving comments
    about him by his wife,  but little concerning   her  current  situation
    and circumstances and that of the surviving children.  There were  also
    photographs showing  the  family  grouping,  the  appellant's  father's
    sister  and  appellant's  father-in-law  and  appellant's  cousin   and
    appellant's sister-in-law linked with S and his family.

31.  There are also photographs of the appellant's sister taken  whilst  she
    was in the LTTE before she was killed.

32.  There are a number of articles relating to  the  MV  Ocean  Lady  trial
    involving the trial of four men accused of  ferrying  dozens  of  Tamil
    migrants to British Colombo's west coast in August 2009.  This  was  in
    the context of a suggestion of human smuggling.  It is  said  that  the
    appellant's brother JH is one of the accused.  He said  that  all  four
    accused remain on bail and are  living  in  Ontario.   The  vessel  was
    carrying some 76 men,  fifteen  of  whom  have  now  been  accepted  as
    refugees, fifteen of whom have had their claims rejected.  Linked  with
    that concern is the MV Sun Sea which arrived a year later carrying  492
    Tamil migrants. That later matter has been to trial and has resulted in
    the acquittal of those that were concerned with the  MV  Sun  Sea.  The
    trial of those involved with the MV Ocean  Lady  is  shortly  to  begin
    again, according to a news local item from January 2017.  The delay  in
    the trial would seem to be because a new trial had been  ordered.   The
    MV Ocean Lady was said to be a  gun  running  vessel  that  transported
    weapons to Tamil Tigers during the war.  There was  a  suggestion  that
    some of those who were aboard the vessel had links to the LTTE.

33.  There is also the medical report of Professor Lingam dated 18  November
    2012 ,dealing with the ill-treatment said to have been meted out to the
    appellant.  On his first arrest he was beaten with a wooden  stick  and
    slapped on the head and kicked with booted feet on the second occasion.
     On the third occasion in 2007 no physical injury, or in 2007.  For the
    rest the appellant was slapped on the head with an open hand and on the
    sixth arrest in May 2009 he was not hit or physically injured  on  that
    occasion.  The nature of the injuries that are complained of are  noted
    in the report.  Given the preserved nature of the facts, little perhaps
    turns upon that report otherwise than confirming the  ill-treatment  of
    the appellant on certain occasions.

34.   There is an article from a website talking about the Great Heroes  Day
    as being an LTTE event and not a Tamil National Day of mourning.   This
    is something celebrated on 27 November every year to commemorate fallen
    Tigers.

35.  It is said that taking  these  matters  individually  and  cumulatively
    they present the  appellant  as  someone  having  a  significant  anti-
    Government profile such as to lead to his persecution  were  he  to  be
    returned.

36.  In that regard considerable reliance is placed  by  the  appellant  and
    his advisors upon a detailed expert opinion of Dr Suthaharan  Nadarajah
    prepared on 12 April 2017.  It is a very lengthy  report  from  someone
    who speaks of himself as being an expert in international  studies  and
    diplomacy, having conducted research into Sri Lanka's  armed  conflict,
    peace interventions and diaspora mobilisation.   He  cites  his  recent
    experience as an independent reviewer and someone invited to  speak  on
    protection failure in Sri Lanka at a congress in Berlin.

37.  For the most part his  report  is  a  generic  report  contending  that
    torture  and  sexual  violence  in  custody   continues.    There   are
    potentially more draconian powers in detention existing at present.  It
    is his view, as detailed in paragraph 92 and onwards,  that  there  are
    continuing arrests and harassment of  those  with  links  or  suspected
    links to the LTTE.  He describes the lack of detail about such  matters
    as arising from a fear by individuals and of journalists or  reprisals.
    It is his view that  the  arrests  of   male  LTTE  cadres  and  others
    escalated in April and May 2016 in the  weeks  running  up  to  18  May
    anniversary of the  war's  end.   In  support  of  his  proposition  he
    highlights the abduction of a Tamil man in June 2016, two men  in  June
    2016 for bearing LTTE insignia, the brief arrest of  the  leader  of  a
    youth organisation.
38.  The expert  cites  very  few  practical  examples  in  support  of  the
    widespread abuses which he claims  to  exist  and  pays  little  direct
    attention to the practicalities of the appellant's individual  case  or
    of those that are said to be concerned with him.  The report is,  I  so
    find, a rather generic and  presents  general  brush  approach  to  the
    matters contained therein.

39.  I say that in the light of the current guidance cases,  namely  GJ  and
    Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)
    and MP and NT [2014] EWCA Civ 829.

40.  In particular the reviewed risk factors as  set  out,  particularly  in
    paragraph 356 of GJ as set out also in paragraph 3 of MP  and  NT.   It
    was  noted  in  that  Judgement  that  the  focus  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    Government's concern has changed since the civil war ended in May 2009,
    the subject now being to identify Tamil activists in the  diaspora  who
    are working for Tamil separatism and  to  destabilise  the  Sri  Lankan
    state.

41.  Thus, those persons potentially at risk are those  perceived  to  be  a
    threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state or perceived  to
    have a significant role in relation to post-conflict  Tamil  separatism
    within the diaspora, which may  include  journalists  or  human  rights
    activists or individuals who have given evidence, and indeed  a  person
    whose name appears on a computerised stop list.

42.  It is to be noted that the Sri Lankan authorities approach is based  on
    sophisticated intelligence, both as to the activities within Sri  Lanka
    and the diaspora.  The authorities know that  many  Sri  Lankan  Tamils
    travelled abroad as economic migrants and that everyone in the Northern
    Province had some level of involvement with the LTTE during  the  civil
    war post-conflict.  An individual's past history will be relevant  only
    to the extent that it is perceived by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as
    indicating a present risk to the unity of the Sri Lankan state  or  Sri
    Lankan Government.

43.  Clearly, the court must assess the evidence, affording such  weight  as
    is appropriate.

44.  It is significant that in this particular  case  considerable  reliance
    is placed upon the UNHCR documentation dealing with risk profiles.   In
    those documents the UNHCR maintains that there is a wider  category  of
    risk that is applicable,  which  includes  former  LTTE  combatants  or
    cadres; those employed by the LTTE in administration, intelligence  and
    computers and former LTTE  supporters  who  may  never  have  undergone
    military training but were involved in sheltering or transporting  LTTE
    personnel or supplying and transporting goods for the LTTE  and  person
    with family links or who are dependent on or otherwise closely  related
    to persons with the above profiles.
45.  These categories are of some importance as  they  are  relied  upon  as
    significant risk factors  in  this  case.   The  appellant  was  not  a
    combatant but was involved with transport and shelter, and has  or  had
    family links with  persons  having  perhaps  a  greater  profile  as  a
    combatant or in the LTTE.

46.  The Court of Appeal makes it  clear  in  MP  and  NT,  particularly  in
    paragraph 8 of its judgment, that such links are not  determinative  of
    an asylum claim.  It notes that the guidance  expounded  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in paragraph 356 of its decision does not simply  recycle  the
    UNHCR text.

47.  It is recognised that  the  issue,  which  lay  at  the  heart  of  the
    challenge made to GJ, was the relationship between the country guidance
    promulgated by the Upper Tribunal and the UNHCR guidelines.  Paragraphs
    295 to 352 of the  Upper  Tribunal's  determination  contain  a  detail
    explanation as to why the Upper Tribunal in the country  guidance  came
    to a more restrictive conclusion, given that over 1,000,000 Tamils live
    in the diaspora and that the risk of  LTTE  resurgence  lies  primarily
    from the diaspora and not within Sri Lanka.  It  is  to  be  recognised
    that in practice all those who lived in areas where  the  LTTE  was  de
    facto  Government  during  periods  of  civil  war   will   have   LTTE
    connections, hence the finding by the Upper Tribunal  of  real  changes
    since 2009.  The Court of Appeal indicated that in that connection, the
    Upper Tribunal had or was entitled to accept the evidence of  Professor
    Gunaratna, in that it was rational and permissible to narrow  the  risk
    categories.

48.  Similarly, in terms of political activities in  the  diaspora,  it  was
    not considered by the Upper Tribunal in GJ as  indicated  in  paragraph
    336 of the determination that the attendance of demonstrations  in  the
    diaspora alone would be sufficient to create a real risk or  reasonable
    degree of likelihood that a person would attract attention  on  return.
    An attendance at one or even several demonstrations is  not  by  itself
    evidence that a person is a committed Tamil activist seeking to promote
    Tamil separatism within Sri Lanka.    It  was  not  for  the  political
    indifferent  to  seek  to  bolster  an  asylum  claim  by   opportunist
    participation.  Rather the concern is with  genuine  demonstrators  who
    may be put at risk as a result of surveillance and video  recording  or
    photography.   This  was   particularly   so   given   the   level   of
    sophistication in the intelligence gathering.  In summary therefore the
    Court of Appeal upheld the approach of the Upper Tribunal in GJ.

49.  Seeking as I do, therefore, in analysing the  risk  on  return  to  the
    appellant, I seek to put all that is presented on  his  behalf  in  its
    overall context.

50.  Generally speaking, and particularly in reliance of the evidence  given
    in the appellant's interview and his first two statements, there  would
    seem to be little basis to doubt the general credibility  of  what  was
    said about his involvement and the reasons which caused him  to  leave.
    He cited a number of occasions when he was detained and sometimes  ill-
    treated and sometimes not and the report of Professor Lingam deals with
    that aspect.  It is of course significant  that  the  majority  of  the
    detentions occurred prior to 2009 and the  last  actual  detention  was
    indeed when he, together with many many Tamils were detained in May  of
    2009.

51.  I do not find that his activities of providing  transport  on  a  small
    scale to LTTE personnel or helping in stocking stores or  finding  some
    accommodation, created any significant profile at all.  He  was  not  a
    quartermaster, he was not an organiser of large scale transport, he was
    not somebody in a significant leadership role, whether a  combatant  or
    not.  Some of the detentions he says were as a result  of  being  found
    with the wrong material or in the company  of  the  wrong  people,  and
    sometimes on account of the questions being asked  about  his  brother.
    The point being made of  course  in  the  country  guidance  that  many
    hundreds of thousands of Tamils, certainly in 2009, would have had some
    connection with the LTTE.

52.  Perhaps of more significance in terms of  profile,  is  that  from  his
    release, after paying a bribe in May 2009 until he was confronted by  a
    member of the EPDP to pay a bribe in August 2012, he had lived with his
    uncle  in  Colombo  for  much  of  that  time,  seemingly  without  any
    difficulties at all.  The fact that his  distant  cousin  was  a  Naval
    Commander; the fact that his brother absconded from bail; the fact that
    his sister had died in conflict did not  create,  as  I  so  find,  any
    significant interest in him by the authorities.  There  are  no  arrest
    warrants or other police documents in existence  to  indicate  that  he
    remained a wanted man.  Although a bribe does  not  necessarily  secure
    immunity from further arrests, there has been no indication at all that
    he was wanted, or indeed is wanted by the authorities after his release
    in 2009.  In reality, many thousands of Tamils were  released,  whether
    officially or by bribes in the aftermath of the events of May 2009.

53.  The way in which he came across the EPDP individuals was by  chance  at
    a checkpoint rather than being deliberately sought out.  It is entirely
    clear, by the behaviour of the two men, that they  saw  an  opportunity
    for financial advancement by  seeking  to  exploit  the  appellant  and
    blackmail him into paying.  There is no indication  at  all  that  they
    were operating in any official capacity, or indeed had any lawful basis
    for their behaviour.  Although it is very easy to  contend  being  EPDP
    led Government involvement, such seems to me to be somewhat unrealistic
    in the overall context of the case.  That they  may  have  returned  on
    occasions to the home in Vanni may be more to do with their greed  than
    with any continuing interest in him on any official basis.

54.  The appellant  relies  on  his  distant  relationship  with  the  Naval
    Commander, but it is to be noted, in all  the  papers  that  have  been
    provided, that the Commander's wife is out of custody.  No evidence has
    been presented at all to show that any government enquiry has been made
    of the appellant's mother, or indeed of any other family members in Sri
    Lanka in connection with that Commander.  He is dead and therefore  his
    threat perhaps has ceased to exist.  Indeed, there was some  suggestion
    in the papers that were presented that his family  had  made  off  with
    some gold, silver and money, which may in  itself  have  provided  some
    interest by the authorities in his next of  kin.   Actually,  there  is
    nothing presented to show that the relatives  of  that  Commander  have
    suffered as a consequence of his position.

55.  Reliance is placed upon the activities of the  brother,  JH,  but  once
    again those matters are shrouded somewhat in the mists of  uncertainty.
    This was the brother who initially fought for the LTTE but was recalled
    because he was underage and should have attended  school.   It  is  not
    clear from the documentation presented as to what it  was  that  caused
    his initial arrest and detention.  There was no indication as  to  what
    he is said to have done, and once  again  no  statement  from  him,  or
    indeed any court or other documentation to give any indication that the
    authorities have a desire to detain him.  Even were it  the  case  that
    the brother had been arrested in the years leading to the 2009 conflict
     and that the appellant had been questioned about it from time to time,
    there is nothing to indicate that  the  brother  had  any  significance
    beyond 2009.  Indeed, in 2009 he  was  one  of  the  four  arrested  in
    connection with the Ocean Lady, the boat taking Tamil migrants  in  the
    immediate aftermath of the defeat in May 2009.  The  focus  of  concern
    for him, as publicised in the press,  is  that  he  is  a  smuggler  of
    people, not a political activist.  Indeed, it is the  evidence  of  the
    appellant that his three brothers want little to do  with  him  because
    they are  not  activists  and  resent  his  activities  in  potentially
    exposing their mother to difficulties  from  the  authorities.   It  is
    difficult without more to conclude,  therefore,  that  the  authorities
    would have any  interest  in  an  individual  in  those  circumstances,
    seeking to use a former vessel of war as a vessel of transportation for
    refugees.

56.  Little has been  adduced  in  the  course  of  the  evidence  that  the
    authorities have expressed any continuing interest in him.

57.  In terms of political activities the appellant indicates  that  he  has
    little official standing, and indeed has yet to  obtain  membership  of
    the  organisation,  or  at  least  may  have  recently   obtained   it.
    Significantly he came to the United Kingdom in 2012, but his activities
    in support of the organisation would seem to have started in 2014/2015,
    generally being limited to  attendance  at  meetings  and  occasionally
    speaking at them as a member of the crowd.  It is difficult to imagine,
    therefore,  that  with  their  sophisticated   observation   that   the
    authorities would sensibly regard him as having any profile such as  to
    meet the profile set out in the country guidance cases.

58.  In saying that, of course I bear in mind in fairness to  the  appellant
    that there is one  element  of  the  evidence  which  bears  particular
    scrutiny and that relates to the claimed visits to his mother.

59.  Significantly, in the statement of 27 November  2012,  particularly  at
    paragraph 44, the risk which is said to arise was the risk due  to  his
    brother's escape from bail, his contributions to assisting the LTTE and
    his relationship to S's wife.  As  I  have  indicated,  none  of  those
    matters were the subject of any interest  by  the  authorities  in  the
    three years that the appellant was  in  Sri  Lanka,  and  it  would  be
    surprising if indeed therefore that that was a well-founded  fear  even
    as expressed in that statement.  The second statement of 13th June 2013
    is a reference to the threat to his mother by the  second  EPDP  person
    and that was before he left Sri Lanka.  There is  no  mention  in  that
    second statement of any other visits paid to his  mother.   Indeed,  if
    the authorities were hunting his brother, why did  they  not  make  the
    obvious enquiries at his home as well?

60.  In terms of  the  third  witness  statement  made  on  5th  June  2017,
    presumably in anticipation of the hearing and four years having expired
    from his last witness statement, the appellant finds it difficult to be
    precise about the people who attended at his parents' home after he had
    left.  The second EPDP man seemingly had attended two or  three  times.
    As I have indicated, I do not find it reasonable that he represented in
    any way authority as opposed to greed.  After the EPDP  personnel  came
    to the home, the purpose of their enquiry or interest simply  would  be
    to ask where he was and threaten to find him when he came back.

61.  Significantly in paragraph 34 it states as  follows,  "There  have  not
    been any  recent  visits  or  any  visits  specifically  mentioning  my
    diaspora activities with the TGTE".  That stands in contrast  with  the
    evidence given  orally  at  the  hearing  that  on  in  May  2016,  the
    authorities had come to the home, specifically on the basis of what had
    been seen on a video.   I  find  that  the  omission  to  mention  that
    significant fact in a statement prepared for the hearing, fundamentally
    undermines the appellant's credibility on that  particular  point.   If
    information was given by his mother three weeks before the hearing  and
    before the making of the statement, I do not find it reasonably  likely
    that he would have forgotten or  considered  that  of  little  account.
    Clearly, if there was such a visit that would be some evidence that the
    authorities were considering that he was someone  to  be  investigated,
    but I do not find the appellant to be credible on that matter.

62.  Thus in relation to these matters I do not find that the appellant  has
    any profile such as to engage with the risk factors as set out  in  GJ,
    nor do I find any evidence of any interest in  him  by  reason  of  his
    family members as  exhibited,  either  before  he  left  Sri  Lanka  or
    afterwards.

63.  Of course I read GJ in the light of the expert evidence which has  been
    summarised but for the reasons that I indicated I give little weight to
    the conclusions of Dr Nadarajah.  His report is general in nature  with
    very few examples and fails to condescend upon particulars,  even  when
    dealing with the appellant's situation.  I see no reason to depart from
    the guidance that has been provided by the Upper Tribunal  as  endorsed
    by the Court of Appeal.

64.  In assessing the risks I bear in mind of course the  due  standard  and
    burden of proof that is to be applied in the reasonable  likelihood  or
    real risk, and indeed as that set  out  in  the  Immigration  Rules  in
    relation to protection.

65.  The only potential risk to the appellant may be if he  returns  to  his
    mother's home in Vanni or nearby, he may encounter some members of  the
    EPDP.  Once again,  some  five  years  or  so  have  elapsed  from  his
    departure and there would be nothing to prevent his  going  to  Colombo
    where he indeed lived and worked for a  number  of  years  without  any
    incident.  There is no reason to believe that those rogue  individuals,
    who may seek to benefit from him in terms of  finance  would  have  the
    resources or the knowledge to track him  down  in  Colombo.   No  doubt
    there is also a sufficiency of protection against  criminal  activities
    as opposed to Government ones.

  66. In all the circumstances therefore I find no basis to  find  that  the
      appellant would be
          at real risk of ill-treatment upon return to Sri Lanka, nor  do  I
find that the conditions
          of humanitarian protection would apply to him


  67.   In terms of his family and private life he is a single  person  who,
      on his own account,  is  estranged  from  his  own  brothers.  He  had
      relatives with whom he lived in Sri Lanka, seemingly without incident,
      namely an uncle in Colombo to name but one. I see no reason why he may
      not safely and fairly return. I bear in mind his medical condition  as
      set out in a number of reports and in particular a report of Dr Obuaya
      on 5th June 2017, a GP medical report by Dr Menyon of 1st  June  2015.
      In terms of the mental state examination of 3 June 2007 the  appellant
      was orientated as  to  time  and  place,  speaking  spontaneously  and
      coherently. No  current  suicidal  ideas  were  elicited  but  he  was
      frustrated. Moderate depressive symptoms were noted  but  he  did  not
      meet the diagnostic criteria for a separate diagnosis of PTSD. He  was
      assessed as having a low risk of suicide but such  might  increase  on
      return. Such a risk would  be  minimised  by  regular  monitoring  and
      medication. I find nothing to suggest a  lack  of  family  support  on
      return or the absence of medical  facilities  or  medication.  I  find
      nothing in his condition to engage Article 3  ECHR  or  any  basis  to
      conclude  a  breach  of  Article  8  rights.  He  does  not  meet  the
      Immigration Rules nor are there any  compelling  circumstances  as  to
      render removal disproportionate.
  68. In all the circumstances the appellant's appeal  is  dismissed  as  to
      asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed

         [pic]                      Date 18 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
