
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09076/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 February 2016                      |On 23 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                                    A M A
                      (AN anonymity direction IS MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Rendle, Counsel instructed by Wai Leung
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, who was born on 25 December 1998, asserts  that  he  was
    born in Damascus in Syria.  It is also his account that in  the  spring
    of 2014 his parents were killed in  Damascus  during  a  bombing  raid,
    whilst he was out of the house at their farm.  Shortly  after  that  he
    left Syria.  He travelled to France where he worked in a restaurant  in
    Paris to pay for the rest of his journey to the United Kingdom.  He was
    discovered in a lorry in Dover on 2 December 2014 and had  a  screening
    interview on 9 December 2014.

2.   On 20 January 2015 Kent Social Services  undertook  an  age  assessment
    and accepted that he was a child. His substantive asylum interview took
    place on 23 April 2015.  On 5 May 2015  he  was  interviewed  over  the
    telephone for seventeen minutes by Verified AB.  His asylum application
    was refused on 4 June 2015 and he was granted  discretionary  leave  to
    remain as an unaccompanied minor  until  25  June  2016.   He  appealed
    against this decision on 15 June 2015 and on 3 December 2015 First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hembrough dismissed his appeal.  On 6 January 2016 First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  White  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  five
    different bases and on 20 January 2016 the Respondent filed a  Rule  24
    response.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

3.   The Appellant was still  a child at  the  date  of  the  error  of  law
    hearing and two social workers from Kent County Council accompanied him
    to the hearing and sat at the back of the court.

4.   Counsel for the Appellant submitted that at the asylum  appeal  hearing
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough had  accepted  that  there  was  an
    error in interpretation at the Appellant's  screening  interview  which
    made it appear that he had initially stated that he left Syria in 2012.
     He also submitted that there was no evidence about the Appellant's ex-
    flatmate's background or that he had been  found  to  be  credible  and
    that, therefore, First-tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough had erred when  he
    stated at paragraph 46 of his decision; "moreover given the  dearth  of
    supporting evidence for his claim  to  be  Syrian  I  do  not  find  it
    credible that had his former flatmate Mohammad, whose  credibility  has
    been accepted by the Home Office, been satisfied as to his  origins  he
    would not have been called to give evidence in support of the appeal".

5.   Counsel also submitted that discrepancies in the language  report  were
    caused by difficulties in interpretation and that  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had been  in  transit  in  France  meant  that  it  was  more
    difficult to pinpoint his origins from his language.

6.   The Home Office Presenting Officer then replied. She noted  that  there
    was no record of proceedings to confirm that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had found that the discrepancy  about  when  the  Appellant  left
    Syria was caused by an error made by the interpreter.   She  relied  on
    the fact that the Judge stated at paragraph 34 of his decision that  he
    had asked the Appellant why 2012 is recorded in his screening interview
    and that at paragraph 40 the Judge said that he found it  difficult  to
    accept that answers had been mistranslated or  misrecorded.   She  also
    submitted that the fact that his former flatmate had not  attended  the
    asylum appeal hearing was something which the  Judge  could  take  into
    account.

7.   The Home Office Presenting Officer also noted  that  in  paragraphs  49
    and 50 of his decision First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hembrough  had  taken
    into account  that  there  may  be  limitations  to  language  analysis
    reports.  She also accepted that no recording  of  the  interview  with
    Verified AB had been provided to the Appellant and his  representatives
    but also noted that no such recording  had  been  requested.  She  then
    submitted that  the  decision  reached  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hembrough was one which was open to him on the totality of the evidence
    before him.

ERRORS OF LAW

8.   One of the grounds on which First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  White  granted
    permission was that First-tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough had  failed  to
    have due regard and make  due allowance for the fact that the Appellant
    was an unaccompanied minor. I  accept  that  at  paragraph  39  of  his
    decision First-tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough stated "the Appellant is a
    minor" but he did not explain what weight he gave to this fact and just
    went on to say that "whilst I have taken this into account I find  that
    I am left with considerable reservations about  his  credibility".  His
    acknowledgment that the Appellant was a child was not reflected in  any
    of his subsequent findings of fact or when considering the  credibility
    of different aspects of the Appellant's account.  This  undermined  his
    credibility findings.

9.   The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hembrough was entitled to draw an adverse inference from the fact
    that the Appellant's former flatmate did not attend the  asylum  appeal
    hearing. However, even if the Appellant's former flatmate had attended,
    the weight which could have been placed on his evidence would have been
    limited. In paragraphs 4 of AB (Witness corroboration n asylum appeals)
    Somalia [2014] UKAIT 00125 the Tribunal noted that when  two  witnesses
    "concur in their evidence that does not without more  prove  that  they
    are telling the truth" and in paragraph 8 it found that evidence  would
    be needed about the basis upon  which  the  witness  had  been  granted
    asylum.  In AC (Witness with refugee status -  Effect)  Somalia  [2005]
    UKAIT 00124 the Tribunal also found that a grant of refugee status  was
    "capable of carrying weight but the grant is not to be equated with  an
    Immigration Judge's determination following a hearing.  An  Immigration
    Judge's decision is likely to be fully  reasoned  and  made  after  the
    evidence in support has been tested".  In the current case,  First-tier
    Immigration  Judge  Hembrough  did  not  make  it  clear  whether   the
    Appellant's former flat-mate had been granted asylum after a hearing or
    the basis upon which he had been granted asylum.

10.  In the current  case  Counsel  for  the  Appellant  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's representatives had  not  asked  for  a  recording  of  the
    Verified AB interview. However, in RB (Linguistic evidence  -  Sprakab)
    Somalia [2010] UKUT 329 (IAC) the Tribunal found  that  "recordings  of
    all material derived from the appellant and used as  material  analysis
    should be made available to all parties if the analysis is to be relied
    on in the Tribunal.

11.  I also find that the  case  of  RB  states  that  "linguistic  analysis
    reports from Sprakab are entitled to  considerable  weight"  and  "that
    conclusion derives from the data available to Sprakab and  the  process
    it uses". It did not find  that  all  linguistic  analysis  reports  or
    reports by Verified AB should be accorded  similar  weight.  Therefore,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough misdirected himself in paragraph 47
    of his decision when he  found  that  "the  use  of  linguistic  origin
    identification reports such as that provided  by  Verified  AB  in  his
    appeal has been specifically approved by the Upper Tribunal in RB"..

12.  Furthermore, although First-tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough did state  at
    paragraph 57 of his decision that  "looking  at  the  totality  of  the
    evidence before me in the round and having regard to the lower standard
    of proof applicable I have not been satisfied that the Appellant  is  a
    Syrian national", very  little  weight,  if  any,  was  placed  on  the
    information that the  Appellant  did  provide  about  Damascus.  Little
    weight was also given to the fact that  the  refusal  letter  does  not
    assert that the Appellant gave false information about Syria  but  only
    that some places could not be found on the internet.  In  addition,  no
    weight was given to the fact that the Appellant gave  some  information
    about number plates in Syria, albeit that it was not comprehensive.

13.  Little or no weight was given to the fact that all  events  took  place
    when the Appellant was a child. In particular, the expectation that the
    Appellant would go through the rubble in the house in which his parents
    had just been killed in  order  to  find  school  reports,  photos  and
    receipts was unrealistic and presumed that  a  child  would  understand
    what evidence he would subsequently be asked to provide if he  fled  to
    Europe.

14.  When reaching my decision I have also taken into account the fact  that
    the Verified AB report  states  that  "linguistic  behaviour  can  also
    change  in  order  to  increase  comprehension  between  two   specific
    speakers" and that this can happen "when one wishes to accommodate  the
    person one is speaking to".   The  report  also  noted  that  "analysis
    regarding subjects  with  a  more  complex  history  of  residence  and
    regarding those having been socialized  in  particularly  heterogeneous
    environments  (e.g.  refugee  camps  or  certain  points   of   transit
    countries) merits extra caution".

15.  For all those reasons I find that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hembrough
    did make material errors of law when reaching his decision.

DECISION

1.   The Appellant's appeal is allowed.
2.   The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hembrough.




DIRECTIONS

1.   The Respondent do provide the Appellant and his solicitors with a  copy
    of the recording of the  interview  conducted  with  the  Appellant  by
    Verified AB within 14 days of service of this decision.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 3 March 2016

Nadine Finch

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

