
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/09869/2014
                                                               AA/09870/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th August 2015                    |On 14th August 2015             |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                    S-I L
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE   )
                                                             First Appellant
                                    S-J L
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTIO MADE)
                                                             Second Appelant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:  Mr K Abdar, Kesar & Co, solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which  would  be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the  public
identifying the appellants and preserving the anonymity  direction  made  at
first instance because both of the appellants are in minority and  there  is
no public interest in identifying them.

2     This is an appeal by both appellants against  the  decision  of  First
Tier Tribunal Judge Lingam, promulgated on 26 February 2015 which  dismissed
both appellants' appeals on asylum grounds.

Background

3     The appellants are brothers.  The  first  appellant  was  born  on  30
August 2000. The second appellant was born on 14 September  2002.  They  are
both nationals of North Korea.

4      On  31  October  2014,  the  respondent  refused   both   appellants'
applications for asylum.  The  respondent  granted  discretionary  leave  to
remain to the first  appellant  until  20  April  2017  and  to  the  second
appellant until 30 August 2018 (or  alternatively,  until  contact  is  made
with their  family).  The  respondent  accepts  the  appellants  set  out  a
credible claim but believes that the appellants both have  a  viable  option
of internal relocation. Relying on KK and  ors  (Nationality:  North  Korea)
Korea  CG  [2011]  UKUT  00092  (IAC),  the  respondent  believes  that  the
appellants can safely relocate to South Korea.

The Judge's Decision

5     The appellants both appealed to the First Tier Tribunal under  Section
83(1) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  First  Tier
Tribunal  Judge  Lingam  ("the  judge")  dismissed  the  appellants'  appeal
against the respondent's decision finding that the appellants  could  safely
relocate to South Korea.

6     Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  23  March  2015,  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Cruthers gave permission to appeal, stating inter alia:


           "...the judge should have considered whether it  was  reasonable
           to expect these appellants  to  relocate  to  South  Korea.  And
           arguable  that  the  judge  did  not  factor  in  any  test   of
           "reasonableness""

The Hearing

7     Mr Abdar, for both appellants, submitted that the judge erred  in  law
because the judge did not  apply  a  test  of  reasonableness  and  did  not
consider whether or not it would be unduly harsh for both of the  appellants
as children to relocate to South Korea in February  2015.  Mr  Abdar  argued
that the judge had conflated the test for internal relocation with the  test
for protection from persecution. He argued that Section 55 of  the  Borders,
Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  should  have  formed  part  of  the
consideration  of  reasonableness  because,  at  today's  date,  the   first
appellant is 14 years old and the second appellant is only 12 years old.  He
accepted that the country guidance cases  of  KK  and  others  (Nationality:
North Korea) Korea CG [2011] UKUT 00092  (IAC)  and  GP  and  others  (South
Korean  citizenship)  North  Korea  CG  [2014]  UKUT  391  (IAC)   must   be
considered, but argued that the only conclusion that  could  be  reached  is
that sending a 12 year old and a 14 year old, both North  Korean  nationals,
to South Korea where they have no family and no network of support  is  both
unduly harsh and unreasonable.

8     Mr Jarvis for the respondent argued that  the  findings  made  by  the
judge between [24] and  [27]  were  findings  which  were  directed  at  the
question of reasonableness and that those findings addressed whether or  not
internal relocation  to  South  Korea  would  be  unduly  harsh;  whilst  he
accepted that at [27] the judge specifically refers  to  "the  threshold  of
persecution for  a  refugee  convention  reason"  instead  of  the  test  of
reasonableness and harshness, he argued that the country guidance  case  law
was against the appellants, that the appellants were not to  be  left  in  a
war zone but would be taken to a country  which  would  screen  and  support
children who South Korea regard as their own nationals.

Analysis

9     In GP and others (South Korean  citizenship)  North  Korea  CG  [2014]
UKUT 391 (IAC), 28 August 2014  it  was  held  that  (i)  The  UT's  country
guidance in KK and others (Nationality: North Korea) Korea  CG  [2011]  UKUT
92 (IAC) stood, with the exception of  paragraphs  2(d)  and  2(e)  thereof.
Paragraphs (2), (3)  and  (4)  of  this  guidance  replaced  that  given  in
paragraphs 2(d) and 2(e) respectively of KK;  (ii)  South  Korean  law  made
limited provision for dual nationality under the Overseas  Koreans  Act  and
the Nationality Act (as amended); (iii) All North Korean citizens were  also
citizens of South Korea. While absence from the Korean  Peninsula  for  more
than 10 years might entail fuller enquiries  as  to  whether  a  person  had
acquired another nationality or right of residence before a travel  document
was issued,  upon  return  to  South  Korea  all  persons  from  the  Korean
Peninsula were treated as returning South Korean citizens;  (iv)  There  was
no evidence that North Koreans returned to South Korea  were  sent  back  to
North  Korea  or  anywhere  else,  even  if  they  failed  the  'protection'
procedure, and however long they had been outside the Korean Peninsula;  (v)
The process of returning North Koreans to South Korea was  now  set  out  in
the  United  Kingdom-South  Korea  Readmission  Agreement  (the  Readmission
Agreement) entered into between the two countries on 10 December  2011.   At
present, the issue of  emergency  travel  documents  under  the  Readmission
Agreement was confined  to  those  for  whom  documents  and/or  fingerprint
evidence established  that  they  were  already  known  to  South  Korea  as
citizens, or who had registered as such with the  South  Korean  Embassy  in
the United Kingdom. (vi)  Applyin MA (Ethiopia) v  Secretary  of  State  for
the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 289, North Koreans  outside  the  Korean
Peninsula who objected to return to South  Korea  must  cooperate  with  the
United Kingdom authorities in seeking to establish whether they could  avail
themselves of the protection of another country, in particular South  Korea.
Unless they could demonstrate that in all of the countries where  they  were
entitled to citizenship they had a well-founded fear of  persecution  for  a
Refugee Convention reason, they were not refugees; (vii)  If they  were  not
refugees, it remained open to such persons to seek to  establish  individual
factors creating a risk for them in  South  Korea  which  would  engage  the
United  Kingdom's  international  obligations  under  the  EU  Qualification
Directive or the ECHR; (viii)  There was  no  risk  of  refoulement  of  any
North Korean to North Korea  from  South  Korea,  whether  directly  or  via
China. South Korea did not return anyone to North Korea at all  and  it  did
not return North Koreans to China.  In a  small  number  of  cases,  Chinese
nationals had been returned to China.  A small number of persons  identified
by the South Korean authorities as  North  Korean  intelligence  agents  had
been prosecuted in South  Korea.  There  was  no  evidence  that  they  were
subsequently required to leave South Korea; and (ix) Once  the  'protection'
procedure had been completed, North Korean migrants had the same  rights  as
other South Korean citizens save that they  were  not  required  to  perform
military  service  for  South  Korea.   They  had  access  to   resettlement
assistance, including housing, training and  financial  assistance.   Former
North Koreans may have difficulty in adjusting to South Korea and there  may
be some discrimination in social integration, employment  and  housing,  but
not at a level which required international protection.

10    Paragraph 339O of the Immigration Rules states:

      "(i) The Secretary of State will not make:
      (a) a grant of asylum if in part of the country  of  origin  a  person
      would not have a well founded fear of being persecuted, and the person
      can reasonably be expected to stay in that part of the country; or
      (b) a grant of humanitarian protection if in part of  the  country  of
      return a person would not face a real risk of suffering serious  harm,
      and the person can reasonably be expected to stay in that part of  the
      country.
      (ii) In examining whether a part of the country of origin  or  country
      of return meets the requirements in (i) the Secretary of  State,  when
      making his  decision  on  whether  to  grant  asylum  or  humanitarian
      protection, will have regard to the general  circumstances  prevailing
      in that part of the country and to the personal circumstances  of  the
      person.
      (iii) (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to return to the
      country of origin or country of return. "

11    In SSHD v AH (Sudan) and Others  2007  UKHL  49  the  House  of  Lords
pointed out that the test  to  determine  whether  internal  relocation  was
available was the test set out in Januzi v SSHD 2006  UKHL  5,  namely  that
the decision maker should decide whether, taking  account  of  all  relevant
circumstances pertaining to the claimant and his or her country it would  be
reasonable to expect the claimant to relocate or whether it would be  unduly
harsh to expect him or her to do so.  The test was one of great  generality.
 In applying the test enquiry had to be directed to  the  situation  of  the
particular claimant; very little was excluded from consideration other  than
the standard of rights protection  which  a  claimant  would  enjoy  in  the
country where refuge was sought.

12    The judge considered internal relocation between [22] and [27] of  the
decision. The judge summarised her findings in the final  sentence  of  [27]
and there, states that the facts she has considered are "...general  welfare
complaints that do not go far enough to cross the threshold  of  persecution
for a refugee convention reason". The judge clearly  states  that  the  test
that she has applied relates to "the threshold of persecution" and is not  a
test of reasonableness, nor a  consideration  of  whether  or  not  internal
relocation would be unduly harsh. I therefore  find  that  the  decision  is
tainted by a material error of law because the wrong test has been  applied.


13    The undisputed facts of this case are that both of the appellants  are
minors and that  they  are  brothers.  The  respondent  accepts  that  their
parents were arrested in China and were handed  over  to  the  North  Korean
authorities and cannot now  be  traced.  It  is  beyond  dispute  that  both
appellants are healthy.

14    GP considers the ability of North Koreans to relocate to South  Korea.
At headnote 3 of the rubric, it finds that "all North  Korean  citizens  are
also citizens of South Korea". It also finds that there is no forced  return
from South  Korea  to  North  Korea.  It  finds  that  there  is  access  to
resettlement  assistance   including   housing,   training   and   financial
assistance but "former North Koreans may have  difficulty  in  adjusting  to
South Korea and there may be  some  discrimination  in  social  integration,
employment and housing but not  at  a  level  which  requires  international
protection".

15    If the appellants were adults, then return to  South  Korea  would  be
reasonable, but I remind myself of the case of ST. I  consider  hypothetical
return at today's date. This  case  comes  down  to  a  simple  question  of
whether or not it is reasonable for two children aged  12  and  14  who  are
separated from their parents to relocate to South Korea, where the case  law
tells me there is  discrimination  in  social  integration,  employment  and
housing.

16    The appellants left North Korea in 2008 and travelled to  China.  They
fled from China at the end of 2013 and arrived in the UK on 1 January  2014.
They are now settled with foster parents and are doing well at school.  They
are children who, on the account which is accepted by the  respondent,  have
endured hardships, poverty, bewilderment and forced  separation  from  their
parents. On the account which  is  accepted  by  the  respondent,  the  most
settled period in their young lives, since 2008, has been the period from  1
January 2014.

17    It is not disputed that North Koreans face societal discrimination  in
South  Korea.  Hypothetical  removal  would  take  both  children  from  the
environment and routines in which they are now settled (and  in  which  they
are now comfortable) and place them through a  further  period  of  upheaval
with removal to another strange country (even if that is a country which  is
prepared to welcome them) where they will be made  the  subject  of  enquiry
and they will face uncertainty whilst attempts are  made  to  resettle  them
once again. They will face the apprehension of attempting to integrate  into
an education system, where the background materials indicate they will  face
discrimination.

18    The simple question is whether or not it is reasonable to  force  that
period of upheaval, uncertainty and the distress of separation  from  foster
parents   and   friends   on   two   children   whose   histories   indicate
vulnerabilities are close to the surface.

19    The conclusion that I reach is that it would both be unduly harsh  and
unreasonable in the unusual circumstances of these cases to force these  two
children  to  repeat  the  distress  of  separation  and  the  distress   of
uncertainty which has already been a repeated feature of their young  lives.


Conclusion

20    I therefore find that in the unusual circumstances of this  case  that
internal relocation to South Korea is not a  viable  option  for  either  of
these  appellants  because,  with  their  accepted  history,  it  would   be
unreasonable to force further disruption upon them.

Decision

21    The decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge  Lingam  promulgated  on  26
February 2015 contains a material error of law. I therefore set it aside.

22    I remake the decision.

23    Both appeals are allowed on asylum grounds.



Signed                                                              Date 7
August 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

