
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09716/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 May 2015                       |On 20 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                             ANNE FLORENCE AHMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant: Mr N Aghayere, Freemans solicitors
For the respondent: Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is Anne Florence Ahmed, a  national  of  Tanzania.  She
       appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
       Secretary of State dated 31 October  2014  to  refuse  to  grant  her
       application for asylum and to remove her from the UK.  Judge  of  the
       First-tier  Tribunal  Colvin  dismissed   the   appeal   on   asylum,
       humanitarian protection and human rights grounds. The  appellant  now
       appeals with permission to this Tribunal. The appellant appealed only
       in relation to the human rights grounds.

    2. The background to this appeal as it relates to the human rights issue
       is not in dispute, in summary the appellant came to the  UK  in  June
       2003 on a visit visa and claimed asylum. Her three siblings reside in
       the UK and her mother came here in  2011.  The  appellant's  daughter
       lives in Abu Dhabi and her son, with whom she has not been in contact
       since 2003, lives in the Comoro Islands. The appellant lives with her
       sister, it is her case that she is the main carer for her mother, who
       lives with her brother, David, and suffers  from  diabetes  and  high
       blood pressure.

    3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence from the  appellant
       and her brother. Following the  hearing  the  appellant  submitted  a
       letter from the appellant's mother's GP which was  before  the  Judge
       when she made her decision. The Judge said that it was accepted  that
       the appellant did not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
       [28]. The Judge considered the appellant's  circumstances  and  found
       that the claim that the appellant is her mother's carer is  the  only
       matter which might be considered as  a  compelling  circumstance  not
       sufficiently recognised under the Rules. The Judge  found  that  this
       issue has not been specifically raised with the  respondent  and  has
       therefore not been considered under the Home Office policy on  carers
       or in relation to Article 8 more generally. The Judge considered that
       it would not be appropriate for her to  do  so  and  that  a  further
       application was  required  so  that  the  respondent  could  properly
       consider the matter.

    4. However the Judge was mistaken in this as the respondent had in  fact
       been aware that the appellant claimed to be her mother's  carer.  The
       respondent said at paragraph 93 of the reasons for refusal letter;

           "As you have failed to show that you are the sole carer of  your
           mother and particularly as there are three other family  members
           who could care for her, one of whom houses her in place of  you,
           this part of your claim has been rejected".

    5. It is clear that this issue had been before the  respondent  and  the
       Judge erred in suggesting otherwise. The respondent had chosen not to
       be  represented  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.   In   these
       circumstances I  do  not  accept  that  the  Judge  was  required  to
       reconvene  the  hearing  for  submissions  on  the  medical  evidence
       submitted after the hearing as contended by Mr  Aghayere.  I  do  not
       accept his alternate contention that the Judge should  have  remitted
       the matter to the Secretary of State for consideration as  the  Judge
       was seized of the Article 8 issue. I do however accept that the Judge
       should have considered the medical evidence along  with  all  of  the
       other evidence in her assessment as to whether there were  compelling
       circumstances not already recognised under the Rules.

    6. Ms Savage submitted that if the Judge erred in her  approach  to  the
       medical evidence and Article 8 this was not a material error  as  the
       GP's letter was brief and contained no  detail  in  relation  to  the
       level of support. She submitted that the appellant had three siblings
       in the UK who are involved with their mother and  that  the  evidence
       indicates that the arrangement whereby the appellant provides care is
       one of convenience rather than there being no other care alternative.
       She submitted that any error is not material because it could not  be
       shown that there are any  compelling  circumstances  to  justify  the
       grant of leave outside the Rules.

    7. Mr Aghayere submitted that any error is material because if the Judge
       found that the appeal could be considered outside the Rules  under  a
       freestanding Article 8 assessment the  Judge  would  have  looked  at
       other factors such as the appellant's length of residence  and  could
       have reached a different conclusion.

    8. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  err  in  her
       consideration of Article 8 because she was mistaken in her conclusion
       that the respondent had not considered the appellant's  claim  to  be
       her mother's carer. The appellant had appealed on Article  8  grounds
       and it was for the Judge to determine  the  issue  conclusively.  She
       failed to do so. I accept that this was a material error as  had  she
       engaged with the issue she could have reached a different decision.

    9. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       in relation to the Article 8 appeal only. The decision in relation to
       the asylum appeal has not been challenged and still stands.

Remaking the decision

   10. In terms of remaking the decision  the  representatives  agreed  that
       there was no dispute as to the facts. I  heard  submissions  from  Ms
       Savage and Mr  Aghayere.  Ms  Savage  submitted  that  there  was  no
       suggestion that the appellant's mother could not receive the required
       care if the appellant is removed from the UK. She submitted that  the
       public interest factors to be considered in this case  are  that  the
       appellant overstayed her entry visa and has not had leave  to  remain
       in the UK since she came in 2003. She referred to section 117B of the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and submitted that there
       is no evidence to  demonstrate  that  the  appellant  is  financially
       independent as she  is  reliant  on  the  financial  support  of  her
       siblings. She submitted that the appellant  established  any  private
       life whilst here unlawfully or with  precarious  immigration  status.
       She submitted that there is no basis for the  appeal  to  be  allowed
       under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

   11. Mr Aghayere submitted that the GP's letter said that the  appellant's
       mother would be adversely affected if she is required  to  leave  the
       UK. He submitted that reasons have been put forward  as  to  why  the
       other siblings cannot care for the appellant's mother.  He  submitted
       that the factors in section 117B are in  the  appellant's  favour  in
       that she can speak English, as evidenced by the fact  that  she  gave
       evidence in English at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  and  she  is
       financially independent in that she has never been dependant  on  the
       state.

Decision and reasons

   12.  It  has  not  been  contended  that  the  appellant  can  meet   the
       requirements of Appendix FM of the Rules. The appellant has  been  in
       the UK since 2003, a period of 12 years. In relation to private  life
       the relevant provision of  paragraph  276ADE  is  276ADE  (vi)  which
       provides that where a person has been in the  UK  for  less  than  20
       years must show that there would be very significant obstacles to her
       integration into the country where she would have to go  if  required
       to leave the UK. The appellant's asylum appeal was dismissed and I do
       not therefore accept that any of  the  issues  raised  therein  would
       cause the  appellant  any  problems  upon  return  to  Tanzania.  The
       appellant says in her witness statement dated 23  January  2015  that
       she has no family left in Tanzania however in oral evidence (recorded
       at paragraph 7 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision) she  said
       that her mother returned to Tanzania in  2013  and  stayed  with  her
       niece and nephew  (the  appellant's  cousins)  for  2-3  months.  The
       appellant spent most of her life in Tanzania, leaving  in  2003  when
       she was 51 years old. She has not shown  that  there  would  be  very
       significant obstacles to her integration in Tanzania.

   13. In deciding how to  approach  human  rights  and  Article  8  I  have
       considered the relevant case law including the decision of the  Upper
       Tribunal in R (on the application of Esther Ebun  Oludoyi  &  Ors)  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department (Article 8 - MM  (Lebanon)
       and Nagre) IJR [2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC)  which  makes  it  clear  that
       there is a need to look at the evidence to see if there  is  anything
       which has not already been adequately considered in  the  context  of
       the Immigration Rules and which could lead to a successful Article  8
       claim. I accept that the fact that the  appellant  plays  a  role  in
       caring for her mother may be such a circumstance and I  therefore  go
       on to consider Article 8.

   14. In considering this appeal under Article 8 I follow the  five  stages
       set out by Lord Bingham in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27.
       The appellant claims to have  a  family  life  in  the  UK  with  her
       siblings and mother. Her siblings are said to support her financially
       and she lives with her sister. The appellant plays a role  in  caring
       for her mother. Although I do not consider that the family life  with
       her mother and  siblings  is  much  more  than  that  of  the  normal
       emotional ties between adult siblings and their parents I accept that
       she has just about established a family  life  in  the  UK  with  her
       mother and siblings.  The  appellant  submitted  a  letter  from  the
       celestial Church of Christ stating that she has been a member of  the
       Church since 2003 and that  she  helps  out  there  by  cleaning  and
       helping at church activities. I  accept  that  the  appellant  has  a
       private life in the UK. I accept that  the  appellant's  removal  may
       interfere with her family and private life in the UK. I am  satisfied
       that such interference would have consequences  of  such  gravity  as
       potentially to engage the operation of Article 8. The decision is  in
       accordance with the law and I go on to consider whether the  decision
       is  proportionate  with  the  respondent's  legitimate  aim  of   the
       enforcement of immigration control.

   15. Whilst it is not disputed that the appellant has  a  caring  role  in
       relation to her mother there are some conflicts in the evidence as to
       the extent of her role. In her witness statement the  appellant  said
       that she visited her mother 'everyday almost' (paragraph 8).  However
       the First-tier Tribunal Judge recorded that the  appellant's  brother
       said that the appellant comes to his house to care for  their  mother
       every day (paragraph 10 of the determination). It is recorded in  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination  that  the  appellant  said
       that she stays with her  mother  three  times  a  week.  However  her
       brother is recorded as saying that the appellant spends the night  at
       his house about 5 times a week.  The appellant said that  her  mother
       can dress herself and that the appellant cooks and bathes her mother.
       The appellant's brother said  that  the  appellant  speaks  to  their
       mother  in  Swahili  and  that  she  translates  for   her   hospital
       appointments. Despite these conflicts I  accept  that  the  appellant
       does play a significant role in caring for her mother in the UK.

   16. The letter from the appellant's mother's GP states that  the  ongoing
       medical issues  the  appellant's  mother  suffers  from  are  type  2
       diabetes, high blood pressure and osteoarthritis which restricts  her
       mobility. He said that the appellant's mother needs help with getting
       around and carrying out domestic work and that she  needs  some  help
       with personal care. He said that the appellant has been  accompanying
       her to hospital and GP  appointments  and  that  the  mother  depends
       heavily on the appellant for her social and  personal  care.  The  GP
       said that he is of the opinion that the appellant's mother's personal
       and social care will  be  adversely  affected  if  the  appellant  is
       removed from the UK. I accept that the  appellant's  mother  requires
       some care. However there is no evidence that the  appellant's  mother
       requires 24 hour care. I also note that the appellant's brother  told
       the First-tier Tribunal Judge that his mother returned to Tanzania in
       2010, 2011 and 2012 and the appellant said that her  mother  returned
       in 2013. On each occasion she was said to have  stayed  there  for  a
       number of months. She clearly did not require a significant amount of
       care from the appellant then.

   17. The appellant's mother lives with her son David. The appellant  lives
       with her sister who she says is a nurse who works full time  and  has
       two children. She said in oral evidence in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       that her other brother lives with his partner  and  has  children  at
       university in Tanzania.  Although  Mr  Aghayere  submitted  that  the
       appellant's siblings cannot care for their mother this  is  not  what
       the evidence indicates. The appellant's mother lives with David  who,
       at the time of the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal was not working
       because of an accident although he was  hoping  to  return  to  work,
       there is no evidence that he cannot  provide  his  mother  with  some
       care. Although the appellant's sister is a nurse there is no evidence
       that she cannot provide her  mother  with  some  care.  There  is  no
       evidence that the appellant's other brother cannot provide his mother
       with some care. The appellant told the First-tier Tribunal Judge that
       the family are in the process of getting help from  social  services.
       This also will be a source of care for the appellant's mother.

   18. Considering all of this evidence I do not accept  that  there  is  no
       other source of care available for the appellant's mother.  I  accept
       the respondent's submission that the appellant is providing the  care
       required by her  mother  because  it  is  convenient  for  her  other
       siblings to allow her to do so and that it is a matter of choice  and
       not necessity.

   19.  There is  a  letter  from  the  appellant's  own  GP  outlining  her
       diagnosis of depression. However it appears that the  stress  of  the
       appeal was exacerbating her depression. There is no evidence that she
       would not be able to access treatment for depression in Tanzania.

   20. The appellant attends Church in the UK. There is no evidence that she
       will be unable to continue to practice her religion upon  her  return
       to Tanzania.

   21. The evidence indicates that the appellant has family in Tanzania. Her
       brother told the First-tier Tribunal Judge that their mother's sister
       lives there and that he has cousins there. The  appellant  said  that
       her  bother's  children  attend  University  there.  The  appellant's
       brother told the First-tier Tribunal Judge that he would continue  to
       help support the appellant if she was not in the UK.

   22. I take into account the length of time the appellant has  resided  in
       the UK. However she overstayed her visit visa in 2003 and has not had
       leave to remain in the UK  since  then.  Any  private  life  she  has
       established has therefore been established whilst she was in  the  UK
       unlawfully or her status was precarious (section 117B (4) and (5)).

   23. I take into account the other factors set  out  in  section  117B.  I
       accept that the appellant speaks English as she gave evidence in  the
       First-tier Tribunal in English. I accept that she is supported by her
       siblings and is  therefore  financially  independent.  However  these
       issues are not determinative and none of the other factors in section
       117B can be weighed in her favour.

   24. I take into account the fact  that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
       requirements of the Immigration Rules in particular Appendix  FM  and
       paragraph 276ADE.

   25. Weighing all of these factors I am satisfied  that  the  decision  to
       remove the appellant is proportionate to the respondent's  legitimate
       aim of the maintenance of an effective system of immigration  control
       for the prevention of disorder or crime or  to  secure  the  economic
       well-being of the country.



Conclusion:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on point of law.

I set it aside and remake it  by  dismissing  the  appeal  on  human  rights
grounds.



Signed      Date: 19 May 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


