
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Aa/09192/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th May 2016                     |On 25th May 2016                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Chowdhury of Counsel, instructed by Freedom
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against a decision of  Judge  M  Davies  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 20th March 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male Iranian citizen who claimed asylum on 24th July
    2014.  His application was refused on 9th October 2014 and  his  appeal
    heard by the FTT on 10th March 2015.  The appeal was dismissed  on  all
    grounds.

 3. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. On 10th March 2016 I heard submissions from both parties in relation to
    error of law.  Permission to appeal had been granted only  in  relation
    to the consideration by the FTT of the Appellant's Facebook page  which
    contained entries which may be perceived by the Iranian authorities  as
    being opposed to the Iranian regime.

 5. I found that the FTT erred in its consideration of this aspect  of  the
    appeal and the decision was set aside.   The  FTT  did  not  adequately
    engage  with  the   background   information   contained   within   the
    Respondent's OGN dated October 2012, which confirmed that  the  Iranian
    government monitored  internet  communications,  and  that  individuals
    returning could be  asked  to  log  into  their  YouTube  and  Facebook
    accounts.  The important aspect that needed to be  considered  was  how
    the Facebook entries would be perceived  by  the  Iranian  authorities.
    The FTT had not adequately considered the background evidence, and  had
    not adequately considered that the background evidence  indicated  that
    if questioned about internet  activity,  an  individual  could  not  be
    expected to lie, and if internet activity was exposed that  was  deemed
    to be opposed to the Iranian regime, this could lead to a real risk  of
    persecution.  Permission to appeal had not been granted in relation  to
    any other findings made by the FTT, and therefore those findings, which
    included an adverse credibility finding  against  the  Appellant,  were
    preserved.

 6. The hearing on 10th March 2016 was adjourned so that  further  evidence
    could be given so that the decision could be re-made.  Details  of  the
    grant of permission, the  submissions  made  by  the  parties,  and  my
    findings are contained in my error of law decision promulgated on  18th
    March 2016.

Re-Making the Decision

The Law

 7. The Appellant is entitled to asylum if he is  outside  his  country  of
    nationality and is recognised as a refugee as defined in  regulation  2
    of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 as a person who falls  within  Article
    1A of the 1951 Geneva Convention.  The onus is on him to prove that  he
    has a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reason  (race,
    religion, nationality, membership  of  a  particular  social  group  or
    political opinion), and is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling  to
    avail himself of the protection of the country of his nationality.  The
    Appellant would be eligible for humanitarian protection under paragraph
    339C of the Immigration Rules if he does not qualify as a  refugee  and
    establishes substantial grounds for believing that if  he  was  removed
    from the United Kingdom, he would face a real risk of suffering serious
    harm, and is unable or, owing to such risk, unwilling to avail  himself
    of the protection of the country of return.

 8. The Appellant also claims that to remove him from  the  United  Kingdom
    would breach Article 3 of the 1950 European Convention on Human  Rights
    (the 1950 Convention).  The Appellant  must  therefore  establish  that
    there are substantial grounds for believing that returning him to  Iran
    would create a real risk that he  would  be  subjected  to  torture  or
    inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

 9. In relation to risk on return, the burden of proof is on the  Appellant
    and can be described as a reasonable degree of likelihood, which  is  a
    lower standard than  the  normal  civil  standard  of  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  The Tribunal must consider the circumstances as at  the
    date of hearing.

The Appellant's Claim

10. In summary the Appellant claimed that his  brother  had  been  involved
    with a political group that was opposed to  the  Iranian  regime.   The
    Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as a student on 17th  September
    2010.  He returned to Iran for two or three weeks at Christmas 2010.

11. The Appellant returned to Iran for a second time in  January  2013  and
    stayed for six months.  The Appellant and his brother made a DVD  which
    was anti-regime and distributed copies of this.

12. Just before the election in  June  2013  the  Appellant's  brother  was
    attacked by Basiji and also received threatening telephone calls.

13. The Appellant's  brother  was  expelled  from  university  due  to  his
    political activities.  The Appellant returned to the United Kingdom and
    passed information back to his brother using Skype and WhatsApp.

14. On  11th  July  2014  the  Appellant's  brother  was  arrested  by  the
    authorities and his father was also detained  for  four  days  and  his
    assets frozen.  The Appellant was advised not to return to Iran.

15. The Appellant  had  been  publishing  anti-regime  information  on  his
    Facebook page and a web blog.

Preserved Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

16. The FTT did not find the Appellant to be a credible  witness.   It  was
    not accepted that  the  Appellant  and  his  brother  distributed  DVDs
    critical of the regime.  The Appellant had little or  no  knowledge  of
    the contents of leaflets and DVDs  produced  by  his  brother  and  his
    brother's group.  The Appellant had never come to the adverse attention
    of the Iranian authorities.  The Appellant had  not  given  a  truthful
    account of why he feared returning to Iran.  It was not  accepted  that
    the  Iranian  authorities  had  arrested  the  Appellant's  father  and
    detained him for four days.



The Hearing - 13th May 2016

Preliminary Issues

17. The Appellant attended the hearing.   There  were  no  difficulties  in
    communication between the Appellant and interpreter in Farsi.

18. I ascertained that I had received  all  documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely and that each party had served the other  with
    any documentation upon which reliance was to  be  placed.   I  had  the
    Respondent's bundle that had been before the FTT with annexes  A-B  and
    the reasons for refusal letter dated 9th October 2014.  I also had  the
    Appellant's bundle which had been before the FTT comprising  429  pages
    and a supplementary bundle comprising 15 pages.

19. I had a  further  supplementary  bundle  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant comprising 40 pages under cover of a rule 15 notice dated 3rd
    March 2016, and further evidence submitted by the Appellant under cover
    of a rule 15 notice dated 4th May 2016 comprising 53 pages.  I received
    from Ms Chowdhury a skeleton argument.

20. Both representatives confirmed that they had  received  a  copy  of  my
    error of law decision promulgated on 18th March  2006,  and  understood
    the  issue  to  be  decided  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  related  to  the
    Appellant's internet activity and whether this would put him  at  risk.
    I was therefore considering asylum based upon the Appellant's political
    opinion, humanitarian protection, and Article 3 of the 1950 Convention.

Oral Evidence

21. The Appellant gave oral evidence  and  adopted  his  witness  statement
    dated 28th April 2016.  In very brief summary  the  Appellant  in  this
    statement confirms that he has been using Facebook since 2011 both  for
    personal reasons, and  to  express  his  political  views  against  the
    Iranian regime.  His Facebook page is publicly accessible.

22. His aim in posting information on his Facebook page is to inform people
    both inside and outside Iran about how the Iranian government oppresses
    and  persecutes  opponents,  restricts  women's  rights  and  mistreats
    prisoners.

23. The Appellant attached to his statement some  recent  posts  which  are
    political in nature.

24. In addition to his Facebook page  the  Appellant  has  been  writing  a
    weblog called Iranibehtar (which in English means  better  Iran).   The
    Appellant has been writing this  blog  since  2014.   Sometimes  it  is
    possible to access weblogs when it is not possible to  access  Facebook
    inside Iran.

25. The Appellant attached to his statement some examples of  what  he  had
    written and confirmed that  his  purpose  was  to  raise  awareness  of
    political issues in Iran and how the government is persecuting its  own
    people.

26. The Appellant fears persecution by the authorities if returned to Iran,
    and fears that his internet activity may have been monitored,  or  even
    if it is not,  he  would  be  questioned  when  he  returned,  and  the
    authorities would discover his internet activity which would put him at
    risk.

27. When cross-examined the Appellant confirmed that his Facebook page  and
    his weblog are both publicly accessible, and could be accessed in Iran.
     The Appellant confirmed that he had not left Iran illegally,  but  had
    travelled using his own passport,  and  that  he  had  been  granted  a
    student visa to enable him to study in the United Kingdom.

The Respondent's Submissions

28. Mr  McVeety  submitted  that  the  appeal  should  be  dismissed.   The
    Appellant relied upon AB and  Others  (internet  activity  -  state  of
    evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC) and I was asked to note that this
    was not a country guidance decision.

29. I was also asked to note  that  the  translations  of  the  Appellant's
    Facebook posts and weblog are very brief.  Mr  McVeety  submitted  that
    the Appellant's website is a British website and I was  asked  to  find
    that the Appellant had left Iran legally, the preserved findings of the
    FTT meant that he was not at risk because of any activities he  claimed
    to have undertaken in Iran, and that his internet  activity  would  not
    put him at risk if returned.

The Appellant's Submissions

30. Ms Chowdhury relied upon her skeleton argument.  I was asked to  accept
    that the Appellant's internet activity would be regarded as  derogatory
    by the Iranian regime and would put him at risk.

31. The Appellant no longer had a valid Iranian passport as his expired  in
    2015 (Mr McVeety indicated that this was accepted)  and  therefore  the
    Appellant would need a special travel document and would not return  to
    Iran willingly.

32. I was referred in particular to paragraph 107 of AB, which referred  to
    Iranian citizens returning to Iran being interrogated  at  the  airport
    and asked to give their Facebook passwords and indicated that a  Google
    search could be carried out to reveal if an individual had  a  Facebook
    account.

33. Miss Chowdhury relied upon the background evidence to indicate that the
    Iranian authorities monitored internet activity and AB  indicated  that
    an Iranian returned to Iran, would be asked  about  internet  activity,
    and if any such activity was discovered which indicated  opposition  to
    the regime, this would lead to a  real  risk  of  persecution.   I  was
    therefore asked to allow the appeal.

34. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

35. I have taken into account all the oral and documentary evidence  placed
    before  me,  together  with  the  oral   submissions   made   by   both
    representatives.  I take into account the lower standard of proof  that
    applies, which can be described as a reasonable degree of likelihood.

36. I have considered the evidence in the round and with anxious  scrutiny,
    and considered this appeal in the light of the provisions of  paragraph
    339L of the Immigration Rules.

37. The issue that I have to decide is whether the Appellant has proved  to
    a reasonable degree of likelihood that his internet activity would  put
    him at risk of persecution or treatment that would breach Article 3  if
    he returned to Iran.

38. I accept that the Appellant has a Facebook page and weblog.   I  accept
    that both the Facebook page and the weblog do contain posts that  would
    be regarded as voicing opposition to the  Iranian  regime.   There  are
    Facebook entries going back to February 2014.  By way  of  example  the
    most recent posts in March and April 2016 refer to a teacher  receiving
    a prison sentence, the Iranian regime discriminating against  a  female
    kick boxer, an Iranian journalist  committing  suicide  after  enduring
    years of imprisonment, and a journalist being tortured,  and  sentenced
    to ten years' imprisonment.

39. The Appellant has provided translations of weblog posts in March  2015,
    which made reference to the Iranian  regime  executing  753  people  in
    2014, trade union activists  being  sentenced  to  imprisonment  by  an
    Islamic revolutionary court, and the International Campaign  for  Human
    Rights in Iran claiming that the authorities have created a  favourable
    climate in society for acts of violence against women.  There was  also
    reference to a blogger on hunger strike, having been imprisoned.

40. I have taken into account all the background  evidence  that  has  been
    provided and I note the Respondent's own Operational Guidance  Note  on
    Iran produced in October 2012 and I set out below, in  part,  paragraph
    3.6.8;

         "3.6.8   Through the Cyber Army and Cyber  Command  the  government
                monitored   internet   communications,   especially   social
                networking websites, such as Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube,
                and   collected   individuals'    personally    identifiable
                information in connection with peaceful expression of views.
                 Freedom House and other human rights organisations reported
                that  authorities  sometimes  stopped  citizens  at   Tehran
                International Airport as they arrived in  the  country,  and
                asked them to log into their YouTube and Facebook  accounts.
                In September  2012,  Freedom  House  reported  that  Iranian
                internet users suffer from routine surveillance, harassment,
                and the threat of imprisonment for their online  activities,
                particularly those critical of the authorities.  Since  June
                2009, the authorities have cracked down on  online  activism
                through   various   forms   of   judicial   and   extralegal
                intimidation.  An increasing number of  bloggers  have  been
                threatened,   arrested,   tortured,   kept    in    solitary
                confinement, and denied medical care, while others have been
                formally tried and convicted."

41. I accept that AB is not a  country  guidance  decision,  but  it  gives
    useful and helpful guidance on the attitude of the  Iranian  government
    towards individuals who undertake internet activity, having carried out
    a comprehensive assessment of background evidence.

42. The Tribunal found at paragraph 470 that a  person  returning  to  Iran
    after a reasonably short period of time on an ordinary passport  having
    left Iran illegally will almost certainly not  attract  any  particular
    attention at all.  That however is not the case with the Appellant,  as
    his passport has expired, and he  would  therefore  have  to  obtain  a
    special travel document.  The Tribunal in  paragraph  471  stated  that
    where a  person's  leave  to  remain  had  lapsed,  and  who  might  be
    travelling on a special passport, there  would  be  enhanced  interest.
    The more active the person had been the more  likely  the  authorities'
    interest could lead to persecution.

43. The Tribunal in paragraph 472 indicated that the more active  a  person
    had been on the internet the greater would be the  risk.   It  was  not
    relevant if a person had used the internet in an opportunistic  way  as
    the authorities are not concerned with a person's motivation.  In cases
    in which the authorities had taken  an  interest,  claiming  asylum  is
    viewed negatively which may not of itself  be  sufficient  to  lead  to
    persecution, but it may enhance the risk.

44. I set out below paragraph 467 of AB;

         "The mere fact of being in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  prolonged
         period does not lead  to  persecution.   However  it  may  lead  to
         scrutiny and there is clear evidence that  some  people  are  asked
         about their internet activity and particularly for  their  Facebook
         password.  The act of returning someone creates a 'pinch point'  so
         that a person is brought into direct contact with  the  authorities
         in Iran who have both the time and inclination to interrogate them.
          We think it likely that they will be asked  about  their  internet
         activity and likely if they have any internet activity for that  to
         be exposed and if it is less than flattering of the  government  to
         lead to at the very least a real risk of persecution."

45. It  is  established  law,  that  if  a  person  is  questioned  by  the
    authorities on their return to their home country, that  person  cannot
    be expected to lie about their activities.

46. In my view, the evidence proves to the lower  standard,  that  being  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood, that the Appellant may  be  questioned
    when returned to Iran.  The evidence also indicates that the  Appellant
    may be questioned about his  internet  activity.   When  that  internet
    activity is revealed, it would  be  regarded  by  the  authorities,  as
    indicating opposition to the Iranian regime.

47. The background evidence, and the decision in AB, indicates  that  in  a
    case such as this, the Appellant would therefore be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution.

48. I therefore conclude that the Appellant  is  entitled  to  a  grant  of
    asylum because of his internet activity.  He is therefore not  entitled
    to a grant of humanitarian protection.  The evidence indicates that the
    Appellant would be at risk of treatment that would breach Article 3  of
    the 1950 Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.

I allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

I allow the appeal on human rights grounds in relation to Article 3  of  the
1950 Convention.

Anonymity

I make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 21st May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

It appears that no fee has been paid or is payable and  therefore  there  is
no fee award.  If a fee has been paid or is payable, I would not make a  fee
award, as the appeal has been allowed because of evidence considered by  the
Tribunal that was not before the initial decision maker.


Signed   Date 21st May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
