
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09246/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4 May 2016                                 |On 6 May 2016                |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 S K GOYTOM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms A Speirs, of Katani & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant identifies herself as a citizen of Eritrea,  born  on  19
    August 1988.  She says that she left Eritrea in 1990 with  her  parents
    and went to Ethiopia, leaving there in November 2014  and  arriving  in
    the UK on 3 January 2015, when she sought asylum.

 2. The respondent refused that claim by a decision dated 15 June 2015.

 3. Based on the appellant's complete lack of knowledge  of  Tigrinya,  the
    language of her claimed ethnicity and the  most  widely  used  national
    language of Eritrea, and in absence of any  documentary  evidence,  the
    respondent declined to accept that  the  appellant  is  Eritrean.   The
    respondent considered that she is a national of Ethiopia.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  D'Ambrosio
    dismissed her appeal for reasons explained in his decision  promulgated
    on 22 December 2015.

 5. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal on the following grounds:

      i) At  paragraph  57  the  judge  outlines  the  appellant's  evidence
         regarding  her  education  ...  the  judge  has  not   taken   into
         consideration the appellant's evidence at paragraphs 1  and  13  of
         her witness statement that she attended school in Eritrea until she
         was 12 years old and had to repeat some years  of  school  ...  the
         statement by the judge at paragraph 57, "Therefore  I  believe  and
         find that  she  has  changed  the  information  about  her  earlier
         schooling in Ethiopia because it conflicted with her claim that she
         had not gone there until she was 12 years old; a claim  which  (she
         hoped) would enable her to deny that she is a citizen of  Ethiopia"
         which has clearly damaged the appellant's credibility is unfounded.
          The judge erred in law by acting unfairly  and  not  allowing  the
         appellant the opportunity to comment on those points.

     ii) At  paragraph  59  the  judge  made  findings  in  respect  of  the
         appellant's knowledge of Eritrea.  The judge said,  "She  had  more
         than enough time to obtain answers  for  them  and  for  any  other
         reasonably  foreseeable  questions"  and   went   on   to   outline
         information available from various sources.  The judge erred in law
         by failing to award the appellant  the  benefit  of  the  doubt  in
         accordance with the low standard of proof in asylum cases.

    iii) At paragraph 60 the judge stated that  the  appellant  should  have
         obtained official documents proving her  Eritrean  nationality  ...
         this was not put to the appellant during the hearing and  therefore
         she was not given the opportunity to explain ... the  judge  stated
         "that seriously affects the appellant's credibility" ... the  judge
         erred in law by acting unfairly and not allowing the appellant  the
         opportunity to comment on these points.

     iv) At paragraph 62 the judge highlights the fact  that  the  appellant
         did not seek to obtain evidence  from  Aster  and  "...  failed  to
         provide any reasonable explanation for  the  absence  of  any  such
         evidence.   That  seriously  adversely  affects   the   appellant's
         credibility."  Again ... this point was not put  to  the  appellant
         during the hearing ... the judge has failed to  take  into  account
         ... that corroboration is not  required  in  asylum  appeals.   The
         judge erred  in  law  by  acting  unfairly  and  not  allowing  the
         appellant the opportunity to comment on these points.

      v) Reference is made to paragraph 64  of  the  determination  ...  the
         judge failed to take into  account  paragraph  16  of  the  refusal
         letter and the appellant's response at paragraph 16 of her  witness
         statement.  The judge outlines that "it is hardly surprising if for
         no other  reason  than  that  the  information  which  that  letter
         provided  about  the  appellant  was  such  that  it  would  hardly
         encourage the Embassy to investigate whether it should  agree  that
         the appellant should be confirmed  to  be  an  Ethiopian  citizen."
         Reference is made to paragraph 105 of ST Ethiopia  CG  [2011]  UKUT
         00252 which confirms the steps to be taken by  a  person  asserting
         deprivation or denial of Ethiopian nationality  ...  the  appellant
         followed such steps as outlined at item 5 of the appellant's  first
         inventory [a letter from her solicitors to the Ethiopian Embassy].

 6. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response which includes the following:

        4. ... The grounds ... are no more than an argument  with  findings
           made by the judge ... it is clear from the refusal letter,  page
           10, that the respondent did not believe, for the reasons  given,
           that this appellant is Eritrean as claimed.

        5. The appellant was on notice from 15 June  2015  and  ...  had  6
           months before the hearing  to  produce  any  evidence  that  she
           thought would address this issue, which she failed to do.

        6. ... The judge has given clear reasons for rejecting the claim of
           the appellant to be an Eritrean citizen ... it may be that  some
           of the reasons given by the judge had not  been  put  in  cross-
           examination but those reasons are  peripheral  and  only  go  to
           amplify the main reasons set out in the refusal letter and  that
           were put to the appellant at the hearing.

      8.    The grounds argue that the appellant should have been given  the
           benefit of the doubt ... [KS (Benefit of the doubt) [2014]  UKUT
           552 is quoted, including the proposition that the benefit of the
           doubt adds nothing of substance to a lower standard of proof].

      9.    ... The judge has considered the evidence in line with [KS]  ...
           The appellant is a 27 year  old  healthy  woman  who  has  moved
           through numerous safe countries choosing the UK to be the  place
           where she claimed asylum ... there is nothing  in  her  evidence
           that shows she should be afforded the benefit of the doubt  that
           might be afforded a minor or someone with  medical  issues  that
           showed that she may be a vulnerable person.

 7. The submissions by Ms  Speirs  generally  followed  the  lines  of  the
    grounds.  On the points said not to have been put to the appellant, she
    accepted that it  was  not  known  what  answers  or  explanations  the
    appellant might have offered.  She has made no application to introduce
    further evidence.  However,  the  absence  of  a  fair  opportunity  to
    respond was the essential thrust of the grounds.  As to the appellant's
    knowledge of Eritrea, it was not reasonable to assume  that  she  would
    know what questions she might be asked, and she had answered 11 out  of
    15 correctly.  The judge did not  appear  to  have  given  this  matter
    negative significance, but he ought to  have  found  it  to  have  been
    positively in the appellant's favour,  and  had  in  effect  imposed  a
    higher burden of proof than the law required.  The judge had  gone  too
    far in relying on matters which are not in the refusal letter  and  had
    not been put to the appellant.  The appellant was  criticised  for  not
    having sought any evidence from an individual named as Aster,  but  her
    evidence would have been given minimal weight anyway.  The letter  sent
    to the Ethiopian Embassy was exactly as suggested by  country  guidance
    case law.  It made little sense for the judge to find that this  "would
    hardly encourage" the Embassy to  reply.   It  was  accepted  that  the
    decision contained other reasons which had not been criticised, but the
    final submission for the appellant was that there were several  reasons
    which were flawed, and the decision as a whole was undermined.

 8. Mrs Saddiq submitted  that  the  determination  contained  no  material
    errors, and that the analysis by the judge was  logical,  both  on  the
    points challenged and on points which had gone without challenge.   The
    appellant had been asked in cross-examination about trying to obtain an
    identify  card  and  about  her  lack  of  ability  to  speak  Tigrinya
    [representatives compared their record of  proceedings  and  agreed  on
    this point].  It was a regular part of disputed  nationality  cases  to
    test knowledge of the country.  While that had to  be  approached  with
    caution, the judge had  simply  found  this  issue  to  be  neutral,  a
    conclusion which was plainly open to him.  He had explained why he gave
    it no particular weight in favour of the appellant.  The appellant  had
    been asked about  the  absence  of  any  documents  from  Eritrea,  and
    confirmed that what she produced  was  all  she  had.   The  judge  was
    entitled to observe that if her account were true  she  ought  to  have
    been able  to  produce  further  evidence.   Those  were  sensible  and
    properly explained conclusions.  There was no element  of  surprise  on
    the central issue of the  appellant's  national  origins  and  personal
    history.  The judge had not fallen into any error about there being  no
    legal requirement for corroboration, having correctly directed  himself
    at paragraph 51.  The absence of a response from the Ethiopian  Embassy
    was another point taken not as adverse to the appellant but as neutral.
     The determination as a whole was fully reasoned and should stand.

 9. Ms Speirs in response submitted that at  paragraph  64  the  judge  did
    appear to find the letter to the Embassy and the absence of a reply  to
    be a negative rather than a neutral factor.  The appellant  could  have
    done no more.  The appellant had said in written submissions  (provided
    after  the  hearing,  as  directed  by  the  judge)   that   in   those
    circumstances the burden of proof  had  passed  to  the  respondent,  a
    submission with which the judge failed  to  deal.   She  accepted  that
    there is no ground of appeal to the Upper Tribunal raising that  point.



10. I reserved my decision.

11. The appellant's grounds are much of one pattern and in the main can  be
    answered collectively.

12. The appellant was generally on clear notice of  the  case  she  had  to
    meet.  There are no points identified in  the  grounds  which  unfairly
    took her by surprise.

13. In any event, the appellant has not hinted at any  further  explanation
    she might have provided.  Without offering to do so,  she  cannot  show
    that she has suffered any prejudice.

14. The judge gave a number of good reasons for declining  to  accept  that
    the appellant is  a  generally  credible  witness  or  is  an  Eritrean
    national.  To most of these reasons, no challenge has been made.  It is
    a particularly strong point that if she  was  brought  up  by  Tigrinya
    speaking parents in Eritrea until the age of 12 and lived with at least
    one Tigrinya speaker thereafter, as she says, she would  remain  fluent
    in Tigrinya.

15. Certain points about which the  appellant  makes  complaint  have  been
    treated by the judge as no more than neutral.   He  sensibly  explained
    why her knowledge of Eritrea did not advance  matters  on  her  behalf.
    His comment about the absence of a response  from  the  Embassy  is  at
    first sight rather negative, but it is in fact perhaps  not  surprising
    that the Embassy has made no reply. In any event, I do  not  read  into
    the judge's  decision  that  he  treated  this  as  going  against  the
    appellant.

16. There was nothing wrong with the judge attaching negative  significance
    to the absence of evidence  from  Aster.   Nor  do  I  agree  with  the
    submission that this is  evidence  which  would  inevitably  have  been
    discounted.  The appellant says this person sheltered her for  about  2
    years, arranged and paid for an agent  to  take  her  to  the  UK,  and
    continues to look after the her child in Ethiopia.  If her  account  is
    true the appellant must have been anxious in the  extreme  to  maintain
    contact with and obtain information from Aster, and must feel very much
    in her debt.  As the judge pointed out, there  is  no  reason  why  she
    might not have provided "a sworn Affidavit with proof of  her  identity
    such as passport or ID" (paragraph 62).

17. There is no doctrine of the benefit of the doubt which  ought  to  have
    been applied so as to enhance the appellant's credibility.

18. In short, the appellant had a full and  fair  opportunity  to  put  her
    case, and has shown no legal error in the judge's thorough reasons  for
    rejecting it.

19. The appellant left it too late to make an argument about the burden  of
    proof, but the outcome would plainly have been the same; this was not a
    finely balanced case.

20. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

21. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            5 May 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




