

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09950/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 May 2014                                |On 25 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Grubb instructed by Hoole & Co Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

   2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of  the
      First-tier Tribunal (Judge Y J Jones) allowing SG's appeal against the
      Secretary of State's decision taken on 18  October  2013  refusing  to
      grant SG further leave to remain and to make a removal decision  under
      s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 on the  basis
      that SG was not entitled to asylum or humanitarian protection.   Judge
      Y J Jones found that SG was entitled to asylum and his  removal  would
      breach Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR  as  there  was  a  real  risk  of
      persecution or serious ill treatment if he returned to Turkey  because
      of his political activities for the BDP and because  of  his  family's
      association with the PKK.

   3. For convenience, I  will  hereafter  refer  to  the  parties  as  they
      appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

   4. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey who was born on 18  August  1994.
      He left Turkey on 17 November  2010  and  arrived  in  the  UK  on  27
      November 2010 when  he  claimed  asylum.   On  20  January  2011,  the
      Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's  asylum  claim.    The
      appellant appealed.  In a determination dated  10  March  2011,  Judge
      Jacobs-Jones  dismissed  the  appellant's   appeal   on   asylum   and
      humanitarian protection ground and under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.
       Judge Jacobs-Jones did not accept the appellant's account that he had
      been arrested and detained as a result of campaigning carried  out  on
      behalf of the BDP.  He did not accept that the appellant would  be  at
      risk on the basis of any family connection  with  the  PKK.   However,
      Judge Jacobs-Jones allowed the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

   5. As a result, on 14 March 2011, the appellant was granted discretionary
      leave to remain until 7 April 2012. On 4 April 2012,  he  applied  for
      further leave to remain.  That application was refused on  18  October
      2013 and is the subject of this appeal.  In her refusal letter  of  18
      October 2013, the Secretary of State concluded  that  the  appellant's
      asylum claim had already not been accepted and following the  case  of
      Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702, the appellant  had  not  submitted  any
      further evidence that merited a  different  view  of  the  facts.   In
      addition, the Secretary of State, on the basis  that  the  appellant's
      claim was not accepted, concluded that he would not be at risk on  the
      basis of his Kurdish ethnicity.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

   6. The appellant appealed again  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   At  the
      hearing before Judge Y J Jones on 13 February 2014, the appellant gave
      oral evidence and submitted  a  number  of  additional  documents  and
      evidence which he relied upon to substantiate his claim  that  he  was
      arrested by the Turkish authorities on  23  April  2010  when  he  was
      distributing leaflets on  behalf  of  the  BDP  and  that  during  his
      detention he was questioned for  two  days  and  beaten  before  being
      released without conditions. Then, on 1 November 2010, whilst  he  was
      gathering signatures for a petition asking for Kurdish lessons  to  be
      included in the school curriculum, the appellant claims  that  he  was
      arrested by three officers; taken to the security  headquarters  where
      he was held in solitary confinement for three days.  During that  time
      he was questioned and beaten and on the last day, he  claims  that  he
      was taken to the top of the building and officers threatened to  throw
      him off the building unless he became an informer.  He  says  that  he
      was forced to sign a document and was told to report on the first  day
      of every month.  The appellant's claim is that he is at risk on return
      to Turkey primarily because of his links with the BDP and because  his
      family was involved in politics, some having links with the PKK.

   7. Before Judge Y J Jones, the appellant  relied  upon  a  'family  tree'
      which set out a number of relatives on the father's side of his family
      which included a number  who  had  been  granted  asylum  in  European
      countries.  The appellant had previously relied on the fact  that  two
      of his maternal uncles were recognised as refugees  in  the  UK.   The
      paternal family members included an uncle who had been granted  asylum
      in France in August 2013; a first cousin who  was  granted  asylum  in
      Austria; and two cousins who were granted asylum in Italy in September
      2010.

   8. The appellant claimed that none of these relatives were members of the
      PKK although  they  were  sympathetic  to  Kurdish  political  parties
      including the BDP.  The appellant claimed  that  his  relatives  were,
      however, suspected to have links with the PKK and that was  the  basis
      of their respective grants of asylum in the  UK,  Italy,  Austria  and
      France.

   9. In addition, the  appellant  relied  upon  an  expert  medical  report
      prepared by Dr Michael Nelki.  That report  dealt  with  a  number  of
      scars and lesions  on  the  appellant's  body.   In  addition,  having
      assessed  the  appellant's  symptoms  and  carried   out   a   CORE-OM
      questionnaire, concluded that those symptoms were indicative  of  PTSD
      and the score was typical of a severe level of psychological distress.



  10. Whilst Dr Nelki did not consider that all the scars and  lesions  were
      attributable to the claimed ill treatment by the appellant during  his
      two periods of detention, Dr Nelki concluded that the overall  pattern
      of the appellant's physical and mental scars  were  highly  consistent
      with the history he had given.

  11. Having set out the findings of Judge Jacobs-Jones in  the  appellant's
      first appeal, Judge Y J Jones concluded,  on  the  basis  of  the  new
      evidence submitted by the appellant, that she accepted his account  to
      be credible, that he had suffered ill treatment in the past and  that,
      as a consequence, there was a real risk that if he returned to  Turkey
      because of his involvement with the BDP  and  his  family's  perceived
      connections with separatist organisations such as  the  PKK  he  would
      also  be  at  risk.   Consequently,  Judge  Y  J  Jones  allowed   the
      appellant's appeal on asylum grounds and under Articles 2 and 3 of the
      ECHR.





Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

  12. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal.  She did so on two grounds.  First, Judge Y J Jones had been
      wrong to reach a positive credibility  finding  contrary  to  that  of
      Judge Jacobs-Jones in the appellant's earlier appeal on the  basis  of
      the new evidence of the appellant's family tree and Dr Nelki's  expert
      report.  Judge Y J Jones had failed properly to follow the guidance in
      Devaseelan in treating the first Immigration  Judge's  findings  as  a
      starting point and had failed to treat  the  new  evidence  with  "the
      greatest  circumspection".   Secondly,  even  if  the  appellant  were
      credible, the Judge had failed to give consideration to the  issue  of
      "sufficiency of protection" set  out  in  the  refusal  letter  of  18
      October 2013.

  13. On 17 March 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge V A Osborne)  granted
      the Secretary of State permission to appeal on both grounds.

  14. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

  15. Mr Richards relied upon the grounds of appeal and placed emphasis upon
      the Devaseelan point.  He submitted that it was not clear why the  new
      documents relating to the appellant's family tree and grant of refugee
      status to his relatives added anything to the appellant's claim  given
      that Judge Jacobs-Jones was aware that the appellant's maternal uncles
      had both been granted asylum in the UK.  There was no evidence of  why
      the other relatives had been granted  asylum  in  Italy,  Austria  and
      France.  As regards Dr Nelki's evidence, Mr  Richards  submitted  that
      that evidence was far from conclusive in its findings and that Judge Y
      J  Jones  had  failed  to  approach  that  evidence  in  the  required
      circumspection set out in Devaseelan given the clear findings in Judge
      Jacobs-Jones' determination.

  16. Although initially Mr Richards placed reliance upon the second ground,
      he did so latterly in his submission and with less emphasis given that
      the refusal letter refers to "sufficiency of protection" at paras  36-
      45 on the basis that the  appellant's  account  is  not  credible  and
      whether he could succeed merely on the basis of his Kurdish ethnicity.



  17. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Grubb in her skeleton argument and oral
      submissions argued that Judge Y J Jones was entitled to rely  upon  Dr
      Nelki's report which was clear and persuasive.  She also  relied  upon
      his finding that the appellant suffered from PTSD which was consistent
      with his claimed ill treatment and also that it was a matter that  the
      Judge was entitled to  take  into  account  in  paras  38  and  39  in
      concluding that an  inconsistency  in  the  appellant's  evidence  was
      explicable on the basis of his "mental state".  She accepted  that  Dr
      Nelki's report was not conclusive in relation to the issue of  whether
      the appellant had been subject  to  torture  but  the  appellant,  she
      submitted, was only required to establish that on  a  lower  standard.
      The Judge was entitled to accept Dr Nelki's evidence and to therefore,
      reach a different conclusion from that of Judge  Jacobs-Jones  in  the
      appellant's first appeal.

  18. In relation to the evidence concerning the appellant's family tree and
      the grant of asylum to his  paternal  relatives,  she  submitted  that
      Judge Jacobs-Jones at paras 21-24 of his determination had  looked  at
      the evidence concerning the appellant's maternal  family  members  and
      had not considered whether, although they  had  connections  with  the
      PKK, his father's family members also had a connection which would put
      the appellant at risk as also being perceived  as  having  connections
      with the PKK.

Discussion

  19. In her determination, Judge Y J Jones correctly  directed  herself  in
      accordance with Devaseelan that the findings of Judge Jacobs-Jones  in
      the appellant's earlier appeal were the  "starting  point"  (see  para
      33).  That is in accordance with the guideline set out in  [34(1)]  of
      Devaseelan.  There it is said that:

           "The first Adjudicator's  determination  should  always  be  the
           starting-point.  It  is  the  authoritative  assessment  of  the
           appellant's status at the time that it was made.   In  principle
           issues   such   as   whether   the   appellant   was    properly
           representative, or whether he gave evidence, are  irrelevant  to
           this."

  20. At [34(2)], the IAT acknowledged that facts arising  since  the  first
      determination can always be taken into account at a second hearing.

  21. At [40], the IAT dealt with matters that "could have been  before  the
      first Adjudicator but were not".  The IAT said this:

           "(4)  Facts personal to the Appellant that were not  brought  to
                 the attention of the first Adjudicator, although they  were
                 relevant to the issues before him, should be treated by the
                 second Adjudicator with the  greatest  circumspection.   An
                 Appellant who seeks, in a  later  appeal,  to  add  to  the
                 available facts in an effort to obtain  a  more  favourable
                 outcome is properly regarded with suspicion from the  point
                 of  view  of  credibility.   (Although  considerations   of
                 credibility  will  not  be  relevant  in  cases  where  the
                 existence of the additional fact is  beyond  dispute.)   It
                 must also be borne in mind  that  the  first  Adjudicator's
                 determination was made at  a  time  closer  to  the  events
                 alleged and in  terms  of  both  fact-finding  and  general
                 credibility assessment would tend to  have  the  advantage.
                 For this reason, the adduction of  such  facts  should  not
                 usually lead to  any  reconsideration  of  the  conclusions
                 reached by the first Adjudicator."

  22. At [40(5)] the IAT noted that:

           (5)   Evidence of other facts - for example country  evidence  -
                 may not suffer from the same concerns  as  to  credibility,
                 but should be treated with caution.

  23. Then at [41] the IAT said this:

           (6)   If before the second Adjudicator the Appellant  relies  on
                 facts that are not materially different from those  put  to
                 the first Adjudicator, and proposes to support the claim by
                 what is in essence the same evidence as that  available  to
                 the Appellant at that time, the second  Adjudicator  should
                 regard the issues as settled  by  the  first  Adjudicator's
                 determination and make  his  findings  in  line  with  that
                 determination rather than allowing the  matter  to  be  re-
                 litigated.  We draw  attention  to  the  phrase  'the  same
                 evidence as that available to the Appellant' at the time of
                 the first determination.  We have chosen  this  phrase  not
                 only in order to accommodate guidelines (4) and (5)  above,
                 but also because, in respect of evidence that was available
                 to the Appellant, he must be taken to have made his choices
                 about how it should be presented.  An Appellant  cannot  be
                 expected to present evidence of which he has no  knowledge:
                 but if (for example) he chooses not to give  oral  evidence
                 in his first appeal, that does not mean that the issues  or
                 the available evidence in the second  appeal  are  rendered
                 any different by his proposal to give oral evidence (of the
                 same facts) on this occasion."

  24. At [41(7)], the IAT recognised that the  force  of  its  reasoning  in
      guidelines (4) and (6) was greatly reduced if  there  was  "some  very
      good reason" why the appellant  failed  to  adduce  relevant  evidence
      before the first Judge.  However, the IAT offered the view  that  this
      would be "rare".

  25. As the Devaseelan guidelines recognise, evidence adduced at  a  second
      appeal hearing which was potentially available at an  earlier  hearing
      but was not produced, should be treated with caution indeed  with  the
      "greatest circumspection".  Its  late  production  may  well  lead  to
      suspicions about its credibility.  However  the  IAT  recognised  that
      some evidence such  as  country  evidence,  may  not  raise  the  same
      concerns about its credibility simply because it was not  produced  at
      the earlier hearing.

  26. That latter category, in my judgement,  contemplates  evidence  where,
      because of its source, it is less  likely  that  its  late  production
      engages a concern that it is lacking in credibility  and,  in  effect,
      has now been produced simply to bolster an otherwise weak  claim.   In
      my judgement, independent  expert  evidence  falls  into  this  latter
      category.  Like  objective  background  evidence,  it  is  essentially
      independent of the appellant.  That, of course, is based upon the fact
      that  the  report  is  properly  prepared,  in  accordance  with   the
      impartiality requirements of a Court or  Tribunal  by  an  expert  who
      understands his or her role as an independent  expert.   The  evidence
      must be assessed in the usual way in the context of all  the  evidence
      of the case.

  27. There is no doubt, in my  view,  that  Dr  Nelki's  report  met  these
      essential characteristics.  It is a balanced report.  It is  also  the
      case that Dr  Nelki's  report  was  not  directly  challenged  by  the
      Presenting Officer at  the  hearing  before  Judge  Y  J  Jones.   The
      challenge to its credence made in the grounds of appeal to  the  Upper
      Tribunal cannot assist the Secretary of State to establish  any  error
      of law by the Judge in relying upon the report.  Indeed, in  his  oral
      submissions Mr Richards (apart from relying on the  grounds of appeal)
      did not seek to undermine Dr Nelki's  conclusions  but  rather  argued
      that they were far from conclusive and Judge Y J Jones had  failed  to
      apply sufficient circumspection, following Devaseelan, in relying upon
      Dr Nelki's conclusions.  Judge Y J Jones dealt with  Dr Nelki's report
      at paragraphs 22-30 of her determination as follows:

           "22.  I have been provided with a medical report by  Dr  Michael
                 Nelki.  He produces a CV at Appendix A of  his  report  and
                 states that his  main  experience  has  been  35  years  in
                 general practice but also eighteen years in refugee  health
                 and medico legal report writing.  He has completed over 400
                 medico legal reports for refugees and asylum  seekers.   He
                 has attended regular and frequent postgraduate training  in
                 general practice  and  study  days  and  periodic  clinical
                 meetings at the Medical Foundation  and  the  Helen  Bamber
                 Foundation.   These  have  included  regular   updates   on
                 psychiatric matters.  He has been  appraised  and  attended
                 peer group meetings locally.

             23. Dr Nelki examined the appellant on  20  December  2013  and
                 listed his findings at paragraphs 29 to 31.  Dr Nelki found
                 six scars and three lesions.  Two lesions found on his face
                 were typical adolescent acne and the third  lesion  was  an
                 area of well demarcated pallor at the back of his neck.  Dr
                 Nelki was unable to say whether it  was  a  birth  mark  or
                 traumatic in origin.

             24.  His  findings  in  respect  of  the  scars  are  found  at
                 paragraphs 33 to 42.  There was a small faint scar  to  the
                 right side of his head, a small faint area of  scarring  to
                 the left side of his forehead, a small faint linear scar to
                 the left of his forehead, a two centimetre linear  scar  to
                 the left of his forehead, a scar to his right  knee  and  a
                 short linear scar in the skin crease of the  left  side  of
                 his neck.  Dr Nelki considered that these scars were highly
                 consistent with a hard blow or heavy  fall  on  to  a  hard
                 surface; however the knee scar might result from any  fall,
                 accidental or deliberate.

             25. The scars are mainly on the right  side  of  his  head  but
                 there are also two on the left side of his head  and  neck.
                 To sustain such scars he would have had  to  have  suffered
                 several different falls on to his head or suffered  several
                 blows on to the head.  In view  of  the  absence  of  other
                 scars, except the knee, accidental cause could be  regarded
                 as less likely.  Dr  Nelki  considered  all  the  scars  as
                 "mature" indicating that he sustained them more than six to
                 twelve months ago.

             26. Dr Nelki examined the appellant's soles of his  feet  which
                 were normal.  He added that it is rare to find any clinical
                 (observable) abnormalities after beatings on the  soles  of
                 the feet (Falaka).  Normal  findings  do  not  exclude  the
                 possibility of Falaka having occurred.

             27.  Dr  Nelki  also  found  symptoms  of  a  severe  level  of
                 depression as they interfere significantly with  his  daily
                 life.   The  appellant  also  had  a  cluster  of  symptoms
                 indicative of post-traumatic stress disorder  (PTSD)  which
                 results in disturbance in the information processing  which
                 becomes apparent in such symptoms of forgetfulness and loss
                 of concentration.

             28. Dr Nelki undertook a CORE-OM  questionnaire.   It  is  most
                 useful as a measure of progress  over  time  comparing  one
                 score with the next.  However despite  the  limitations  of
                 its single use the appellant showed a score  typical  of  a
                 severe level of psychological distress.   It  confirmed  Dr
                 Nelki's clinical impression of his mental state.

             29. Dr Nelki considered whether the appellant may  be  feigning
                 or exaggerating his history or symptoms, however, he  found
                 nothing  to  suggest  any  exaggeration  or  feigning.   In
                 particular he answered openly, promptly  and  forthrightly,
                 making good eye contact.  His demeanour and  affect  during
                 the interviews fitted  his  history,  giving  Dr  Nelki  no
                 reason to doubt his  account  or  reported  symptoms.   The
                 pattern of symptoms he described also  in  many  ways  fits
                 genuine rather than feigned symptoms.

             30.  Dr  Nelki  concluded  that  the  overall  pattern  of  the
                 appellant's physical and mental scars is highly  consistent
                 with the history given.  Given the total picture of all the
                 scars they constitute reasonable evidence of the trauma  as
                 described."

  28. Having set out Dr Nelki's evidence, Judge Y L  Jones  considered  that
      evidence to be relevant in two respects.  First, at  paras  37-38  she
      dealt with inconsistencies  relied  upon  by  the  respondent  in  the
      appellant's evidence as follows:

           "37.   The  judge  found  that  the  appellant's  evidence   was
                 undermined because of the  discrepancies  in  his  evidence
                 about what he was doing when he was arrested. He also  gave
                 different stories in respect of who made the  leaflets  and
                 at  whose  behest  the  appellant  was   distributing   the
                 leaflets.

           38.   It has been submitted in the skeleton argument  on  behalf
                 of the  appellant  that  the  discrepancies  regarding  the
                 events on 23 April  was  confusion  over  two  explanations
                 provided rather than  there  being  a  discrepancy  in  the
                 evidence.  There was a misunderstanding of the  appellant's
                 evidence rather than a discrepancy in the evidence.  On  23
                 April 2010 he was distributing leaflets and on  1  November
                 2010 he was collecting signatures for a  petition  to  have
                 lessons  in  Kurdish  in  his  school.   I  find  that  the
                 appellant may have made a mistake in his evidence as  given
                 on one occasion but on all the other occasions he has  been
                 consistent in relation to his  activities  and  arrests  in
                 Turkey.  He was 16 when he was interviewed and I find  that
                 he may have made a slight error or have been  misunderstood
                 because of his mental state in respect of  the  discrepancy
                 found by Judge Jacobs-Jones.

  29. At paragraph 39 Judge Y L Jones continued:

           "I am assisted in coming to  the  conclusion  that  this  was  a
           mistake rather than a discrepancy by the medical evidence  given
           by Dr Nelki who confirms that the appellant's scarring is highly
           consistent with a hard blow or heavy fall on to a hard  surface.
           Dr Nelki found several  scars  on  the  appellant's  head  which
           indicated several blows to the head  which  made  an  accidental
           cause less likely.  Dr Nelki also found that  in  December  2013
           the appellant was suffering from depression  and  post-traumatic
           stress disorder and in coming to the latter  conclusion  he  was
           supported by the information gained from the CORE-OM test."

  30. Secondly, at para 40, Judge Y L Jones concluded that Dr Nelki's report
      supported the appellant's claim as follows:

           "I find that  the  evidence  given  by  Dr  Nelki  supports  the
           appellant's claim to have been beaten whilst in custody  on  two
           occasions in Turkey.   Dr  Nelki  is  an  expert  witness.   His
           evidence has not been challenged by the Respondent."

  31. Then at paragraph 41, Judge Y L Jones concluded:

           "Having considered all the evidence I find that the appellant is
           credible and has suffered persecution in the past in Turkey.

33.   In my judgement, Judge Y L Jones was entitled to take into account  Dr
      Nelki's evidence concerning the  appellant's  PTSD  as  new  or  fresh
      evidence that cast further light on the appellant's evidence  and  the
      claimed discrepancies in that evidence.  Further, having  set  out  at
      some length  Dr  Nelki's  evidence  at  paras  22-30,  which  was  not
      challenged by the respondent, that evidence clearly as Judge JY L ones
      found  supported  the  appellant's  account.   It  was  not   evidence
      considered by Judge  Jacobs-Jones  at  the  appellant's  first  appeal
      hearing.   Dr Nelki's expert opinion was, of  course,  independent  of
      the appellant and was entitled to  considerable  weight.   Judge  Y  L
      Jones, as I have already set out,  recognised  that  the  findings  of
      Judge Jacobs-Jones were "the  starting  point"  following  Devaseelan.
      There is nothing in Judge Y L Jones' reasons which  suggest  that  she
      failed to give careful consideration to Dr  Nelki's  evidence  in  the
      light of the fact that it had not been presented at the earlier appeal
      hearing.  Nothing in her determination suggests  that  she  failed  to
      follow the guidance in Devaseelen in taking Dr Nelki's  evidence  into
      account in assessing the appellant's credibility including aspects  of
      the appellant's evidence which had  troubled  Judge  Jacobs-Jones  but
      which could  be  explained  in  the  light  of  the  medical  evidence
      concerning the appellant's mental health.

  34. In addition, Judge Y L Jones took into account the evidence concerning
      the refugee status of a number of the appellant's  paternal  relations
      in Austria, Italy and France.  The Judge set this evidence out at para
      13(h)-(k).  At para 35-36  Judge  Y  L  Jones  referred  to  this  new
      evidence as arising  subsequent  to  the  earlier  appeal  hearing  as
      follows:

           "35.  Since the findings made by  Judge  Jacobs-Jones  in  March
                 2011 further evidence has been submitted on behalf  of  the
                 appellant.  In particular documents confirming that certain
                 relatives on both his mother's and father's side have  been
                 granted asylum in the UK, Italy,  Austria  and  France  for
                 suspected links  with  the  PKK  because  of  their  family
                 background.

           36.   The appellant was criticised by the Immigration Judge  for
                 not producing documents in support of his claim and has now
                 produced family trees and document granting refugee  status
                 to the relatives mentioned above."

  35. At para 41 Judge Y L Jones returned to this new evidence as follows:

           I find that he would be at real risk on return to Turkey because
           of his family  connections  with  separatist  organisations  and
           having failed to report on 1 December 2011 as requested that  he
           will be known to the authorities in Turkey.  He has given  clear
           evidence that he has always supported Kurdish political parties,
           that he was involved in the BDP,  a  legal  political  party  in
           Turkey.  I find that his involvement in  political  activity  in
           Turkey was not low level and he was considered as  a  separatist
           because he was arrested on two occasions and beaten.  It was not
           disputed by the respondent that the appellant's mother's side of
           the family had known links with the PKK and there is now further
           evidence in relation to the paternal side of  the  family  which
           supports the appellant's contention that  the  authorities  were
           interested in him as the result of the political profile of  his
           family.  He was also suspected of having direct links  with  the
           PKK.  He has  been  detained  twice  and  the  medical  evidence
           supports the appellant's claims in respect of his  treatment  in
           detention.  The appellant has also been active  in  the  Kurdish
           community in the UK and the medical evidence in respect  of  the
           appellant's injuries is unchallenged."

  36. Then at para 34 taking into account that Judge Jacobs-Jones'  findings
      had been made in the "absence of medical and corroborative  evidence",
      Judge Y L Jones reached her finding that she accepted the  appellant's
      account of past persecution and that there was a  real  risk  that  on
      return he would suffer persecution as a result of his  own  activities
      for the BDP and his family links to the PKK.

  37. At the previous appeal  hearing,  only  the  evidence  concerning  the
      maternal relatives of the appellant was  presented  to  Judge  Jacobs-
      Jones.  The family tree and the fact that a number of the  appellant's
      paternal  relatives  had  been  granted  refugee  status  in  European
      countries was not a matter before the Judge in that  earlier  hearing.
      It is worth noting that Judge Jacobs-Jones based, in part, his finding
      that the appellant would not be at risk on the basis that he  did  not
      accept that any perceived association with the PKK in the case of  the
      appellant's mother's relatives would reflect on the appellant as  they
      had lived separately from the  appellant's  mother   (see  summary  in
      Judge Y L Jones' determination at para 34(b)).  In this appeal,  Judge
      Y L Jones had more information concerning the appellant's family.   It
      does not appear that that evidence was challenged  before  the  Judge.
      The Judge was entitled to accept that  a  number  of  the  appellant's
      paternal relatives had been granted refugee  status.   As  Judge  Y  L
      Jones pointed out in para 41 (set out above),  this  further  evidence
      supported the appellant's contention that the Turkish authorities were
      interested in  the  appellant's  family  because  of  their  political
      profile.  It was properly open to the  Judge  to  conclude  that  this
      evidence bolstered the appellant's claim (albeit one rejected  in  the
      first appeal hearing) that  his  family's  perceived  connection  with
      organisations such as the PKK and that there was a real risk that  the
      appellant would likewise be perceived on return.

  38. Standing back, this was an appeal where Judge Y L Jones had additional
      evidence not considered  at  the  appellant's  earlier  appeal.   That
      evidence was uncontested before the  Judge  both  as  to  the  refugee
      status of his paternal relatives and the expert opinion  of  Dr  Nelki
      which was supportive of central aspects of the  appellant's  claim  to
      have been ill treated whilst in detention.

  39. Nothing in Devaseelan prevented Judge Y L Jones on the basis  of  this
      evidence reaching factual conclusions which were different from  those
      reached in the first appeal.  Judge Y L Jones was well  aware  of  the
      need to take the earlier findings as her "starting point" and she gave
      careful consideration  to  this  uncontested  new  evidence.   It  was
      entirely supportive of the appellant's claim and I am  satisfied  that
      Judge Y L Jones was entitled, having taken it into account,  to  reach
      the positive findings in the appellant's favour that she made.

  40. Consequently, for these reasons I reject  the  principal  ground  upon
      which Mr Richards sought to challenge Judge Y L Jones' decision.

  41. As regards the second ground, as I have said Mr Richards did not press
      that before me.  He was entirely  right  not  to  do  so.   Given  the
      Judge's factual findings about the appellant's  past  persecution  and
      real risk of (through his family) being perceived as involved with the
      PKK, the Judge's finding that the appellant  had  established  a  real
      risk of persecution for a convention reason  was  entirely  consistent
      with the country guidance in IK (Returnees - Records - ISA) Turkey  CG
      [2004] UKIAT based  upon  the  risk  factors  set  out  in  the  IAT's
      determination.  The grounds' reference to the Judge  failing  to  take
      into account the issue of "sufficiency of protection" are set  out  in
      the refusal letter dated 18 October 2013 is without merit.   That  can
      only be a reference to paras 36-45 in which  the  Secretary  of  State
      reached that conclusion on the basis that "it was  not  accepted  that
      [the appellant] was arrested and tortured as  [he]  had  claimed"  and
      that the only risk factor would therefore  be  his  Kurdish  ethnicity
      which would not place him at real risk of persecution or  serious  ill
      treatment.  Given Judge Y  L  Jones'  findings,  this  aspect  of  the
      appellant's claim fell away.  She found  that  he  would  be  at  risk
      because of his actual or perceived political associations.  Given that
      this risk was at the hands of the Turkish state itself,  no  issue  of
      sufficiency of protection could arise.

Decision

  42. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the
      appellant's appeal on asylum grounds and under Articles 2 and 3 of the
      ECHR did not involve the making of an error  of  law.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal's decision stands.

  43. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is, accordingly,
      dismissed.




                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date: 16.06.2014




















