
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09721/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 21st April 2016                    |On 13th July 2016                     |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge DEANS

                                   Between

                                    [J Z]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Anzani of Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal A M S Green dismissing an appeal on asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds.

 2. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1989 and is a national of Pakistan.   She
    entered the UK in February 2014 as a  student  and  claimed  asylum  in
    February 2015.  The claim was made on the basis that she  has  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution because of her membership of  a  particular
    social group, namely women in Pakistan.

 3. It was  accepted  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  that  women  form  a
    particular social group in Pakistan for  the  purpose  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.  The Respondent accepted  also  that  the  Appellant  is  a
    national from Pakistan and that she was married to a man called [GA].

 4. According to  the  Appellant  she  is  from  a  traditional  family  in
    Pakistan.  She was under pressure from her family from an early age  to
    marry a cousin.  This led her to attempt suicide in July 2010.  In  the
    same year she met [GA] and in  2011  they  started  a  relationship  in
    secret.  In 2012 the Appellant's father asked her to marry her sister's
    brother-in-law but the Appellant refused.   The  Appellant  self-harmed
    again and was in hospital for three days.

 5. In September 2013 the Appellant ran away with  [GA]  to  Lahore.   They
    applied for student visas for the UK, both of which were granted.  They
    left Pakistan in February 2014 and initially lived in London, where the
    Appellant enrolled as a student.  A week after arriving in the UK, [GA]
    visited his sister in Dewsbury.  On his return he  told  the  Appellant
    that his family would not accept her.  In March 2014 he went to see his
    sister again and did not return.  The Appellant has not seen him  since
    and had spoken to him only once, three months after he left.

 6. In September 2014 the Appellant's father contacted her  via  Skype  and
    threatened to kill her if she returned to Pakistan.  This prompted  the
    Appellant to  claim  asylum.   She  has  subsequently  entered  into  a
    relationship with another man who is a Sri Lankan national  in  the  UK
    with a student visa.  The Appellant has a sister in  the  UK,  who  has
    disowned her because of her relationship with her present partner.

 7. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  found  the  Appellant's  evidence
    generally coherent and plausible.  She had not claimed  asylum  at  the
    earliest opportunity but the judge accepted her explanation for  delay.
    The judge accepted that her evidence was generally credible.  The judge
    accepted that the Appellant had been threatened by her father  and  her
    uncle and that she had been disowned  by  her  father  because  of  her
    marriage to [GA].  The judge accepted that the Appellant  is  separated
    from her husband and in a new relationship.  If she returns to Pakistan
    she would do so as a lone woman.  As she had  been  threatened  by  her
    father and her uncle she faced the risk of persecution or serious  harm
    in her home area and she could not return there.

 8. The judge considered whether the Appellant could safely go elsewhere in
    Pakistan.  The judge had regard  to  the  case  of  SM  (lone  women  -
    ostracism) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 0067.  This indicated that there  might
    be the option of  internal  relocation  to  one  of  Pakistan's  larger
    cities.  The judge noted  that  the  Appellant  had  already  lived  in
    Lahore, albeit with her husband, without incident or threats  from  her
    family.  This suggested that internal relocation to Lahore was possible
    although she was no longer with her husband and would not  be  able  to
    access support from family members or a male guardian in the  place  of
    relocation.  Her family had disowned  her  and  she  had  not  been  in
    contact with them since  September  2014.   This  might  make  it  more
    difficult for her to relocate internally.  She might not be able to use
    a State domestic violence shelter because these operated on  the  basis
    of reconciling family with their family networks  and  places  were  in
    short  supply.   There  appeared  to  be  little  prospect  of   family
    reconciliation.  There were, however, factors  that  favoured  internal
    relocation.  The Appellant was 26 years old and well-educated.  Her age
    and  education  would  help  her  to  find  work  to  support  herself,
    suggesting it would not be unduly harsh to relocate.  She did not  have
    children.  She might be able  to  avail  herself  of  a  privately  run
    shelter, which would be a more flexible  arrangement  and  provide  her
    with longer term support.   There  was  nothing  to  suggest  that  her
    partner could not visit her in Pakistan.  He would be able  to  protect
    her during such visits.  In  the  final  analysis  the  balance  tipped
    marginally in favour of the Appellant relocating to a city in Pakistan.

 9. The judge went on to consider the risk of suicide and  found  that  the
    threshold for an Article 3 claim based on the risk of suicide  was  not
    reached by reliance on a single line of a doctor's report.  There  were
    no GP or  hospital  records  from  the  UK  and  the  judge  could  not
    meaningfully assess whether  the  Appellant  suffers  from  any  mental
    illness or was at risk of suicide.

10. The judge also considered the appeal under Article 8 and found that the
    interference in the Appellant's private life was not  disproportionate.
    The judge accepted that the  Appellant  has  a  relationship  with  her
    current partner but  the  couple  were  not  living  together  and  the
    evidence did not allow the judge to find whether it was a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.  The Appellant had established a private  life
    in the UK while her immigration status was precarious.

Application for permission to appeal

11. In the application for permission to appeal  the  judge's  findings  in
    relation  to  internal  relocation  were  challenged.   The  judge  had
    suggested that the Appellant's  current  partner  could  visit  her  in
    Pakistan and protect  the  Appellant  during  such  visits.   This  was
    inconsistent with the finding made under Article  8,  where  the  judge
    questioned  whether  the  relationship  was  genuine  and   subsisting.
    Furthermore,  the  findings  showed  that  the  judge  considered   the
    Appellant to be in need of protection upon return to Pakistan.  It  was
    irrational to suggest that this protection could be adequately provided
    by a boyfriend visiting  Pakistan  occasionally.   The  judge  made  no
    mention of the Appellant's situation when she was not  being  protected
    by her boyfriend.

12. It  was  further  contended  that  although  the  judge  suggested  the
    Appellant might be able to avail herself of a  privately  run  shelter,
    this finding was largely negated by the acceptance that places in  such
    shelters were limited.  No consideration was  given  to  the  situation
    faced by the Appellant if she was unable to  secure  a  place,  or  the
    situation she would face after being required to leave such a centre.

13. It was further contended that although the Appellant has a first degree
    and a Masters degree, her employment in Pakistan prior to coming to the
    UK had been as a receptionist.  In SM the Upper  Tribunal  referred  to
    internal relocation in terms of  whether  a  woman  has  qualifications
    enabling her get well paid employment and pay for  accommodation.   The
    Tribunal also referred to the significant discrimination faced by women
    in employment and the fact that they were frequently paid less than men
    for similar work.   It  is  contended  that  the  judge  did  not  give
    consideration to the level  and  nature  of  employment  likely  to  be
    available for the Appellant, nor the remuneration she would  be  likely
    to receive.  The suggestion that because of her age and education alone
    she  would  be  able  to  relocate  to  Lahore  was   speculative   and
    insufficiently reasoned.  The judge had  erred  in  his  assessment  of
    whether it was unduly harsh for the Appellant  to  internally  relocate
    within Pakistan.

14. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis of whether the  Appellant
    could reasonably be expected to relocate  internally.   The  judge  had
    recognised that the Appellant was  a  person  in  need  of  protection.
    Having made this finding it was arguable that it was not  open  to  the
    judge to find  that  sufficient  protection  might  be  provided  by  a
    boyfriend who would only occasionally be able to visit  the  Appellant,
    particularly as the judge made no finding as to whether  the  Appellant
    would find a shelter but, owing to the limited number of  places,  only
    that she might.

15. The Respondent submitted a rule 24 notice dated 23rd March 2016.   This
    described the decision of the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as
    comprehensive and balanced, finding that there was  a  viable  internal
    flight alternative.  The judge properly directed himself in terms of SM
    and applied the guidance in this  case.   The  judge  reached  findings
    which were open to him on the totality of the evidence,  having  regard
    to  the  Appellant's  circumstances.   The  judge  had  identified  and
    reserved all the material conflicts between the parties and set down in
    clear terms reasons for the findings.

Submissions

16. At the hearing before me Ms Anzani relied on a skeleton argument. There
    was a finding that the Appellant  was  in  need  of  protection  -  the
    question was one of who would provide this protection.   The  Appellant
    was in a relationship with a Sri Lankan national in the UK.  The  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal said this man could visit the  Appellant  in
    Pakistan and provide  protection  for  her  during  these  visits.   An
    obvious question arose as to what would happen to  the  Appellant  when
    the man was not there.  He had no entitlement to  reside  in  Pakistan.
    His visits would be sporadic.  The Appellant was  a  26-year-old  woman
    ostracised by her family and at risk from relatives in  Pakistan.   The
    assessment of risk was further undermined by the judge's  finding  that
    the Appellant's relationship with her boyfriend had not been  shown  to
    be genuine and subsisting.  There was a question of what was reasonable
    in terms of internal relocation.  The judge thought the Appellant's age
    was in favour of her relocating but the  guidance  on  this  was  quite
    clear from SM - the Appellant was not an older female.  The judge  took
    no account of what would happen if the Appellant was unable to  find  a
    place in a shelter or was required to  leave.   This  was  contrary  to
    guidance SM.  Detailed consideration of the facts was required but  the
    judge found at paragraph 24 only that the balance tipped marginally  in
    favour of relocation.  This was on the basis of findings which had  not
    been properly reasoned and the  balancing  exercise  was  flawed.   The
    decision should be re-made.

17. Miss Anzani continued  that  the  only  factos  tending  to  show  that
    relocation would not be unduly harsh was the Appellant's education  but
    notwithstanding her qualifications she was employed as  a  receptionist
    before she left Pakistan.  She had never had  an  independent  life  in
    Pakistan but had lived with  her  family  or  with  her  husband.   The
    decision in SM pointed to it not being unduly harsh  for  well-educated
    women to live on their own in larger cities, where  they  might  obtain
    well paid employment.  This did not apply to this  Appellant,  who  was
    relatively young and had a social stigma through  being  ostracised  by
    her family  and  abandoned  by  her  husband.  She  would  be  severely
    prejudiced by returning to Pakistan, to live without a male protector.

18. For the Respondent, Mr Wilding submitted that there was no error of law
    in the  judge's  treatment  of  internal  relocation.   The  judge  had
    followed SM.  The Appellant had an employment history in Pakistan.  The
    judge took into account this and the  Appellant's  education.   It  was
    difficult to find anything which the  judge  had  failed  to  consider.
    There was a question of whether the Appellant's current  partner  would
    visit her in Pakistan.  The judge did not need to go into the  question
    of whether the Appellant would definitely be able to live in a shelter.
     The judge found the  Appellant  was  well-educated  and  her  age  and
    education would help her  to  support  herself.   This  conclusion  was
    consistent with the  country  guidance.   The  judge  had  made  proper
    findings without an error of law.

19. Mr Wilding continued that if  an  error  was  found  then  the  country
    guidance was clear.  The Appellant was educated.  There was nothing  to
    suggest she would have been able to  work.   The  Respondent's  refusal
    letter dealt with the issue of shelters and this should  be  considered
    in relation to internal relocation.  If the decision was to  be  remade
    then it should be found that the Appellant  could  relocate  internally
    within Pakistan.

20. Reference was made to paragraph 19 of  the  decision  where  the  judge
    recorded that the Appellant had some work experience as a teacher.   Mr
    Wilding  explained  that  this  had  been  the  Appellant's   husband's
    occupation.

21. Mr Wilding responded to the issue of whether visits by the  Appellant's
    current boyfriend would constitute protection.   Mr  Wilding  submitted
    that while every case depended upon its own facts,  the  lack  of  male
    protection applied to many women.

Discussion

22. Overall the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  approached  the
    evidence in this appeal this with care and deliberation.  I accept Miss
    Anzani's  submission,  however,  to  the  effect  that  there   is   an
    illogicality  in  the  judge's  reasoning  in  relation   to   internal
    relocation.  Having found that the Appellant would be at  risk  in  her
    home area and would not have male protection on relocating,  the  judge
    nevertheless suggested that protection could be afforded the  Appellant
    by occasional visits by her current boyfriend, notwithstanding that the
    judge was uncertain as to whether there was a  subsisting  relationship
    between the Appellant and her boyfriend.  It is  illogical  to  suggest
    that the Appellant's need for male  protection  in  Pakistan  would  be
    provided by a man who would visit the Appellant only  occasionally  and
    only if the relationship was subsisting.  Miss Anzani rightly asked the
    question as to what the Appellant's position would be in  between  such
    visits and it is this which should have occupied the judge's attention.

23. Furthermore, as  Miss  Anzani  pointed  out,  the  Appellant  has  been
    ostracised by her family and abandoned by her husband with a  resulting
    social stigma.  She would be returning to  Pakistan  not  as  a  mature
    woman but as a young woman, albeit well-educated but with  little  work
    experience and,  indeed,  no  work  experience  commensurate  with  her
    qualifications.

24. For the Respondent, Mr Wilding directed  me  to  the  passages  in  the
    refusal letter dealing with support which could be  provided  to  women
    returning to Pakistan, particularly in terms of privately run shelters.
     Private shelters are referred to at paragraph 33,  where  the  country
    information suggests that these facilities are small-scale and few  and
    far between.  The primary concerns of the private organisations  appear
    to be domestic violence and "honour" crimes.

25. So far as this Appellant is concerned, the judge found that  she  would
    be at risk in her home area.  As far as relocation  is  concerned,  the
    question is not only one of safety but also of reasonableness,  in  the
    sense of whether it would be unduly harsh to expect  the  Appellant  to
    relocate.  Given the paucity of places in private shelters, it seems to
    me that little weight can be placed  on  the  availability  of  such  a
    place.  The Appellant is a young woman, entirely alone, with no regular
    male protector, and with the social stigma  of  having  been  abandoned
    both by her family and by her husband.  Notwithstanding her  education,
    there seems little prospect of the Appellant being able to maintain and
    support herself in Lahore under these circumstances.  It is more likely
    the  Appellant  would   face   isolation,   very   limited   employment
    opportunities, and the vulnerability that this would bring to her.   In
    other words, when  full  consideration  is  given  to  the  Appellant's
    circumstances in accordance with SM, the conclusion which is reached is
    that it would be unduly harsh to expect the Appellant  to  relocate  to
    Lahore to avoid serious harm in her home area.

26. I therefore substitute for the decision of the judge the decision which
    should have been made, which is that the appeal is  allowed  on  asylum
    grounds on the basis that the Appellant is at risk  of  persecution  in
    her home area as a member of a particular social  group  and  that  the
    alternative of internal relocation would be unduly harsh.

Conclusions

The making of a decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.  I  was  not  asked  to
continue this order and I see  no  reason  of  substance  for  so  doing,  I
therefore lift the order.



Fee  Award                               Note:  This  is  not  part  of  the
    decision

I was not addressed on whether to make a fee  award.   My  understanding  is
that no fee has been paid and therefore no fee award is made.






Signed                              Date: 13 July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
