
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09285/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 13 April 2015                              |On 7 May 2015                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                     ND
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, instructed by Wick & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    refusing him further leave to remain following the refusal of his claim
    for asylum.


    Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran  born  on  24  September  1994.   He
    arrived in the UK on 2 November 2010 as an illegal entrant and  claimed
    asylum.  His application was refused but on 17  December  2010  he  was
    granted discretionary leave to remain until 24 March 2012 in accordance
    with  the  respondent's  public  policy  on  the  handling  of   asylum
    applications from unaccompanied asylum-seeking children.  There was  no
    appeal against that decision but on 22 March 2012 the appellant applied
    for further leave to remain.  That  application  was  refused  for  the
    reasons given in the respondent's Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  of  16
    October 2014.  The respondent was not satisfied that the appellant  had
    demonstrated that he had a well-founded fear of  persecution  in  Iran.
    The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal  was  heard
    on 22 December 2014.

3.   The appellant's claim was that he was an  Iranian  citizen  of  Kurdish
    ethnic origin who would be at risk on return because the government had
    found out that he had been involved in selling alcoholic  drinks  found
    in his house.  He said that this had happened some 26 days  before  his
    interview and the next day he had left Iran, being taken to the  border
    by car and then travelling to Turkey by horse  and  on  foot  where  he
    stayed for one night before travelling across Europe by lorry.  He also
    claimed that about three years previously he had been arrested  because
    a photograph of "Imam Kumaini" had been taken from  his  local  mosque.
    Three other men were also arrested.  He was  kept  in  a  room  at  the
    police station for about two months, subjected to regular beatings  and
    eventually was released.  When he returned to his village he  was  told
    that the three men arrested had been executed.  The appellant also gave
    evidence that he had  attended  a  demonstration  outside  the  Iranian
    Embassy in July 2011.  There were many people  taking  photographs  and
    someone came out of the embassy to look at them.  A friend  later  told
    him that there were pictures on the internet.  He had also  attended  a
    demonstration in January 2013 but this  was  not  outside  the  Iranian
    Embassy, which was closed at the time,  but  was  a  walk  between  the
    French and Turkish Embassies.

4.   The respondent noted that the appellant's fingerprints had  been  taken
    by the French authorities in Coquelles on 21 September 2010 when he had
    given his correct name and age but a different date of birth.   It  was
    the respondent's view that the appellant had spent a considerable  time
    in France and it was reasonable to expect him to  have  claimed  asylum
    there.

    The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The judge set out his findings of credibility and fact in [33]  -  [49]
    of his decision.  He said that he was aware of the provisions of s.8 of
    the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.  He
    noted that at his interview the appellant had  said  that  his  journey
    from Iran to the UK took 20 to 25 days and that the raid on  his  house
    took place 26 days before the  screening  interview,  which  had  taken
    place on 3 November 2010.  He had arrived in the UK on 27 October  2010
    and so the raid must have taken place in the early part of October 2010
    but this could not be reconciled with the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    fingerprints were taken by the French authorities on 21 September 2010.
     The judge noted that the appellant had given his correct name and  age
    but a different date of birth when fingerprinted and at  interview  had
    denied that his fingerprints had been taken  during  his  journey.   He
    found that this inconsistency and his willingness to lie  significantly
    undermined his credibility.  He was satisfied that  the  appellant  had
    spent more time than he had claimed in France, that he must have passed
    through other EEA states on his journey and that his failure  to  claim
    asylum before arrival was not the action of a person genuinely  seeking
    Refugee Convention protection.

6.   The judge found  that  the  appellant  had  been  inconsistent  in  his
    accounts  of  the  events  leading  to  his  departure  from  Iran,  in
    particular in his  initial  statement  saying  that  "we  were  selling
    alcohol drinks" as opposed to a later claim that the alcohol was simply
    hidden in a storeroom by illegal traders under an arrangement with  his
    uncle.  For these  reasons  the  judge  found  the  appellant  to  lack
    credibility and rejected his  account.   He  considered  whether  there
    would be  a  risk  from  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  attended
    demonstrations in this country but was not satisfied that he would have
    been of any interest to the authorities in the past or that they  would
    be able to identify him assuming they were minded to do  so.   He  also
    considered the risk to the appellant on  return  as  a  failed  asylum-
    seeker referring to the findings in SB (risk  on  return-illegal  exit)
    Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053.  He went on  to  consider  the  appellant's
    article 8 rights but found that in so  far  as  family  life  had  been
    established and removal would amount to an  interference,  the  adverse
    decision was lawful, for a legitimate purpose and proportionate to  the
    need to maintain  immigration  control.   Accordingly  the  appeal  was
    dismissed on all grounds.

    The Grounds and Submissions

7.   In the grounds it is argued  that  the  judge  erred  by  starting  his
    assessment of credibility with s.8 of the 2004 Act; he failed  to  take
    into consideration that the reason why the appellant might have entered
    the UK as he did was through being under the influence of  agents;  did
    not take into account the consideration that the  appellant  was  a  15
    year old unaccompanied minor travelling with the aid of an  agent  and,
    when  considering  what  inferences  should  be  drawn  from  what  the
    appellant had said at his screening  interview,  failed  to  take  into
    account that this interview was conducted without a  responsible  adult
    being present.

8.   The grounds further challenge the finding that the appellant would  not
    be at risk on return despite  attending  a  demonstration  outside  the
    Iranian Embassy in 2011.  They argue that the judge failed to take into
    account the added risk arising from his Kurdish ethnicity and failed to
    consider or make findings on the risk  to  the  appellant  due  to  his
    father's political profile, the evidence before the  judge  being  that
    his father was executed for protesting against a Persian  candidate  in
    the local elections in the largely populated Kurdish  region  of  Iran.
    The grounds then assert that the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
    appellant's claim under para 276ADE(vi) or to make any findings on  the
    risk of return as a failed asylum-seeker.

9.   Mr Burrett adopted these  grounds  in  his  submissions,  arguing  that
    starting with s.8  was  indicative  of  the  judge's  approach  to  the
    evidence.  He had failed to take into account the appellant's age  when
    drawing adverse inferences from the screening interview, had failed  to
    make any real findings about the demonstrations or to take all relevant
    matters into account in his assessment of the risk  on  return  and  in
    particular the appellant's ethnicity and the fact that his  father  had
    been executed.

10.  Mr Tufan submitted that the judge had clearly taken  into  account  the
    appellant's age when reaching his conclusions on the  evidence  and  it
    was for him to decide what inferences should be drawn from the evidence
    that the appellant had been in France at the time when  he  claimed  to
    have been having problems with the Iranian authorities.  The judge  was
    entitled to give weight to inconsistencies  in  the  evidence  and  his
    findings on the lack of risk arising from sur place activities had been
    properly open to him.  There had been no acceptance  or  evidence  that
    the appellant had appeared in an online newspaper in July 2011 and  the
    evidence in relation to  his  father's  execution  in  about  2004  was
    irrelevant, as there was  no  evidence  that  the  authorities  pursued
    family members after that date.

    Consideration of whether there is an Error of Law

11.  We must consider whether the judge erred in law such that his  decision
    should be set aside.  We are satisfied  that  there  are  a  number  of
    factors which when taken as a whole undermine the safety of the judge's
    finding on credibility.  It  is  not  in  dispute  that  the  appellant
    arrived in the UK as a minor aged 15.  His screening interview was on 8
    November 2010 and his substantive interview on 9  December  2010.   The
    judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  inconsistencies  in  the
    interviews but when doing so he should also have taken into account the
    fact that when he was interviewed in 2010 he was  a  minor  and  it  is
    clear from the record of the  screening  interview  for  children  that
    there was no adult present as  opposed  to  the  substantive  interview
    where a representative from solicitors was in attendance.   Whilst  the
    judge was also  entitled  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's fingerprints had been taken by the  French  authorities  in
    Coquelles on 21 September 2010 the inference that this was inconsistent
    with the appellant's account of events in Iran is  substantially  based
    on the answers the appellant had given at his screening interview  that
    the raid on his home had taken place about 28 days previously.

12.  When considering the risk arising from the appellant's attendance at  a
    demonstration outside the Iranian Embassy in 2011 the judge said he did
    not accept that the appellant had a political profile or that he  would
    already be  known  to  the  Iranian  authorities.   The  appellant  had
    provided photographs of himself at the demonstration  and  it  was  his
    evidence that he was visible in a photograph  published  in  an  online
    newspaper in July 2011.  However,  the  judge  said  that  he  was  not
    persuaded "as he has not  been  of  interest  in  the  past,  that  the
    authorities would be able to identify him assuming they were minded  to
    do so."  Any risk to the appellant  would  arise  from  whether  he  is
    perceived  because  of  his  activities  to  be  of  interest  to   the
    authorities and a lack of  interest  in  the  past  is  not  in  itself
    determinative of that issue.

13.  It was part of the appellant's case that he was  of  Kurdish  ethnicity
    and that his father had been executed in  about  2004.   These  factors
    were not taken into account by the judge in his assessment  of  whether
    the appellant in his particular  circumstances  would  be  at  risk  on
    return and they are not matters which can be discounted  as  irrelevant
    to that assessment.

14.  When we take these various factors cumulatively we are  satisfied  that
    the judge erred in law by failing to take a number of relevant  matters
    into account both in his assessment of credibility and of the  risk  on
    return.  The error is such that the decision must be set aside.

15.  Both representatives agreed that  in  these  circumstances  the  proper
    course would be for the appeal to be re-heard and that this  should  be
    before the First-tier Tribunal rather  than  the  Upper  Tribunal.   We
    agree with this submission as the appeal will have to  be  re-heard  de
    novo.  The appeal will therefore be remitted for a fresh hearing before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

    Decision

16.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the  decision  is  set  aside.
    The appeal is remitted  for  a  fresh  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

17.  The First-tier Tribunal judge did not anonymise his decision but  there
    are orders on the appeal file indicating that the intention was to make
    an anonymity order. To preserve the position until the  First-tier  can
    consider the matter further we make an order under r.14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and accordingly unless and  until
    a Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is  granted
    anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
    identify him or any member of his family.  This direction applies  both
    to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




    Signed                                   Date: 6 May 2015


        Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
