
[pic]
IAC-AH-co-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09344/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 August 2015                    |On 17 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Muhammad Ayaz Baig
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant was born on  2  April  1987  and  is  a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  He entered the United Kingdom  as  a  student  in
    2011 and applied for asylum in February 2014.  He  was  refused  asylum
    and a decision was taken on 24 October 2014  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom.  The appellant appealed against that  decision  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cox) which, in a decision promulgated on  18
    March 2015, allowed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.  The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claims that he comes from Kashmir and his family  village
    is in Punjab.  The judge generally found the appellant to be  credible.
    At [41], he  found  "...  the  appellant  to  be  quite  an  impressive
    witness."  The judge also  found  [45]  that  the  appellant  had  been
    "threatened as a result  of  community  work  in  his  local  area  [of
    Kashmir] and that on 8 February 2014 shots were fired at him.   I  find
    that the  attempt  to  kill  the  appellant  is  an  incident  of  past
    persecution."   The  judge  concluded  that  the   appellant   had   an
    objectively well-founded fear  of  persecution  in  his  home  area  of
    Pakistan [48].

 3. The question of internal flight within Pakistan  was  examined  at  the
    hearing.  The judge concluded [54] that

         "... on the totality of the  evidence  I  find  the  appellant  has
         failed  to  discharge  the  burden  of  proof.   In  my  view   the
         appellant's suggestion that he would be at risk throughout Pakistan
         is too speculative.  He has failed to satisfy me, even applying the
         lower standard of proof that his assailants may be able to find him
         anywhere in Pakistan."

    The judge directed himself to Januzi  [2006]  UKHL  5  and  AH  (Sudan)
    [2007] UKHL 49 and Hysi [2005] EWCA Civ 711.   The  judge  also  relied
    upon HJ (Iran) 2010 UKSC  31,  in  particular  [58  -  59],  the  judge
    observed that the appellant is a  "relatively  young  male  who  speaks
    Urdu, Punjabi and English and has spent 24 years in his  home  country,
    including his formative years."  He noted that the appellant has lived,
    studied and worked in Lahore where his wife is currently  living.   The
    judge also observed that,

         "... in addition whilst in the UK the  appellant  has  demonstrated
         considerable resilience and adaptability  by  studying  and  living
         here  for  over  three  years  which  strongly  suggests  that  the
         appellant is capable of adjusting to life in different  cities  and
         cultures."

    However, the judge found [60] that the appellant had been persecuted in
    the past and was now suffering from depression.  The appellant believes
    that his assailants may find him anywhere in Pakistan even  though  the
    judge found that this  fear  was  not  objectively  based.   He  found,
    however, that the appellant's fear would have "a profound  effect  upon
    him."  The judge was satisfied that  "in  having  to  relocate  [within
    Pakistan] the appellant would not be  able  to  continue  his  work  on
    behalf  of  the  Kashmiri.   In  effect,  the  appellant  will  conceal
    fundamental aspects of his personality."  Applying HJ (Iran) the  judge
    found that it would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant to relocate
    within Pakistan, including to Lahore.

 4. The grounds  of  appeal  noted  that  the  fear  of  the  appellant  of
    persecution in other parts of Pakistan outside his home  area  was  not
    objectively well-founded and observed that the judge had not

         "... concluded that the appellant would not be able to continue  to
         work on any projects raised in Kashmir on return to another part of
         Pakistan - as such the  core  aspect  which  is  the  focus  of  HJ
         examination is not restricted upon (albeit there is no actual  risk
         to the appellant)."

    The grounds go on to note that "even if the result of  the  appellant's
    depression and subjective fear is his own restriction  on  his  actions
    with respect to the  Kashmir  cause  -  the  result  is  the  same:  no
    persecution in an area outside of  his  home  area.   The  respondent's
    immigration decision does not therefore infringe  the  essential  right
    which HJ indicates should be protected.

 5. I find that the grounds of appeal have merit.  I find  that  the  judge
    has become confused in his application of HJ (Iran).   Given  that  the
    judge found that the appellant's  assailants  would  not  find  him  in
    another area of Pakistan (for example, Lahore where his wife is living)
    there is no reason to believe that he could not  become  engaged  there
    with work on behalf of the Kashmiri people  (even  assuming  that  such
    work represented the core aspects of his personality).  Crucially,  the
    appellant cannot claim that he would refrain from working  at  all  for
    Kashmiri causes in areas of Pakistan outside his home  area  out  of  a
    fear of being persecuted in those areas.  The appellant  could  express
    his support for the Kashmiri cause in those areas and might  also  work
    (albeit at a distance) on behalf  of  the  Kashmir  people  and  do  so
    without any objectively well-founded fear of  persecution.   The  judge
    appears to be suggesting that the  appellant  is  entitled  to  refugee
    status in the United Kingdom because he cannot live in  his  home  area
    and because only in that area is he able to express his support for the
    Kashmiri people.  That begs the question as to  whether  the  appellant
    can reasonably live anywhere at all  outside  Kashmir  without  denying
    this core aspect of his personality.  Put bluntly, this core aspect  of
    the appellant's personality, as understood by Judge Cox, would  not  be
    restricted any more in Lahore (a city within the appellant's country of
    nationality) than it would be in Bradford (where he currently resides).



 6. I find, having regard to the above, that the judge has erred in law and
    that his decision in respect of internal flight within Pakistan is  not
    sustainable.  The judge should have found on the facts and applying the
    relevant jurisprudence that the option  of  internal  flight  for  this
    appellant would not be unduly harsh.  I therefore set aside the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision and remake the decision dismissing the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on  18  March
2015 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The appeal is dismissed  on
asylum grounds.  The appeal is  dismissed  on  human  rights  grounds.   The
appellant is not entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 22 September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
