
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09613/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 September 2016                   |On 22 December 2016                  |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                AREFREZA [K]
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Holmes, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini, Counsel, instructed by Jein Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
    refusal to  grant  him  international  protection  by  way  of  refugee
    recognition or humanitarian protection or leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds and under Article  2  3  or  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

 2. Permission was granted on the basis that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    arguably made inadequate findings of  fact  in  its  decision,  and  in
    particular, failed to make it clear whether the Tribunal accepted  that
    the applicant had genuinely been posting oppositionist web blogs  about
    the Iranian authorities, both from  Iran  and  later  from  the  United
    Kingdom, for a period of three years before the undisputed closing-down
    of his internet blogging account by the Iranian authorities.

 3. The Secretary of State's Rule 24  reply  to  the  grant  of  permission
    stated that

         "The  judge  has  found  that  the  appellant's  alleged   blogging
         activities were intrinsically linked to the  other  claimed  events
         such as the raid on his house (determination paragraph 32).  Having
         found those events not credible, it is submitted, that the Tribunal
         did  not  accept  the  blogging  activities  either  (Determination
         paragraphs 32 and 33). In any event, it is  noted  that  the  blogs
         were not in the appellant's own identity and the  grounds  fail  to
         establish how the assessment of risk could be any different even if
         the Tribunal had accepted the blogging activities  when  they  were
         not identifiable or linked to the appellant".

 4. Mr Bazini has taken me through the decision and it is  clear  that  the
    Tribunal misdirected  itself  as  to  the  effects  of  both  Danian  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [1999] EWCA Civ 3000 and  AB
    and Others (internet activity - state  of  evidence)  [2015]  UKUT  257
    (IAC).  It is clear, also,  that  many  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings of fact are mutually inconsistent.

 5. In the light of the review of the contents of the  determination  which
    has been undertaken this morning Miss  Holmes  does  not  maintain  the
    submissions in the Rule 24 Reply.

 6. I find that the reasoning  in  this  determination  is  irrational  and
    unsustainable, in the manner contemplated by  Lord  Justice  Brooke  at
    [90] in R (Iran) & Ors v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2005] EWCA Civ 982:

         "90. ...2. A finding might only be set aside for error  of  law  on
         the grounds of perversity if it was irrational or  unreasonable  in
         the Wednesbury sense, or one that was  wholly  unsupported  by  the
         evidence.

             3. A decision should not be set aside for inadequacy of reasons
         unless the adjudicator failed to identify and  record  the  matters
         that were critical to his decision on material issues,  in  such  a
         way that the IAT was unable  to  understand  why  he  reached  that
         decision."

 7. The First-tier Tribunal's decision is  perverse  and  I  am  unable  to
    understand its reasoning.  The decision will be set  aside  and  remade
    afresh in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with  no  findings  of  fact  or
    credibility preserved.



Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision. The decision in this appeal will be remade in  the
First-tier Tribunal.


Signed: Judith A J C Gleeson                 Date: 21 December 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
