
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/09567/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th September 2015                |On 17th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     J h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma of Counsel instructed by Time Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Samimi (the judge) promulgated on 1st May 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant claims to be a citizen of Myanmar born 1st  January  1986.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom illegally in February 2008 and claimed
    asylum on 2nd June 2014 claiming that if returned to Myanmar  he  would
    be persecuted because of his claimed Rohingya ethnicity.

 4. The Claimant's application was refused on 31st  October  2014  and  his
    appeal was heard by the judge on  10th  April  2015.   The  appeal  was
    allowed on asylum grounds on the basis that the judge accepted that the
    Claimant had given a credible and consistent account.

 5. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The grounds may be summarised as follows.

 6. The judge in paragraph 13 of her decision had erred in stating that the
    Secretary of State accepted the Claimant's account  to  originate  from
    Baguna in Myanmar and having fled to a refugee camp in Bangladesh.   It
    was contended that this was incorrect and had not been accepted by  the
    Secretary of State in the reasons for refusal letter dated 31st October
    2014.  It was contended that the judge had failed  to  give  sufficient
    reasons for her conclusions.

 7. The Claimant had produced a 'Rohingya refugee  family  book'.   It  was
    contended  that  the  judge  wrongly  reversed  the  burden  of  proof,
    concluding that the burden rested upon the Secretary of State to  prove
    that the book was false, and had referred to irrelevant case law.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    White for the following reasons;

         a.   The judge appears to indicate that the Respondent has accepted
             various elements of the Appellant's account (para 13)  whereas
             the Respondent in the reasons for refusal letter  at  para  49
             did not accept that the Appellant was a national  of  Myanmar;
             nor that the Appellant was of Rohingya ethnicity; nor that the
             Appellant lived in a refugee camp.

         b.   In the consideration of the reliability of the refugee book as
             evidence the judge has wrongly applied the  guidance  in  Shen
             and AA (Nigeria) (thus placing the burden of  proof  upon  the
             Respondent) rather than the guidance in  Tanveer  Ahmed  (that
             the evidence should be looked at in the round) (paras  15,  16
             and 17)."

 9. Following the grant of permission the Tribunal issued  directions  that
    there should be a  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain
    whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such that the decision
    should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

The Secretary of State's Submissions

10. Mr Melvin relied upon grounds  contained  within  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  Mr Melvin submitted that the judge was factually
    incorrect in paragraph 13 in stating that the Secretary  of  State  had
    accepted the Claimant's account, as  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    dated 31st October 2014 made it clear that the material issues  in  the
    account were not accepted.

11. In relation to the refugee book, it was contended that the judge should
    have relied on the principles in Tanveer Ahmed.

The Claimant's Submissions

12. Mr Sharma contended that the Secretary of State had  misread  paragraph
    13, and the judge had not erred.  The judge had in fact found that  the
    Secretary of  State  had  accepted  that  the  Claimant's  account  was
    consistent with objective evidence, and this had been accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State in the refusal letter.

13. Mr Sharma submitted that in this case the Secretary  of  State  had  in
    fact alleged forgery, and therefore the judge had been correct to  find
    the burden of proof rested upon the Secretary of State, and the  burden
    had not been discharged.  Reliance was placed upon paragraph 33 of  the
    refusal letter which Mr Sharma submitted amounted to an  allegation  of
    forgery.  Therefore the case law referred to by the judge was relevant.



14. At the conclusion of submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. I will not set out paragraph 13 of the First-tier Tribunal decision  in
    full, but I set out the following which  has  been  challenged  by  the
    Secretary of State;

         "The Respondent has accepted that the Appellant's account of having
         been brought up in the village of Baguna in Myanmar,  the  currency
         of Myanmar as well as the Appellant's overall account of his family
         fleeing  Myanmar  after  the  village  was  attacked  in  1992  was
         consistent with the objective  evidence  confirming  that  Rohingya
         villages in Myanmar were attacked at that time  resulting  in  many
         Rohingya families  fleeing  to  refugee  camps  in  Bangladesh.   I
         therefore accept that  the  Appellant  has  provided  a  consistent
         account of having been born and brought up in Baguna,  Myanmar  and
         that his family were forced to flee to refugee camps in Bangladesh,
         after his father was killed in the course of  the  attacks  against
         the Rohingya in 1992."

16. The Secretary of State did state at paragraph 20 of the refusal letter;



         "It is also noted that the overall account that you  gave  of  your
         family having to flee Myanmar after your village  was  attacked  in
         1992 is consistent with background information.  Background sources
         confirm that Rohingya villages in Myanmar were indeed  attacked  at
         this time, resulting in many Rohingya families fleeing  to  refugee
         camps in Bangladesh."

17. It was also stated in paragraph 21  that  the  Claimant  had  correctly
    provided some brief general information about the Rohingya people, such
    as their religion, the clothes that they wear, and the food they eat.

18. However the Secretary of State went on to state in  paragraph  28  that
    while there were some elements of the  Claimant's  account  which  were
    consistent with external information, there were other  elements  which
    were not.

19. The Secretary of State stated the following at paragraph 49;

         "In summary, you have failed to  meet  all  of  the  conditions  of
         paragraph 339L, and it has  been  decided  not  to  award  you  the
         benefit of the doubt.  It is therefore not accepted that you are  a
         national of Myanmar, nor is it accepted that you  are  of  Rohingya
         ethnicity.  It is also not accepted that you  lived  in  a  refugee
         camp in Bangladesh."

20. The judge in paragraph 13 concludes  that  because  the  Appellant  has
    provided a consistent account, the account is accepted.   I  find  that
    the judge has given inadequate reasons for reaching this conclusion.  I
    set out below the head  note  in  Budhathoki  (reasons  for  decisions)
    [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they won or lost."

21. The judge did not adequately engage  with  the  reasons  given  by  the
    Secretary of State for refusing the Claimant's application, and did not
    adequately analyse the evidence, taking into account that the Secretary
    of  State  specifically  rejected  the  Claimant's   account   of   his
    nationality and ethnicity, and his claim to have  lived  in  a  refugee
    camp in Bangladesh.  The judge did not address the point  made  by  the
    Secretary of State,  that  part  of  the  Claimant's  account  was  not
    consistent with background evidence.

22. This amounts to  an  error  of  law.   The  judge  has  not  adequately
    explained her reasons, so that the Secretary of  State  can  understand
    why no weight has been given  to  the  points  raised  in  the  refusal
    letter.

23. In relation to the assessment of the refugee family book, I  find  that
    the judge materially erred in law.  The judge  correctly  set  out  the
    burden of proof in paragraph 4 of her decision, acknowledging that  the
    burden rested upon the Claimant.  This however is not the  case  if  an
    allegation of forgery is made by the Secretary of State, as the  burden
    then rests upon the Secretary of State.

24. The Secretary of State considered the family book in  paragraphs  29-37
    of the refusal letter.  At paragraph 33 it is stated;

         "33. It is noted that inside the book, on page two,  your  name  is
             listed, as well as your mother's and brother's name.  However,
             where your name is listed, it appears that  a  correction  has
             been made over it, and it appears that this name may have been
             changed."

25. The Secretary of State concluded at paragraph 37;

         "37. For the reasons  given  above  and  considering  the  document
             submitted in the round, it is considered  that  you  have  not
             shown that this  document  can  be  relied  upon.   Therefore,
             little weight can be given to this document."

26. The Secretary of State had, earlier in the decision  at  paragraph  30,
    made specific reference to the principles in Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT
    00439.

27. The two cases referred to by the judge are not relevant.   Shen  (paper
    appeals; proving dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 00236 (IAC) gives guidance  as
    to consideration of dishonesty in paper appeals.  This is not  a  paper
    appeal.

28. AA (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 773 gives guidance upon the  consideration
    of false representations, and concludes that dishonesty must be proved.
     I do not find that the  Secretary  of  State  made  an  allegation  of
    forgery in the refusal letter.  In my view it was made quite clear that
    it was for the Claimant to prove that the family book could  be  relied
    upon.  This is consistent with the principles in  Tanveer  Ahmed  which
    are that in asylum and human rights  cases  it  is  for  an  individual
    Claimant to show that a document on which  he  seeks  to  rely  can  be
    relied upon.  A decision maker should consider whether  a  document  is
    one on which reliance should properly be placed after  looking  at  all
    the evidence in the round.  Only very rarely will there be the need  to
    make an allegation of forgery, or evidence strong enough to support it.
     The principles in Tanveer  Ahmed  were  confirmed  in  MJ  Afghanistan
    [2013] UKUT 00253 (IAC).  The judge made no reference  to  the  Tanveer
    Ahmed principles  and  this  is  a  material  error  of  law  as  those
    principles should have been  considered,  and  the  judge  should  have
    considered whether the Claimant had proved that the family  book  could
    be relied upon.

29. For the reasons given above the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains material errors of law and  is  set  aside  with  no  findings
    preserved.

30. The decision needs to  be  re-made  and  I  have  decided  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit this  appeal  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    having taken into account  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement of 25th September 2012 which states;

         '7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that;

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.'

31. In my view the requirements of paragraph 7.2(b) apply, in that this  is
    an asylum appeal where extensive fact-finding needs to be carried  out.



32. The parties will be advised of the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing in due course.  The hearing will take place at the Hatton Cross
    hearing centre and be heard by a First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than
    Judge Samini.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The First-tier Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  direction.   I  continue  that
direction pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008.  As a consequence there is a prohibition on  the  disclosure  or
publication of documents or information relating to the proceedings  or  any
matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the Claimant.


Signed   Date 10th September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  This is  to  be  considered  by
the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   Date 10th September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
