
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09026/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Date Sent                  |
|On 13th June 2013                               |On 14th August 2013        |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                             Shareena Arivalagan
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Thorne, Counsel instructed on behalf of Vasuki
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 16th April  1991.   She
    appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Shimmin) who in a determination  promulgated  on  27th  December
    2012 dismissed her appeal against the decision  of  the  Respondent  to
    refuse to grant asylum under paragraph 336 of HC 395 (as amended) and a
    decision to remove the Appellant by way of directions under Section  10
    of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.



The background to the appeal:

 2. The history of the appeal is as follows.   The  Appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom as a student by air from Delhi on 28th  September  2011.
    She had applied for a UK student visa on 14th September 2011  and  this
    was subsequently issued on 21st September.  Thus this gave her leave to
    enter the UK as a student until 13th October 2015  to  study  at  Aston
    University.  Before the Appellant left India she  had  lived  with  her
    grandparents in Trichy and  they  remain  there  with  her  aunt.   The
    Appellant first contacted the immigration authorities on 27th July 2012
    and was given an appointment to claim asylum  which  she  did  on  21st
    August 2012.

 3. The basis of her claim is as follows.  The Appellant was born in Trichy
    in the Tamil Nadu region of India.  Her parents had travelled there  as
    refugees in 1990.  It was asserted that the Appellant's  father  was  a
    member of the Tamil Tigers.  The  Appellant  was  educated  to  O-level
    standard and had worked as a teacher.

 4. The Appellant's father returned to  Sri  Lanka  after  the  Appellant's
    birth and remained there until 2002 when he rejoined the  family  group
    in Tamil Nadu.  The Appellant claims her father was content  for  about
    one month but then the Tamil Tigers began asking him to return  to  Sri
    Lanka on the threat of death to his family.   In  response  her  father
    committed suicide.

 5. The Appellant applied for a Sri  Lankan  passport  at  the  Sri  Lankan
    Embassy in Chennai in 2011.  The Sri Lankan authorities knew  that  the
    Appellant was a Tamil refugee and so she had to make five or six visits
    to the embassy before she was issued a Sri Lankan passport on 11th  May
    2011.

 6. The Appellant applied for a UK student visa on  14th  September  giving
    her leave to enter the UK to study as a student  at  Aston  University.
    The Appellant's fees for studying in the  UK  were  half  paid  by  her
    grandparents in India and half by her mother from the proceeds of  sale
    of land in Sri Lanka.  The Appellant intended to study in  the  UK  and
    thought that she would get a work  permit  at  the  conclusion  of  her
    studies if she did not go back to India as she would be able to  obtain
    Indian citizenship.  Before the Appellant left India she  was  required
    to obtain an "exit" from the commissioner office and this cancelled her
    refugee status in India.

 7. The Appellant entered the UK on  28th  September  2011.   She  had  two
    uncles in the UK and one of those uncles "tried to misbehave" with  the
    Appellant and the other uncle "covered up" his actions.  She has  since
    had no further contact with them or any other family members in the UK.

 8.  The  Appellant's  mother  was  due  to   provide   her   second   year
    university/accommodation fees by selling more land in Sri Lanka to meet
    the costs.  It is claimed by the Appellant that her mother returned  to
    Sri Lanka in January 2012 to collect the money for the  land  and  that
    the Appellant last heard from her on 28th January 2012, one week  after
    she arrived in Sri Lanka.  The Appellant considers  her  mother  to  be
    missing.  It is now stated on behalf of the Appellant that  her  mother
    was arrested in Sri Lanka but that her whereabouts are unknown.

 9. The Appellant stopped attending university in January 2012 and  she  is
    no longer a student.  She did not claim asylum as  she  felt  depressed
    and began taking antidepressants.  The Appellant claimed asylum on 21st
    August 2012.

10. The Appellant feared return to Sri  Lanka  for  a  number  of  reasons.
    Those reasons are as follows.  Firstly, she has no-one  there  to  help
    her and fears that she may be of adverse interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities due to her father's membership of the  Tamil  Tigers.   She
    also feared that the Sri Lankan government might assume that due to her
    age she had returned to Sri Lanka to join the Tamil  Tigers.   Thirdly,
    she believed that if her mother is  in  trouble  with  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities this might mean that she would also be at risk on return.

11. The Respondent in a comprehensive refusal letter dated  18th  September
    2012 considered the factual aspects of the Appellant's claim in respect
    of her fear of  persecutory  harm  at  the  hands  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities as a result of political opinion being imputed  to  her  on
    account of her father's alleged membership of the Tamil Tigers and  her
    claim that her mother had gone missing in January 2012.  The Respondent
    accepted that the Appellant had been born in India as had been  claimed
    and that they accepted that she had been born in the Tamil Nadu  region
    of India  as  this  was  consistent  with  the  background  information
    regarding Sri Lankan Tamil refugees in Tamil Nadu and  had  claimed  to
    have been part of a refugee family in India.  However,  the  Respondent
    did not accept that her father was ever a member of the  LTTE  for  the
    reasons given in the refusal letter and even if it were  accepted  that
    he had previously been a member, it was not  considered  that  the  Sri
    Lankan government or the authorities were aware of this and thus  would
    hold no adverse interest in him.  On her account it took place when she
    was a child and before his death a decade ago which the Respondent  did
    not consider equated to the authorities  holding  any  ongoing  adverse
    interest in her.  Therefore it was not accepted that the Appellant  was
    unaware of her mother's  whereabouts.   At  the  time  of  the  refusal
    letter, the Appellant's account was that her mother was missing.   Thus
    the refusal letter did not deal with the later  account  given  in  her
    witness statement of 18th  December  2012  that  her  mother  had  been
    arrested in Sri Lanka.  Thus the Respondent refused the application  as
    it was considered that the Appellant did not demonstrate a well-founded
    fear of persecution.  The Respondent issued  directions  directing  her
    removal to Sri Lanka.

The proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal:

12. The Appellant exercised her right to appeal that decision and it led to
    the appeal  coming  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Shimmin)
    sitting  at  Bradford  on  19th  December  2012.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 27th December 2012 Judge Shimmin dismissed  her  appeal.
    This was a comprehensive determination in which  the  judge  considered
    the evidence  before  him  and  set  out  his  findings  of  fact  from
    paragraphs 25 to 52.  At the hearing the Appellant did  not  give  oral
    evidence.  As the judge noted at paragraph 11, a psychiatric report had
    been produced stating that the Appellant was not fit to give  evidence.
    He further recorded that Counsel who appeared  on  her  behalf  at  the
    hearing had told the Tribunal that she had spoken to the  Appellant  at
    length and that she was satisfied that the Appellant was able  to  give
    instructions.  The judge records that "the Appellant,  after  receiving
    advice from Ms Dawes, chose not to give oral evidence."  Thus the judge
    heard submissions from the parties concerning the evidence and  it  was
    upon that which he made his findings of fact in this appeal.  In  those
    findings of fact, the judge dealt with the issues of  credibility  that
    had been raised by the Respondent in the  refusal  letter  and  by  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing before him and in the context of  the
    evidence produced on behalf of the Appellant.  As regards  the  account
    given by the Appellant as to her father's  alleged  membership  of  the
    Tamil Tigers/LTTE, he noted that there had been no evidence produced of
    his  alleged  membership  of  the  Tamil   Tigers   and   that   whilst
    corroboration was not required in asylum claims, he placed weight  upon
    the Appellant's asylum interview in which she had stated that  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities "did not know my father was connected in the past to
    the LTTE".  The judge found that the Appellant was inconsistent in  the
    statement compared with her account that she could not  return  because
    of her father's involvement being known  by  the  authorities  and  her
    mother's "arrest" for that reason.  He  found  that  the  inconsistency
    damaged her credibility.  Furthermore, when considering her profile and
    her relationship to her father, whom it was claimed was a  past  member
    of  the  LTTE,  took  into  account  the  Appellant's  own  conduct  in
    approaching the Sri Lankan authorities when she obtained a  Sri  Lankan
    passport in 2011.  He considered that the Appellant's conduct  and  her
    willingness to  seek  assistance  and  protection  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities was inconsistent with her claim that the authorities  might
    consider her to be connected to the LTTE due to  her  father's  alleged
    prior activities.  Furthermore he found that the willingness of the Sri
    Lankan  authorities  to  issue  her  with  a  ten  year  passport   was
    inconsistent with them being aware of her father's  alleged  membership
    of the LTTE.  The judge found at paragraph 31 that if  the  authorities
    were aware of her  father  having  been  such  a  member,  it  had  not
    generated any adverse interest in her or any  adverse  profile  because
    they issued her with a passport.   In  this  context  it  was  of  more
    significance because they did so knowing  that  she  was  intending  to
    travel to the UK as a student.  The judge made the point  that  the  UK
    was a centre for the support and fundraising  for  Tamils.   The  judge
    took into account the country guidance case of TK (Tamils - LP updated)
    Sri Lanka CG [2009] UKAIT 00049 noting that  the  records  of  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities kept upon persons  with  a  history  of  arrest  and
    detention had become "increasingly sophisticated" and further took into
    account that applications for passports were checked centrally  in  Sri
    Lanka and that if the Appellant was considered to have left  Sri  Lanka
    illegally or was present on an alert  list,  her  passport  application
    would have been refused.

13. The judge considered the delay in the Appellant making  her  claim  for
    asylum having claimed to have lost touch with her  mother  in  February
    2012 and having ceased being a student and stopped attending university
    in January 2012.  The Appellant did not  take  steps  to  claim  asylum
    until 27th July.  The judge  at  paragraph  34  to  35  considered  the
    evidence on behalf of the Appellant that she had  not  claimed  earlier
    because she was "depressed" and the judge considered the arguments  put
    forward on the Appellant's behalf by her Counsel at paragraph 35 namely
    that at the time, the disappearance of her mother was said to have  had
    a significant effect on her, she could not attend  university  and  her
    visa was revoked.  She had been sexually abused by her  uncle  and  the
    psychiatric report confirmed that the Appellant suffered, and continued
    to suffer moderately severe depression.  The judge found that if  those
    issues, if true, when considered cumulatively  would  have  meant  that
    despite her intelligence, education and ability in English she was  not
    functioning properly.  He found that whilst she had  made  a  delay  in
    making an asylum claim and that damaged her  credibility,  such  damage
    was limited.  Thus he did not place much weight on that  as  a  factor.
    He further noted that the Appellant's asylum claim coincided  with  her
    failure to continue her studies due to financial problems.

14. The judge also considered at paragraphs 37 to 42 the account  given  in
    her interview concerning answers that  she  gave  and  the  Appellant's
    account that the answers recorded for her in her asylum interview  were
    not accurate.  The judge gave careful consideration  to  the  interview
    and the circumstances in which it had  taken  place  and  analysed  the
    answers given by the Appellant in her interview by reference to answers
    given at other stages within the  interview.   After  carrying  out  an
    analysis of that evidence the judge recorded that he was satisfied that
    the Appellant at the end of the interview  acknowledged  that  she  was
    provided with a copy of the recording of the interview and that she had
    signed to confirm that she received such copy.  She also confirmed that
    she had  understood  the  questions  put  to  her  and  understood  the
    interviewer.  He was satisfied that the evidence demonstrated that  the
    Appellant had returned to Sri Lanka at the age  of  2  and  had  stayed
    there for five or six years despite her claim to have never been to Sri
    Lanka.

15.   Furthermore he considered that the evidence demonstrated that she had
    no fear of return to Sri Lanka when  she  had  made  her  student  visa
    application and placed weight upon her  answer  at  question  28  about
    return to Sri Lanka at the conclusion of her  student  visa.   Thus  he
    found that the Appellant was willing to return to Sri  Lanka  in  three
    years time and did not express any fear of doing so at that  date.   He
    found that there was "nothing in her account which would indicate  that
    she would be safer then.  She will still be  a  young  person  and  the
    authorities might still consider her a potential Tigers recruit as  she
    had claimed."

16. The judge then went on to deal with  the  Appellant's  account  of  her
    mother's disappearance and the  later  evidence  that  she  gave  in  a
    statement dated the day before the hearing that her mother had in  fact
    been arrested.  In this context he also took into account and  made  an
    assessment of a letter or statement from  the  Appellant's  grandmother
    which was relied upon to demonstrate that the  Appellant's  mother  had
    been arrested.  The judge, after analysing the Appellant's evidence and
    that of the grandmother, reached the conclusion that he could place  no
    weight on the evidence from the grandmother who lived in India and thus
    the information was likely to come from others.  He  found  that  there
    was no indication as to where that information  about  the  arrest  had
    been obtained and that throughout the asylum interview there  had  been
    no indication that the aunt living in Sri Lanka had attempted  to  make
    any enquiries as to the whereabouts of the Appellant's mother.  Thus he
    found that the "escalation of the Appellant's mother from  the  missing
    to the having been arrested is an attempt to embellish the  Appellant's
    claim and damages the Appellant's credibility."  He also considered the
    witness statement of the Appellant  (paragraph  11)  stating  that  the
    villagers were aware of the appellant's father's LTTE  involvement  and
    that there were informers that had been  recruited  to  the  army.   He
    noted that this had not been suggested before and neither the Appellant
    nor her witnesses gave any reason for knowing this.  He found that this
    further damaged her credibility.  He further noted that the Appellant's
    account was that her mother encountered problems in Sri  Lanka  due  to
    her husband's membership of the LTTE before his death in 2002 and  that
    the Appellant's aunt, who lived in Jaffna, had said that her mother may
    have been arrested.  He found that this was only  speculation  and  was
    not supported by any evidence and in particular the aunt  had  made  no
    effort to make enquiries  about  the  whereabouts  of  the  Appellant's
    mother.

17. The judge further recorded that even if the authorities were aware that
    the Appellant's father had been a member of the LTTE (which he did  not
    accept) the Appellant at the time was a child and ten years had elapsed
    and he did not find it reasonably likely  that  the  authorities  would
    have any ongoing interest in her.  In respect  of  her  interview,  the
    Appellant acknowledged that when she left India she knew she could  not
    return and accordingly she must have considered returning to Sri  Lanka
    at the end of her studies in the UK.  Indeed he  had  dealt  with  this
    earlier in the determination when reviewing her answer at  question  28
    where she stated she would return to  Sri  Lanka  at  the  end  of  her
    studies if she did not get a UK work permit.

18. Thus the judge found after considering all the credibility points, that
    many of them were "not minor or peripheral but went to the heart of the
    account" thus he did not find her a credible witness and did not accept
    that she had given at truthful factual account of her claim.

19. The judge also considered the  report  of  Dr  Krishna  Balasubramaniam
    dated 29th November 2012.  He considered that this was  a  report  that
    should not be accorded any weight noting that there were concerns about
    the quality of the report noting that it was  "descriptive,  repetitive
    and relied on  the  findings  of  others.   It  contains  virtually  no
    analysis of its own."  The judge also did not find that his opinion had
    a sound basis given the credibility issues identified and the  lack  of
    analysis.  The author of the report was that  she  had  been  suffering
    from a "depressive  disorder  of  a  moderate  to  severe  degree  with
    suicidal thoughts".  The  judge  also  considered  his  prognosis  that
    "deporting her to Sri Lanka is likely to worsen her condition and there
    is a likelihood that she may commit suicide," however he rejected  that
    evidence because he did not accept that this was a report upon which he
    could place any weight thus he did not find that the Appellant would be
    at risk of harm on notification of or on actual return  to  Sri  Lanka.
    The judge went on to state that if he was wrong  in  this  finding  and
    that she was suffering from the condition described, he had taken  into
    account the background evidence that had been set out  in  the  refusal
    letter that  mental  health  services  exist  in  Sri  Lanka  and  that
    treatment, would be available of the type that she required.   He  also
    noted that the Appellant had an aunt in Sri Lanka who would be able  to
    support her during any treatment.  The refusal letter in  dealing  with
    the objective material relevant to the issue of mental health treatment
    was set out at length at paragraphs  83  onwards  and  cited  the  COIS
    Report for Sri Lanka dealing with the availability and affordability of
    antidepressant  and  therapeutic  drugs,  at   paragraph   23.30,   the
    information concerning mental health  provision  at  paragraphs  23.21,
    23.22 and 23.23-23.27 thus he found that mental health services existed
    in Sri Lanka and that treatment would be available  to  her.   Thus  he
    dismissed the appeal.

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

20. The Appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision  on  three
    grounds.  Ground 1 related to the judge's adverse credibility  findings
    and it was submitted that the judge had erred in  law  by  finding  the
    Appellant had been inconsistent  in  her  account  as  to  whether  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka knew of her father's LTTE involvement and that
    he had erred in law by  rejecting  her  account  of  her  mother  going
    missing and of being arrested because he failed to attach weight to the
    witness statement  of  the  Appellant's  aunt  at  page  8.   Ground  2
    submitted that the judge had "irrationally or perversely  rejected  the
    psychiatric report of the doctor on the  premise  that  the  judge  had
    rejected the Appellant's  credibility  and  that  no  weight  could  be
    attached to the report.  It was submitted the finding was at  "complete
    odds in paragraph 35 of the determination."  Furthermore the judge  had
    irrationally attached no weight to the medical report and  the  medical
    evidence was "clinically corroborative of the Appellant's scarring  and
    thus the judge had materially erred in law by finding that the  medical
    report adds nothing to the Appellant's claim."  Ground 3 was  that  the
    determination did not consider the country guidance decision of TK  Sri
    Lanka and that the judge did not address the material risk factors.

21.   On 30th January 2013  permission  was  granted  by  Designated  Judge
    Appleyard who stated

         "The grounds seeking permission to appeal are  threefold.   Firstly
         the judge erred in his consideration of the issue  of  credibility,
         secondly in his consideration of the medical evidence  and  finally
         in a failure to consider country guidance case law  and  background
         evidence and make specific findings.  The grounds are arguable."

22. The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  At the hearing, Mr  Thorne,
    of Counsel,  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.   By  way  of  a
    preliminary issue he sought to correct what were factual errors in  the
    Grounds of Appeal as drafted by  another  Counsel,  who  also  had  not
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.  Firstly, in respect of ground
    1 it was stated at paragraph 3 that "the Appellant  made  it  clear  in
    oral evidence that paragraphs 11-12 of her witness statement  ..."   In
    this respect, the Appellant had not given oral evidence  and  therefore
    paragraph 3 was factually wrong.  At paragraph 7,  in  respect  of  the
    medical evidence it was stated  in  the  grounds  that  the  judge  had
    "irrationally attached no weight to the Appellant's medical report  and
    in light of the jurisprudence mentioned  above  and  the  argument  the
    medical  evidence  is  clinically  corroborative  of  the   Appellant's
    scarring."  In this respect, there had been no jurisprudence  mentioned
    in the preceding paragraph nor was there any argument in this case that
    the medical evidence was clinically corroborative  of  the  Appellant's
    scarring.   The  medical  report  did  not  deal  with   any   scarring
    whatsoever.  In respect of ground 3,  there  were  gender  differences.
    After having pointed  out  those  factual  errors  in  the  grounds  as
    drafted, Mr Thorne made substantial submissions  concerning  errors  of
    law in the determination of Judge  Shimmin,  many  of  which  were  not
    drafted as Grounds of Appeal.  I shall set out those  oral  submissions
    as they are not reflected in the grounds.

23. The first ground relied upon related to the judge's adverse credibility
    findings and in particular the  evidence  concerning  whether  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities were aware of her father's involvement in the  LTTE.
    It was submitted that the judge  erred  in  law  by  finding  that  the
    Appellant had been inconsistent  in  her  account  as  to  whether  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka knew of  his  involvement  in  the  LTTE.   He
    referred to the witness statement at paragraph 11 and 12  that  at  the
    time of his involvement that the authorities were not  aware  but  that
    the relatives  and  others  were  aware  of  this  and  that  in  those
    circumstances information might come to light.  Furthermore, she relied
    upon the arrest of her mother.  It was submitted the judge did not deal
    with one material aspect of the claim that when the Appellant's  mother
    went back to Sri Lanka to an area where her  husband  had  been  active
    this raised the possibility  of  the  Appellant's  mother  coming  into
    conflict with the authorities because of her wish to  reclaim  land  at
    the hands of local residents.  Thus by returning to the local  area  it
    might have exposed her mother to a different degree of risk.

24. The next point raised was that the judge fundamentally erred in law  by
    failing to deal with this Appellant who did not give oral evidence.  In
    this respect I asked Counsel how the judge should have dealt with  this
    issue.  Mr Thorne helpfully submitted that she had not  been  given  an
    opportunity to answer questions and it would be fundamentally unfair to
    hold that against her.  The judge did not say in the determination that
    his was an Appellant who was not giving evidence and this gave her  the
    loss of her opportunity and pervaded his approach to credibility.

25. The next point raised concerning credibility related to the Appellant's
    application for a passport.  The evidence before the Tribunal was  that
    she had been granted a passport from the Sri Lankan authorities in  May
    2011 and there had been  a  number  of  visits  before  that.   It  was
    submitted that the Immigration Judge conflated  the  local  authorities
    and those concerned with the issue of passports.  Mr Thorne relied upon
    the COIS  Report  for  Sri  Lanka  at  paragraph  25.18  and  the  exit
    procedures for Sri Lankans and that  Sri  Lankan  citizens'  exits  are
    checked by the immigration authorities but the checks  are  limited  in
    scope and that those who are on court bail would "flag up" thus  people
    who would be high profile would have a "stop on  them".   He  submitted
    that this contrasted with the level of checks aimed  at  failed  asylum
    seekers set out at paragraph 25.22 where detailed checks are made  with
    the returnee's home area.  Thus  he  submitted  there  was  a  contrast
    between a cursory check on exit and detailed checks when  returning  to
    Sri Lanka and that therefore this was a fair inference that this  would
    apply to passports.  He further submitted there was nothing to  suggest
    that detailed checks were undertaken by the Sri Lankan authorities when
    issuing passports.

26. He then dealt with the Appellant's interview.  Mr  Thorne  acknowledged
    that there were concerns arising from the  interview  and  the  answers
    that she had given as set out in the  judge's  analysis.   However,  he
    submitted, there had been no consideration of her health at the time of
    the interview and it had been incumbent on the judge  to  consider  her
    medical condition when considering any discrepancies in the interview.

27. Mr Thorne then turned to the issue of the  medical  evidence  that  had
    been raised in ground 2.  He submitted that the judge had a report from
    a  qualified  medical  practitioner  who  had  given  a  prognosis  and
    diagnosis, however the judge did not give proper reasons for  rejecting
    the psychiatric report.  Her further submitted the judge did  not  deal
    with the issue of suicide and did not engage with the report.  He  said
    that even if the medical evidence  was  insufficient  to  succeed,  the
    judge should have dealt with it in more detail.  He then submitted that
    there had been a freestanding Article 3 claim on suicide risk  although
    he could not be clear about this as he had not been Counsel in the case
    and did not have any note from the Counsel who had appeared before  the
    Tribunal.

28. The last point relied upon was that the judge  had  not  undertaken  an
    analysis of the country guidance decision of TK (as cited) when  making
    an assessment of the Appellant's profile.  This was an error of law and
    the risk factors were not considered by the judge in the context of  an
    overall  assessment  of  the  case.   Thus  he  submitted  there   were
    demonstrable errors of law in the determination and that it  should  be
    set aside.

29. Ms Petterson on behalf of the Respondent noted that there had  been  no
    Rule 24 reply but  made  oral  submissions.   As  to  the  issue  of  a
    freestanding Article 3 claim on suicide, she referred to the Presenting
    Officer's minute as to how the case proceeded before the FtT  and  that
    the case appeared to be advanced on the basis of  a  medical  treatment
    case rather than a suicide  case.   She  also  made  reference  to  the
    skeleton argument and compared it with what the judge had  set  out  at
    paragraph 51 and that it was based on treatment  available  and  not  a
    freestanding Article  3  claim  and  in  particular  that  the  judge's
    response to the report was that in any event if she had  mental  health
    problems, as the  case  had  been  argued  before  him,  the  objective
    material in the Respondent's refusal letter demonstrated  that  medical
    treatment would be available for her on return to Sri Lanka.  In  those
    circumstances Ms Petterson submitted that paragraph 51  was  more  than
    sufficient to deal with the medical aspects of the case.

30. Ms Petterson dealt with the interview and  the  Appellant's  case  that
    some of the answers recorded were not accurate.  She submitted that the
    typed interview had not been sent with the refusal  but  provided  four
    weeks later in October 2012,  however  the  Appellant  applied  for  an
    adjournment which had been granted on 30th  November  2012  and  for  a
    further adjournment of the hearing on 3rd December thus the hearing was
    adjourned for a period of two months  until  19th  December  after  two
    adjournment applications.  She submitted  that  if  the  Appellant  had
    problems in giving instructions as to  the  scope  of  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal against the interview, there had been  a  substantial  time  for
    that to have been done and the judge was entitled to take into  account
    the typed interview had been available from October 2012 and  that  the
    hearing did not take place until two  months  later.   Furthermore  the
    Appellant's bundle including her witness statement had  been  faxed  to
    the court on 18th December, the day before the court  hearing  and  her
    witness statement also signed on 18th  December.   The  judge  set  out
    clear findings at paragraphs 38 to 40 based  on  her  evidence  in  the
    interview which was correctly analysed and the judge  was  entitled  to
    find that there was a discrepancy in her evidence for the reasons  that
    he gave.  In any event, it is clear from the judge's assessment that he
    did  not  place  any  particular  weight  to  be  attributed  to   this
    discrepancy and did not take against her because of this (see paragraph
    42).

31. Ms Petterson then dealt with the credibility findings  in  relation  to
    the father's involvement in the LTTE and the  issue  of  the  Appellant
    obtaining a passport from the Sri Lankan authorities.  The interview at
    questions 19 and 20 demonstrated that she had gone to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities in Chennai and that she had had to take  letters  with  her
    and that they knew  that  she  was  a  Tamil  refugee  in  India.   She
    submitted that the judge did not fall into error when  considering  the
    Appellant's history and that whilst procedures are different for people
    applying for documents from abroad, the  evidence  from  the  Appellant
    herself was that the Sri Lankan authorities knew that she was a refugee
    in India but issued her with a passport in full knowledge that she  was
    travelling to the UK as a student (which the judge found to be a  place
    known to the authorities as one where activities were  undertaken)  and
    that she had gone to the authorities on five or  six  occasions  before
    the passport was issued and  that  they  had  asked  her  a  number  of
    questions.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  take  the  view  that   the
    Appellant's case that her family were known by the authorities to  have
    LTTE connections was not made out. Whilst it had  been  submitted  that
    the Appellant's case was that it was  only  in  2011  when  her  mother
    disappeared that they knew, the judge gave reasons as to why he did not
    accept the Appellant's account that she had been arrested which was the
    account that she gave much later on in her chronology.  The judge found
    that she had speculated about  her  mother's  disappearance  originally
    when she gave her account in her  interview  and  that  the  letter  or
    statement given from a family relative was "extremely vague"  and  this
    was a finding entirely open to the judge bearing in mind the content of
    that letter referring to "somebody  informed".   Furthermore,  her  own
    evidence was that no-one had made enquiries as to what had happened  to
    the Appellant's mother and that the judge was entitled to consider  why
    no enquiries had been made and the vagueness of the account given  that
    she had been arrested.

32. Ms Petterson submitted  that  Counsel  had  referred  to  the  mother's
    disappearance being due to a possibility that  the  local  people  were
    upset about her reclaiming land and that this might be a reason for the
    mother's disappearance and risk from the  authorities.   She  submitted
    that this had not been argued before the First-tier Tribunal  and  that
    the judge was entitled to take the view that the Appellant's record and
    profile, and that they had her father's name on the  birth  certificate
    would have been of relevance in deciding whether to issue a passport or
    travel document.  The Appellant's own evidence was that the process was
    bureaucratic on the basis of there being a number of visits being  made
    before the passport was actually issued and questions that  were  asked
    of her.  This is understandable if not actually in the country and that
    the authorities would need to be clear about a  person's  heritage  and
    background before producing a passport.  In this context various  birth
    certificates were submitted (see F6 and F7) the birth certificate shows
    registered at  Chennai  in  Sri  Lanka  and  born  in  Tamil  Nadu  and
    registered as a birth of Sri Lankan parents.   In  those  circumstances
    the judge's conclusions on the passport were entirely open to  him  and
    were supported by references within the COIS Report referred to in  the
    refusal letter at paragraph 45 relied upon by the Respondent.

33. As to the medical evidence, it was open to the judge to place little or
    no reliance upon the  report.   It  was  not  entirely  clear  how  the
    psychiatrist could reach the conclusion that  there  had  been  a  "few
    attempts of suicide" when the letter that he had  referred  to  in  the
    report and annexed at page 20A stated that there  was  "no  mention  of
    active thoughts of self-harm".  This was  a  letter  from  a  telephone
    consultation in July.  Even if taken in conjunction with the letter  of
    9th  October  where  it  made  reference  to  a  suicide  attempt,  the
    psychiatric report was factually wrong by stating that there  had  been
    "a few attempts of suicide".  That was not supported  by  any  evidence
    whatsoever.  Furthermore there were  no  proper  details  of  what  had
    happened, or in what circumstances or any treatment or analysis arising
    from that.  The judge was entitled to give little weight to the report.
     For the reasons given by the judge, he could place  no  reliance  upon
    the report due to the matters set out in it.

34. Dealing with the final issue relating to the question of  risk  factors
    in TK, the refusal letter dealt with this at paragraph 34.   The  judge
    made some reference to TK at paragraph 32.  However, the Appellant  did
    not fall into the risk categories, her personal history showed that the
    majority of her life was spent in  Tamil  Nadu,  she  had  no  criminal
    record, had made no confession.  As to scarring there was simply a mark
    to her ankle, it was not indicative of any combat or military training.
     Whilst she would be coming from London, she had been admitted  to  the
    UK with a valid visa as a  student  and  therefore  she  had  not  left
    illegally and whilst she may have made an asylum claim, she had entered
    the UK as a student and continued to have a  visa.   It  had  not  been
    accepted by the judge that her father was a member of the LTTE.  In the
    alternative, even if he was, he had been dead since 2002 and there  was
    no evidence that he was of any adverse interest nor  any  other  family
    member was of any adverse interest.  She was therefore not  someone  to
    be perceived to be of any interest to the authorities and thus  it  was
    not necessary for the judge to consider those factors in the  light  of
    the findings of fact that he made.  She was not at risk  on  return  to
    Sri Lanka.

35. By way of reply Mr Thorne submitted that the medical report, did  refer
    to a few attempts at suicide  but  there  was  evidence  of  a  suicide
    attempt in the statement of Mr Hussain.  It was not clear when that had
    taken place from the statement and he did not give evidence.  At to the
    issue of land, he submitted that there was a good reason for someone to
    denounce her if it meant that she could not have the land.

36. I reserved my determination.

My conclusions:

37. The judge's findings of  fact  and  his  analysis  of  credibility  are
    comprehensive and are set out at paragraphs 25-32 of the determination.
     Whilst there have been points raised  concerning  specific  paragraphs
    relating to credibility findings, it is important in my  judgment  that
    the findings are read and taken as a whole.

38. The first issue  relates  to  the  inconsistency  found  by  the  judge
    concerning whether  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  were  aware  of  the
    Appellant's father's involvement in the LTTE.  At paragraph 29  of  the
    determination he records matters set out in  the  refusal  letter  (see
    refusal letter [35]-[38]) that the Respondent did not accept  that  her
    father was a member of the Tamil Tigers.  This was based  on  the  fact
    that no evidence had been produced to  the  Respondent  concerning  his
    alleged membership.  The Appellant in her interview (question  37)  was
    asked what he did for the Tamil Tigers.  She was not able to  give  any
    evidence concerning this stating "I don't know - never spoke about it."
     Thus she could give no details concerning the alleged position he held
    or any work he did for the LTTE.

39. The judge made the point that the basis of her claim to be at  risk  of
    harm was that the authorities would know of his links to the  LTTE  and
    it would be imputed to her but he noted, "however at question 52 of the
    Appellant's asylum interview the Appellant states that the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities 'did not know my father was connected in the  past  to  the
    LTTE.'"  The  judge  records  the  inconsistency  as  one  between  her
    insistence that she was at risk from the  authorities  because  of  her
    father's profile when at  the  same  time  she  was  stating  that  the
    authorities did not know that her father was even in the LTTE (see  her
    answers to questions 39 and 52 of the interview).  At the time  of  her
    interview, her account according to  her  own  evidence  was  that  her
    mother had simply disappeared; she had no  evidence  to  say  what  had
    happened to her other than she was unable to contact her (see screening
    interview at questions 28, 36, 42 and 46).   She  speculated  that  her
    mother's disappearance was as a result of the father's connections with
    the Tamil Tigers but as the judge recorded at paragraph  29,  that  was
    inconsistent with her evidence that the authorities had no knowledge of
    her father's involvement.   When  the  judge  used  the  word  mother's
    "arrest" the whole sense of the paragraph is referring to the  mother's
    "disappearance" rather than arrest.  The paragraph  also  falls  to  be
    read  alongside  and  in  conjunction  with  paragraphs  43-45  of  the
    determination.  In those paragraphs the judge deals with the claim made
    in her later witness statement at paragraphs 11 and 12, which  appeared
    substantially after the interview, that in fact  her  mother  had  been
    arrested and the evidence  that  she  put  before  the  judge  in  this
    respect.

40. The judge said this:-

         "43. The Appellant has in her screening interview stated 'my mother
             went back to Sri Lanka in 2012 to sell some land to be able to
             keep supporting me in the UK.  Since she left India in January
             2012 I have not been able to  contact  her.'   In  the  asylum
             interview the Appellant recounts at questions 28, 36,  42  and
             46 her aunt's speculation that her mother's  disappearance  is
             as a result of her father's connection to  the  Tamil  Tigers.
             In the Appellant's  witness  statement  at  paragraph  12  the
             Appellant states 'my aunty and grandma confirm that my  mother
             was arrested due to the fact that the Sri  Lankan  authorities
             got information and arrested my mother.  Since her arrest  her
             whereabouts  is  not  known.'   In  the   statement   of   the
             Appellant's   grandmother,   Nadanathevar   Sarojamallar,   at
             paragraph 6 she states '... her mother was arrested  when  she
             was in Sri Lanka.  We understand  that  she  was  informed  by
             someone and got arrested.  Her whereabouts  is  not  known  we
             lost her.  The former LTTE and others are informing  the  army
             and working with them for money and to safeguard  their  lives
             ...'  I note that the grandmother lives in India and therefore
             her information is likely to come from others.   There  is  no
             indication as to where that information about the  arrest  has
             been obtained.  Throughout the asylum interview  there  is  no
             indication that the aunt living in Sri Lanka has attempted  to
             make any enquiries as to the whereabouts  of  the  Appellant's
             mother.  I find the escalation of the Appellant's mother  from
             the missing to having been arrested is an attempt to embellish
             the Appellant's claim and damages the Appellant's credibility.



         44.      Furthermore, the witness statement of the Appellant states
             that villagers are aware  of  the  Appellant's  father's  LTTE
             involvement and that there are informers,  some  recruited  to
             the army.  This has not been suggested before and neither  the
             Appellant nor her witnesses give any reason for knowing  this.
             I find this further damages her credibility.

         45.   The Appellant suggests that her mother has lost touch as  she
             might have encountered  problems  in  Sri  Lanka  due  to  her
             husband's membership of the LTTE before  his  death  in  2002.
             The Appellant's aunt, who  lives  in  Jaffna,  says  that  her
             mother may have been arrested but this is only speculation and
             does not claim to be supported by evidence.  The aunt has made
             no effort to make  enquiries  about  the  whereabouts  of  the
             Appellant's mother."

41. It is plain from those paragraphs that the judge considered her earlier
    account that the father's activities were not known by the  authorities
    and that she had  speculated  as  to  her  mother's  disappearance  and
    considered the new account given that the aunt and the grandmother  had
    confirmed to her that her mother had  been  arrested  due  to  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities obtaining information  and that  "since  her  arrest
    her whereabouts were not known."

42. The judge made a critical appraisal of that evidence  noting  that  the
    grandmother (who was said to have provided the  information)  lived  in
    India and that the  information  could  not  have  been  known  to  her
    personally or by way of direct evidence but by others, that  there  was
    no indication as to where that information about the  arrest  had  been
    obtained from and importantly, that throughout the Appellant's evidence
    in her interview there had been no indication that  the  aunt  who  was
    actually living in Sri Lanka, and had known of the disappearance for  a
    significant number of  months,  had  not  made  any  attempts  to  make
    enquiries as to the mother's  whereabouts.   As  the  judge  stated  at
    paragraph 45, the Appellant's aunt who lives in Jaffna claims that  the
    mother may have been arrested but that it was not supported by evidence
    and reiterates that the aunt had made no effort to make enquiries about
    the whereabouts of the Appellant's mother.

43.  The written grounds at paragraph 5 submit that the judge erred in  law
    by rejecting the Appellant's account of her mother  going  missing  and
    having been arrested and that the judge irrationally failed  to  attach
    sufficient weight to the witness statement  of  the  Appellant  or  the
    evidence from the aunt and grandmother.  I reject that submission.  The
    judge made plain the reasons why he attached no weight to that evidence
    for the reasons that he gave.  There is nothing irrational or  perverse
    about his consideration of that evidence and in  my  judgment,  he  was
    fully entitled to reach the conclusion that  he  did  on  the  evidence
    before  him  when  taken  as  a  whole  that  "the  escalation  of  the
    Appellant's mother from the missing  to  having  been  arrested  is  an
    attempt to embellish the Appellant's claim," and that that was a matter
    which undermined the core of her account to be at risk of harm and  the
    credibility of her account.

44. A further point raised by Mr Thorne is that the judge did not deal with
    a material part of the Appellant's  claim  that  when  the  Appellant's
    mother returned to Sri Lanka that it  raised  the  possibility  of  the
    Appellant coming into conflict with local residents due to her wish  to
    reclaim the land which she wished  to  sell  to  raise  money  for  the
    student fees.  I reject that submission. Also, as Ms Petterson submits,
    this was not argued before the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  Appellant
    did not suggest that the local residents had come  into  conflict  with
    her on the basis of her reclaiming her land.  Mr  Thorne  has  not  put
    before the Tribunal any evidential basis for such a submission which is
    entirely speculative.  In any event,  such  a  submission  ignores  the
    Appellant's own evidence that the Appellant's mother had  already  sold
    some family land  to  cover  her  "up-front  fees"  in  order  for  the
    Appellant's studies when she applied to study in the UK  (see  question
    21 of the interview).

45. It has been submitted on behalf of the Appellant that the  judge  erred
    in law by failing to deal in the determination with the  Appellant  who
    did not give oral evidence.  It was submitted that as she had not  been
    able to give evidence she was not given an opportunity  to  answer  any
    questions and that in those circumstances the judge did not  take  that
    into account (that is the loss of opportunity to  make  her  case)  and
    this pervaded his approach to credibility.

46. It is plan from the determination that the judge  did  deal  with  this
    issue at paragraphs 10 to 11 of the determination.  As set out in those
    paragraphs he was fully aware of the fact that the  Appellant  did  not
    give oral evidence and at paragraph 11 dealt with the reasons  why  she
    did not give oral evidence.  It is further plain from the determination
    that he dealt with the appeal on the basis of  the  evidence  that  was
    presented  before  him  on  behalf  of  the  advocates  including   the
    documentary evidence (which appears to have been faxed to the  Tribunal
    on 18th December the day before  the  hearing)  and  despite  the  non-
    attendance of Fazial Hussain, who had provided a statement at page 7 of
    the bundle.  There is no indication whatsoever that he took as a factor
    against her that she did not give oral evidence.  Indeed  he  carefully
    considered her case on the evidence that was presented on her behalf by
    her legal representative.  It is difficult in my judgment to  see  what
    else the judge could have done or should have done other  than  make  a
    careful appraisal and assessment of the evidence before  him,  applying
    the anxious scrutiny that he should and  ensuring  that  he  considered
    that evidence in the round when reaching a conclusion.  I am  satisfied
    that he did consider the appeal correctly  and  fairly  notwithstanding
    the lack of oral evidence on her part.

47. A further point in respect of credibility related  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities' issue of  a  ten  year  passport  to  the  Appellant.   At
    paragraphs 30 to 32 the judge dealt with this issue.  He found that the
    Appellant had approached the Sri Lankan authorities for a  passport  in
    2011 and this was inconsistent with her claim that the authorities were
    aware or may be aware of the Appellant's father's  alleged  membership.
    Furthermore he found that the issue of the passport  demonstrated  that
    if the authorities were aware of her father having been a member of the
    LTTE, that this had not generated any adverse interest in  her  or  any
    adverse profile  because  they  indeed  issued  her  with  a  passport.
    Importantly, in the context of the  current  background  material,  the
    judge found that the authorities did so knowing she  was  intending  to
    travel to the UK as a student, the UK being a centre  for  support  and
    fund-raising for the Tamils.

48. It is submitted on behalf of the Appellant that the judge conflated the
    issue of the local authorities and that of the Sri Lankan  authorities,
    relying on the different scrutiny given by the Sri  Lankan  authorities
    to the scrutiny of documents on exit by contrast to the level of checks
    made on those returning  to  Sri  Lanka.   It  is  submitted  that  the
    background evidence demonstrated that  detailed  checks  were  made  on
    returnees compared with those leaving the country and  that  it  was  a
    fair inference that this would apply to the issue of passports.

49. The background evidence does give an insight into  the  procedures  and
    checks that are undertaken.  At paragraph 25.20, it notes that at check-
    in passengers produced their passports for the airline staff  and  they
    are routinely checked for identity against  passport  details  and  the
    validity of the passport.  At the security gate, they are then required
    to  produce  their  passport  to  the  Department  of  Immigration  and
    Emigration area (the DIE).  The Immigration Officer scans  the  details
    of the passport on the DIE border control system database  and  non-Sri
    Lankans  will  be  checked  against  existing  database  records.    At
    paragraph 25.21 it records that the DIE  are  only  notified  when  the
    court decides to impound the suspect's passport or when  a  warrant  is
    issued.  Details will be placed on an alert list within  the  database.
    The other method  which  is  rare  and  case-specific  is  where  state
    intelligence services inform the  Immigration  Officers  of  individual
    suspects or terrorist activity or those on  a  wanted  list  and  those
    details are put on the DIE database.

50. The entry procedures are also dealt with at paragraph 25.22.

51. I do not find that the evidence gives rise to any inference in the  way
    suggested that only a cursory check would have been made upon the issue
    of the passport by considering that  particular  material.   There  was
    evidence before the Tribunal as to how passports are issued in the form
    of evidence from the Respondent and from the  Appellant  herself.   The
    Respondent provided information to the Tribunal considering  the  issue
    of passports at paragraph 44 of the refusal letter.  The refusal letter
    stated that

         "The website of  the  Sri  Lankan  Department  of  Immigration  and
         Emigration states that, 'a Sri Lankan citizen can apply for  a  new
         passport or passport renewal,  while  he  is  in  another  country,
         through the Sri Lankan mission  in  that  country  or  the  nearest
         country, where a  Sri  Lankan  mission  is  not  available  in  the
         resident  country).   These  applications  are  processed  by   the
         overseas missions branch  at  immigration  head  office.   Passport
         applications such as the one obtained by you in India in  2011  are
         considered and checked centrally in Sri Lanka by the  DIE.   It  is
         therefore considered that if you were perceived to  have  left  Sri
         Lanka illegally or were present on the  alert  list  your  passport
         application would  have  been  denied.'   The  Respondent  referred
         earlier to paragraph 25.31 of the COIS Report dated 7th March  2012
         who reported the systems in place to identify those  who  had  left
         Sri Lanka illegally stating 'DIE had access to an alert list.  This
         list contained information relating to court  orders,  warrants  of
         arrest, jumping bail, escape from detention as well as  information
         from Interpol and the SIS computer system.  The DIE computer system
         had its own alert system related to the alert list but this did not
         indicate the exact reason for the alert.  Following an  alert,  DIE
         refer these people to CID  or  SIS  to  establish  the  position.'"



52. The Respondent also produced documents exhibited at E1 and E2 from  the
    Department  of  Immigration  and  Emigration  in  Sri  Lanka  and   the
    information referred to at paragraph 44 can be found by  accessing  the
    hyperlink from those documents.

53. There was  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  that  the  application  was
    therefore processed at the overseas mission but that such  applications
    are checked centrally in Sri Lanka by the Department of Immigration and
    Emigration.  Indeed the application for a visa, the  details  of  which
    are contained within the  Respondent's  bundle  demonstrates  that  the
    passport  itself  was  issued  in  Colombo.   There  are  a  number  of
    documentary requirements that the Appellant  was  required  to  produce
    before the authorities including birth certificate or identity card and
    also attestation from a person of standing on the list provided.

54. The judge relied upon the matters set out in the refusal letter and the
    background evidence set out at paragraph 25.31 of the COIS  Report  set
    out earlier.  As the passports are checked centrally in  Sri  Lanka  by
    the DIE, the judge was entitled on the evidence before him to find that
    if she was perceived to have left illegally or  to  be  present  on  an
    alert  list,  there  is  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the  passport
    application would have  been  denied.   Therefore  her  ability  to  be
    provided with a passport demonstrated that she was of  no  interest  or
    was not an individual perceived to be an  LTTE  sympathiser  or  family
    member.

55. In any event, the Appellant's own evidence  undermines  the  submission
    made that a cursory check was made of her background before issuing the
    passport.  Her evidence before the Tribunal was that the normal time to
    take for a passport issue  was  a  lot  shorter  than  it  was  in  her
    particular case.  She stated that it had taken a lot longer  to  obtain
    her passport and she was required to attend on five or six occasions at
    the department before a passport was issued.  During those  visits  she
    states that she was questioned about the Tamil Tigers and  whether  she
    had  joined  or  would  join  the  Tamil  Tigers  (see  question   50).
    Furthermore, she confirmed that they knew she was a refugee  living  in
    India, the inference from that is that there may be  some  LTTE  links.
    The authorities had also her father's full name as it was  recorded  on
    the birth certificate necessary for the issue of the passport and  thus
    they would have been able to make checks via the information that  they
    had.  The judge was therefore  entitled  to  take  the  view  that  the
    Appellant's record and profile, having been a refugee in India,  having
    spent time there as a child, having produced a birth  certificate,  the
    delay in the issue of the passport, being questioned  on  five  to  six
    occasions before the issue of the passport, the questions that she  was
    asked and the authorities' knowledge that she was applying to study  in
    the UK a place of  support  and  fund-raising  for  the  Tamil  Tigers,
    demonstrated that there was nothing  adverse  to  her  profile  of  any
    interest to the authorities.

56. It is  further  asserted  in  the  written  grounds  that  it  was  the
    Appellant's case that the authorities may not necessarily have known at
    the time of the issue of the passport that he was a member of the  LTTE
    and that they only knew later as  evidenced  by  the  mother's  arrest.
    That submission fails to take into account  not  only  the  Appellant's
    evidence concerning the difficulties that  she  had  in  obtaining  the
    passport and the questions asked of her concerning the Tamil Tigers and
    her own past history but fails to take  into  account  that  the  judge
    rejected the Appellant's account and did not believe  that  her  mother
    had been "arrested" as she had claimed.

57.   It is plain that he has serious concerns about the evidence that  had
    come to light at a very late  stage  including  the  vagueness  of  the
    wording of the letter relied upon to confirm such an  arrest  and  that
    the aunt that was actually in Sri Lanka and had known about the alleged
    disappearance for a significant period had done nothing at any time  to
    make enquiries about her whereabouts.  They were all matters  that  the
    judge was entitled to take into account to undermine her  account  that
    her mother had been arrested.

58.   It had further been submitted that the  judge  was  not  entitled  to
    place weight upon her interview although it was acknowledged by Counsel
    that there were some concerns about the answers that she had  given  in
    her interview.  It was the Appellant's case that some answers  recorded
    were not accurate.  It is clear from the determination that this was an
    issue that the judge gave careful consideration to.  The  determination
    deals with that issue at paragraphs 37 to 42.  The judge noted that  at
    no  point  in  the  interview  did  she  indicate  any  problems,   she
    acknowledged that she had been provided with a copy  of  the  recording
    and signed to confirm that she  had  received  such  a  copy  and  also
    confirmed at the conclusion of the interview that  she  understood  all
    the questions put to her and had understood the  interviewer.   It  was
    noted that if she had disagreed with the recording of the interview the
    representatives would have been at liberty to have produced the  record
    and have indicated which questions were either wrong or in dispute.  It
    is also clear from the evidence that the typed interview was  not  sent
    with the refusal but was provided four weeks  later  in  October  2012.
    There were two applications for adjournments the first one made on 30th
    November 2012 for the case to be adjourned until December and  then  on
    3rd December a further adjournment was asked for a  further  two  weeks
    until 19th December.  Thus the  Appellant's  representatives  had  from
    October until December, a period of two months to raise any issues.  If
    the Appellant had problems taking instructions as to the scope  of  the
    appeal, the judge was entitled to take  into  account  that  the  taped
    interview was available for a period of two months.  The judge dealt at
    paragraph 38 with the issue that the Appellant disputed at  question  6
    of the interview which related to whether or not she had ever  been  or
    lived in Sri Lanka.  In the interview on more than one occasion as  the
    judge had noted she had given an account of having lived in Sri  Lanka.
    After the interview it was asserted that she had  never  lived  in  Sri
    Lanka.  The judge therefore made a careful  analysis  of  the  relevant
    questions but in the context of the interview as a whole.  In doing  so
    at paragraph 41 he was satisfied after carrying out his  analysis  that
    the Appellant had returned to Sri Lanka at the age of 2 and had  stayed
    there for five or six years despite her claim to have never been to Sri
    Lanka contained in her witness statement at  paragraph  9.   The  judge
    went on to state that he was not clear why she should  be  inconsistent
    about such a factor as it did not seem to be particularly  material  to
    her claim.  Nonetheless, it demonstrated a further inconsistency in her
    evidence and damaged her credibility.

59. He further took into account the interview record but  noted  that  she
    did not challenge her answer to question 28.  That was  a  question  in
    which she was asked "so if you had been unable to get a UK work  permit
    in 2015 would you have gone to Sri Lanka?"

    Answer "yes but my mother has to pay my second year fees ..."

    The judge notes in respect of this,

         "Therefore I find that the Appellant appears to have  been  willing
         to return to Sri Lanka in three years time and did not express  any
         fear of doing so at that date.  There is  nothing  in  her  account
         which would indicate that she will be any  safer  then.   She  will
         still be a young person and the authorities  might  still  consider
         her a potential Tiger to recruit as she has claimed."

    Thus the judge dealt with a further credibility  issue  that  had  been
    raised by the Appellant as to why she should not return to Sri Lanka.

60. I am satisfied having considered the determination in  the  context  of
    the interview, the answers that she gave and the general background  to
    that interview including the submission that  she  was  suffering  from
    depression at the time that I find that the judge did  make  a  careful
    analysis and was thus entitled to make  those  findings  based  on  her
    evidence.

61. I now turn to the issue of the medical evidence.  The  judge  first  of
    all  considered  the  medical  evidence  at  paragraphs  34-35  of  the
    determination in the context of  her  failure  to  claim  asylum.   Her
    evidence before the judge was that she did not  claim  earlier  due  to
    depression.  The judge considered the Respondent's submission that  the
    Appellant was an intelligent and  educated  individual  with  excellent
    English (bearing in mind she was studying at Aston University) and  had
    access to advice and guidance in the university, the medical profession
    and friends in the UK and that there would  be  no  impediment  to  her
    taking steps towards claiming asylum before the six months had  elapsed
    following  her  mother's  disappearance  and  the  curtailment  of  her
    studies.  The judge considered by way of response at paragraph  35  the
    submissions made on behalf of the Appellant noting that  there  was  no
    immediate requirement to regularise her status as  she  had  a  student
    visa valid until 2015, the disappearance of her mother was said to have
    a significant effect on her, she could not attend university, her  visa
    was revoked, she had been sexually abused by her  uncle  and  estranged
    from her family in the UK and had financial  difficulties.   The  judge
    noted  that  the  psychiatric  report  confirmed  that  "the  Appellant
    suffered, and continued to suffer moderately severe  depression,  there
    had been one suicide attempt."  The judge found

         "I find that these issues, if true, when  considered  cumulatively,
         will have meant that despite her intelligence education and ability
         in English, the Appellant was not functioning properly.  It was not
         until she received advice from her GP that she claimed  asylum.   I
         find that in the light of these  issues  although  the  Appellant's
         delay in making an asylum claim damages her  credibility  that  the
         damage is limited.  Thus  the  judge  did  take  into  account  the
         medical report at that stage in reaching a finding  concerning  the
         delay.  Although it is clear that the delay of six months was found
         to damage her credibility  but  that  it  was  only  to  a  limited
         degree."

    The judge dealt with the report  itself  at  paragraphs  50-51  of  the
    determination.  The judge said this:-

         "50. I have considered the  report  of  Dr  Krishna  Balasubramanim
             dated 29th November 2012.  The Respondent does not take  issue
             with his qualifications and expertise but I am  not  confident
             as  to  the  quality  of  the  report.   It  is   descriptive,
             repetitive and relies on the findings of others.  It  contains
             virtually no analysis of its own.  I have found the  Appellant
             not to be a credible witness and therefore  I  do  not  accept
             what  the  Appellant  has  told  Dr  Balasubramanim  is  true.
             Therefore, I find that his  opinion  does  not  have  a  sound
             basis.  His opinion is that the Appellant is suffering from  a
             'depressive disorder of  a  moderate  to  severe  degree  with
             suicidal thoughts.'   He considers that, 'deporting her to Sri
             Lanka is likely  to  worsen  her  condition  and  there  is  a
             likelihood that she may commit suicide.'  Because of  my  lack
             of confidence in the report, I find that the  Appellant  would
             not be at real risk of harm or notification of  or  on  actual
             return to Sri Lanka.

         51.  If I am wrong in this finding and the Appellant  is  suffering
             from the mental condition described I note from the background
             evidence set out in the reasons for refusal letter that mental
             health services exist in Sri  Lanka  and  treatment  would  be
             available.  I note that the Appellant has an aunt in Sri Lanka
             who could support her during her treatment."

62. The medical report can be found in the Appellant's bundle at pages 9 to
    18.  I should summarise that report.  The  report  was  written  by  Dr
    Balasubramanim who describes himself as a consultant  psychiatrist  for
    the past twenty years.  For the purposes of this report he reviewed the
    Asylum Interview Record and refusal letter, a letter from  a  GP  dated
    9th October and a letter from the Birmingham and Solihull Mental  Trust
    dated 20th July 2012.  His diagnosis was that she was suffering from  a
    depressive disorder ICD coding F32 of a moderate to severe degree  with
    suicidal thoughts.  He considered that the disorder was  brought  about
    by various tragic events in her  life  which  were,  her  family  being
    displaced by internal conflict in Sri Lanka and her parents  moving  to
    India as refugees, the fact that she was  born  in  India,  her  father
    committed suicide in  2002  and  she  and  her  mother  underwent  more
    hardship, her mother went to Sri Lanka and was arrested and  she  could
    not  be  contacted  and  she  became  ill,  that  she   had   financial
    difficulties, and that her uncle had abused her sexually.  At paragraph
    5 the doctor said that she had been traumatised by the suicide  of  her
    father, the loss of her mother in Sri Lanka and the sexual assault that
    she had suffered at the hands of her uncle.  In terms of  treatment  he
    said that she required close monitoring by the  health  treatment  team
    and required psychological treatment for up to a full year.   He  found
    that she was not fit to give evidence and that she would be  likely  to
    improve after a two month period.  In his conclusions, he  referred  to
    her as having "made a few attempts  at  suicide."   He  further  stated
    "deporting her to Sri Lanka is likely to worsen her condition and there
    is a likelihood she may commit suicide."

63.  The judge is criticised for the way that he  dealt  with  the  medical
    evidence.  The  judge  was  not  bound  to  accept  the  report  of  Dr
    Balasubramanim.  The position is summarised by Stanley Burton LJ in the
    case of SS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 155 at  paragraph  21  of
    his judgment where he said:-

         "21. Generally speaking, the weight if any, to be given  to  expert
             (or indeed any) evidence is a matter for the trial  judge.   A
             judge's decision  not  to  accept  expert  evidence  does  not
             involve an error of law on his  part  provided  he  approached
             that evidence with the appropriate care and gives good reasons
             for his decision.  Ultimately, therefore, there are  only  two
             issues as to the Senior Immigration Judge's treatment  of  the
             medical  evidence:  did  he   address   that   evidence   with
             appropriate  care  and  did  he  give  good  reasons  for  his
             conclusion?  Those two questions  are  inter-related.   It  is
             difficult to conceive  of  a  case  in  which  a  judge  gives
             adequate reasons for his conclusions on expert evidence yet he
             is held to have  exercised  insufficient  care.   His  reasons
             demonstrate his care."

64. SS was a case which involved expert evidence which  had  not  been  the
    subject of cross-examination,  of  a  psychiatrist  who  had  diagnosed
    complex post traumatic stress disorder.  Further  it  had  been  opined
    that the applicant would be likely to  become  extremely  disassociated
    and unable to provide a coherent account in court.  In that case on its
    particular facts, it was held that the judge was entitled not to accept
    the expert report for the reasons given.

65. I have set out earlier the findings made by the judge and the  specific
    criticisms made by him concerning  the  quality  and  content  of  that
    report.  The medical report was  indeed  repetitive;  the  summary  and
    conclusions at paragraph 2 were repeated again at paragraph  8  of  the
    conclusions at length.  He referred to future treatment in the  summary
    and the conclusions at paragraph 2  and  repeated  this  again  at  (c)
    management plan.  The judge found the report to be one which relied  on
    the findings of others and contained virtually no analysis.

66. In this respect the Appellant's previous history should  have  been  of
    relevance.  The report makes no reference to  having  asked  or  having
    seen any general practitioner's notes.  He makes  a  reference  to  two
    letters; one from a GP dated 9th October and a letter dated 20th  July.
    There is no reference at any  time  of  any  treatment  sought  by  the
    Appellant between January 2012 (when she claimed that she had to  leave
    college due to depression and July 2012).  The first reference  is  set
    out in the letter of 20th July which refers to a telephone  appointment
    (rather than a  face-to-face  appointment)  at  the  Birmingham  Health
    Authority on 19th July and then nothing further until  September  2012.
    The author of the report simply recites what he has been told by way of
    history of the Appellant without making any reference to any  notes  to
    obtain a consistent picture.

67.   It is also right to record that the doctor  is  factually  incorrect.
    It is not clear how he came to the conclusion that  there  had  been  a
    "few suicide attempts."  In the report on two occasions at paragraph  2
    and paragraph 8 he states that the Appellant had made  "a  few  suicide
    attempts."  However it is plain from the  letter  at  page  20A  (which
    records the telephone consultation that took place with  the  Appellant
    in July) that at that time  she  had  no  active  thoughts  of  harming
    herself.  Whilst the interview  that  took  place  in  August  2012  at
    question 60 she said sometimes  like  "harming  myself"  there  was  no
    evidence of any attempts to do so at the interview in August  2012  nor
    in July.  Whilst there was a letter from Fazial Hussain at  page  7  of
    the bundle, who did not give oral evidence before the Tribunal, he said
    that on one occasion she tried to commit suicide by taking tablets.  No
    date was given for that and as noted in July she had no active thoughts
    and in August she made no reference to that either.  In any event, even
    taken in  conjunction  with  the  letter  of  9th  October  which  made
    reference to an attempted suicide attempt in Birmingham,  there  is  no
    evidence whatsoever to support the doctor's description of  her  having
    attempted suicide on a few occasions.  Importantly as the  judge  notes
    there are no proper details of what happened in this regard,  when  the
    attempt was made or the circumstances surrounding that.  All  of  those
    matters of  course  are  relevant  in  making  a  proper  analysis  and
    diagnosis.

68. The doctor gives no proper description of her presentation at paragraph
    6 under the heading "mental state  examination."   He  states  at  this
    point

         "During the examination I found Miss Arivalagan a Sri  Lankan  lady
         of average height, who spoke spontaneously and coherently in  Tamil
         which is her native language.  In her mood she appeared  depressed.
         She is preoccupied with the traumatic memories of what happened  to
         her in the past.  Examinations of her cognitive functions indicated
         that her concentration was poor."

    He gave no detail or  examples  of  her  presentation  to  support  his
    diagnosis at paragraph 7 where he said  she  was  also  suffering  from
    traumatic stress as evidenced by flashback experience of  past  trauma.



69. As to the prognosis, he stated that the depression would improve over a
    period of twelve months.  He said that deporting her to Sri Lanka would
    be likely to worsen her condition as firstly, she would be moving to an
    environment where her family  had  suffered,  that  she  had  not  ever
    visited Sri Lanka, that she had no links with Sri Lanka  and  had  been
    brought up in India, and that she had said her life was in danger  like
    her mother.

70.  As the judge has noted, there was no analysis of those factors and  he
    has not taken into account the evidence  that  was  set  out  from  the
    immigration authorities that was  before  him  in  the  interview  that
    firstly, she had intended to return to Sri Lanka after her studies  and
    therefore it was in contemplation that she would return  there  despite
    her earlier experiences which had led her to living in India.  She  had
    also given evidence that contrary to the view that he had expressed  in
    his prognosis and diagnosis, that she had lived in India for  a  period
    of five to six years as a child, that there was no  evidence  that  her
    family had suffered in Sri Lanka, and that she had links with Sri Lanka
    as her aunt lived in Jaffna.  As noted in the decision of HH (Ethiopia)
    [2007] EWCA Civ 306, the more a diagnosis is dependent on assuming that
    the account given by the Appellant was to be believed, the less  likely
    it is that significant weight will be  attached  to  it.   Further  the
    author of such a medical report needs to understand what is expected of
    them if a critical and objective analysis of the injuries  or  symptoms
    displayed.   They  need  to  be  vigilant  but  ultimately  whether  an
    Appellant's account of the underlying events  is  or  not  credible  or
    plausible is a question of a legal appraisal.

71. It is clear from a consideration of the report made by the  judge  that
    he criticised the quality of the report for the reasons given and  thus
    could attach no weight to it.  I do not find that the  judge  erred  in
    law in his consideration of the report.  It was not the type of  report
    that was intended in effect to corroborate her account as some  reports
    do that are put before the  Tribunal,  for  example,  to  support  ill-
    treatment and torture in their country of origin.  All it  demonstrated
    was that at the present time she was suffering from moderate to  severe
    depression for a number of reasons.  Those  life  experiences  did  not
    mean that she was a refugee or demonstrate that her mother was arrested
    and it was not capable of corroborating her claim to be at risk of harm
    at the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities.  All the  report  could  do
    was to demonstrate  that  she  had  been  diagnosed  with  symptoms  of
    depression and there were a number of reasons  given  relying  on  past
    events, which  were  not  relevant  to  refugee  status,  for  example,
    financial difficulties which the judge found at paragraph 36  coincided
    with the Appellant's  asylum  claim  (the  claim  coinciding  with  her
    failure to continue her studies due to financial  problems),  the  fact
    that her visa was cancelled, possible sexual abuse  by  her  uncle  and
    estrangement by her family in the UK and social isolation.  The  report
    did not nor could it, offer significant and separate  support  for  her
    claim.  In those circumstances, the  criticisms  made  of  the  judge's
    treatment of the report are not made out.

72.   It is further submitted that the judge did not deal with the issue of
    suicide and did not engage with the report.  The matters set out in the
    preceding paragraphs are relevant to this issue.  It is plain from  the
    determination when  read  alongside  the  report  that  the  judge  had
    concerns concerning the quality of the report, the  diagnosis  and  the
    failure of the report to deal  with  relevant  issues  concerning  past
    history, there being no reference to what happened between January  and
    July, no attempt to obtain the GP's notes to obtain a  proper  history,
    the factual mistake referring to a few attempts of  suicide  when  that
    was not the evidence and  even  in  relation  to  the  suicide  attempt
    referred to in the  letter  in  October,  there  being  no  information
    whatsoever as to the circumstances of this.  It was open  therefore  in
    those circumstances for the judge to place no weight upon  that  report
    in making any assessment of this risk.

73.   It was further submitted that a freestanding Article 3 claim was  put
    forward before the Judge.  Mr Thorne was not Counsel before the  First-
    tier Tribunal and he  had  no  note  from  Counsel  who  had  appeared.
    Different Counsel had also drafted the  grounds.   Ms  Petterson,  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, checked her minute and noted that  what  was
    in it reflected paragraph 51 of the determination that  the  judge  did
    consider her medical condition and that the case had been  advanced  on
    the basis whether medical treatment was available to  her.   The  judge
    made reference to the extensive background  evidence  set  out  in  the
    refusal letter concerning the mental health services  that  existed  in
    Sri Lanka for someone suffering from depression of the type  identified
    by the psychiatrist, notwithstanding the concerns raised by him by  the
    judge.  The background material at paragraphs 83 onwards dealt with the
    material  from  the  COIS  Report  relating  to  the  availability  and
    affordability of anti-depressive and therapeutic drugs, the information
    from the World Health Organisation relating to mental health policy  in
    Sri Lanka (paragraphs 23.30, 23.21, 23.22).  It noted  that  Sri  Lanka
    had the world's tenth highest  suicide  rate  and  citing  material  at
    paragraphs 23.23 and 23.24 and citing paragraph  23.25  noting  that  a
    consultant psychiatrist had stated that every  district  in  Sri  Lanka
    apart from Monaragala, had a hospital  offering  treatment  for  mental
    illness.  Colombo having two hospitals apart from the NIMH offering the
    facility.  The judge  in  his  determination  at  paragraph  51  placed
    reliance on that background evidence noting that mental health services
    existed in Sri Lanka and that treatment would be available.  In respect
    of assistance to her, he further took into account that she had an aunt
    in Sri Lanka who could support her during treatment.

74. Having considered the judge's treatment of the medical evidence,  I  do
    not find that the judge's approach to the medical evidence was  flawed.
    In the decision of Y and Z v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ  362,  the  Court  of
    Appeal held that no Tribunal is bound simply to accept everything  that
    an expert says but  the  Tribunal  must  give  acceptable  reasons  for
    rejecting such evidence and  acknowledge  that  the  factuality  of  an
    Appellant's account might be so  contraverted  by  the  Tribunal's  own
    findings as to undermine the psychiatric evidence.  The judge  did  not
    find that the  Appellant  had  given  a  credible  account  as  to  the
    circumstances in Sri Lanka for her and reached the conclusion that  she
    would not be at risk of harm from the authorities on return.

75.   As to the other issues that were raised  in  the  report,  concerning
    other life events, the doctor did not consider the other evidence  that
    was contained in the immigration authority's  material  in  making  any
    analysis of those factors.  In those circumstances it was open  to  the
    judge to reject the report in the way that he did.  The facts in Y  and
    Z are entirely different.  In that case the material findings were that
    the two Appellants were so traumatised  by  their  experiences  and  so
    subjectively terrified at the prospect of return that they would not be
    capable of seeking the treatment that they need.  The court  had  found
    that the chances of finding a secure base, with no known family left in
    Sri Lanka from which to seek the care that would keep them from  taking
    their own lives, were on any admissible view of the  evidence,  remote.
    The court acknowledged that none of the reasoning represented a licence
    for emotional blackmail by asylum  seekers  and  an  Immigration  Judge
    would be right to continue  to  scrutinise  the  authenticity  of  such
    claims with care.

76.   I do not find that it has been demonstrated that the judge's approach
    to the medical evidence was flawed and consequently find  that  he  was
    entitled to reach the view on the evidence before him that there  would
    be medical treatment available in Sri  Lanka  for  the  Appellant  that
    could be accessed by her alongside the support that she  had  from  her
    aunt,  notwithstanding   the   depressive   symptoms   she   had   been
    experiencing.

77.   The last point raised relates to Ground 3 of the written grounds that
    the judge did not take into account the country guidance case of TK Sri
    Lanka (LP Updated) Sri Lanka CG  UKAIT  0049  and  that  there  was  no
    assessment of the Appellant's profile against the risk factors set  out
    in that decision.

78. The risk factors set out in TK are as follows:


                 "(i) Tamil ethnicity.


                 (ii) Previous record as a suspected or actual LTTE  member
                 or supporter.


                 (iii) Previous criminal record and/or  outstanding  arrest
                 warrant.


                 (iv) Bail jumping and/or escaping from custody.


                 (v) Having signed a confession or similar document.


                 (vi) Having been asked by the security forces to become an
                 informer.


                 (vii) The presence of scarring.


                 (viii) Returned  from  London  or  other  centre  of  LTTE
                 activity or fund-raising.


                 (ix) Illegal departure from Sri Lanka.


                 (x) Lack of ID card or other documentation.


                 (xi) Having made an asylum claim abroad.


                 (xii) Having relatives in the LTTE.


                    "

79. It is plain from the determination that the judge made  findings  about
    the credibility of the Appellant's evidence and rejected her claim  and
    did not find on the facts as established that she  would  face  a  real
    risk of persecution on return to Sri Lanka for the reasons that he gave
    at paragraphs 25 to 52 of the determination.  I have set out earlier in
    this determination that those findings, notwithstanding the grounds for
    permission to appeal, were ones that were open to him and findings that
    he was entitled to make on the evidence that had been presented  before
    him.

80.   It is right that he did make reference to the country  guidance  case
    of TK at paragraph 32 and the refusal letter dealt with  those  factors
    that I have outlined earlier within the  refusal  letter.   Whilst  the
    judge did not go through those risk factors, even if he  had  done  so,
    the only outcome on the findings of fact that he made would  have  been
    to have dismissed the appeal noting that she would not be  at  risk  of
    harm.  The Appellant's account was not accepted by the  judge  and  the
    assessment of risk would have to be  seen  against  those  findings  of
    fact.  I asked Counsel to identify to the  Tribunal  the  risk  factors
    that he said would be relevant.  He identified that she  was  of  Tamil
    ethnicity and would be  returning  from  the  United  Kingdom.   As  to
    scarring, the only evidence was of a mark to her ankle.  That  was  not
    likely to be seen as being caused by  combative  or  military  training
    even if seen.  The COIS Report at paragraph 25.53 makes it  clear  that
    the strong anecdotal evidence was that scarring in the past was used to
    identify suspects  and  was  used  to  identify  whether  suspects  had
    undergone military style training.  Contacts in  government  ministries
    suggested that the practice had either ceased or used less  frequently.
    At the very least, the security forces only  conducted  these  searches
    when there was another reason to suspect an  individual  and  were  not
    looking for particular scars as such, but anything to show the  suspect
    as having been involved in fighting or military training.  There was no
    recent  evidence  that  examinations  were  routinely  carried  out  on
    returnees.  Whilst she had also claimed asylum, it would be right  that
    she would be returning with a visa in her passport having been  granted
    a student visa until 2015.  Importantly, the judge did  not  find  that
    she had signed any confession, that she had any  family  links  to  the
    LTTE or that she would be suspected of any links to the LTTE  thus  the
    factors  that  were  identified  would  not  have  been  sufficient  to
    demonstrate that she was at any real risk  of  harm  upon  return.   In
    those circumstances, there was no requirement on the  particular  facts
    of this case for the judge to go through those  factors  identified  in
    TK.

81. In conclusion, I am satisfied that  the  judge  did  give  careful  and
    anxious scrutiny to the current appeal, that  he  did  not  take  as  a
    matter against her that she was not able to give oral evidence but gave
    a careful consideration  of  the  material  before  him  including  the
    medical evidence.   In  the  anxious  scrutiny  that  he  gave  to  the
    material, I am satisfied that it has not  been  demonstrated  that  the
    credibility findings were not open to  him  or  were  wrongly  made  as
    asserted in the grounds. For this Tribunal to set aside  the  decision,
    it must be demonstrated that the judge made an error of  law  that  was
    material in his approach but having given the  matters  raised  careful
    consideration, I do not find that it has  been  demonstrated  that  the
    judge made any error of law in his approach to determining this appeal.



82. Mr Thorne informed the Tribunal that there was a  likelihood  that  the
    Appellant's  condition  may  require  a  further  report.    In   those
    circumstances, it would be open to the Appellant to make a fresh  claim
    based on any new evidence.  However on the evidence that was before the
    Tribunal, which I am to have regard to, for the reasons that I have set
    out it has not been demonstrated that the judge made any errors of law.
     For those reasons the decision shall stand.

Decision

83. The original Tribunal did not make  an  error  of  law.   The  decision
    stands.








Signed                                  Date: 5/8/2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds



