
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09499/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10th March 2016                       |On 31st March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     KW
                           (ANONYMITY order MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr G Brown of Counsel, instructed by Compass
Immigration Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Bruce (the judge) promulgated on 14th January 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female Nigerian citizen born in 1981.  She has  three
    children born 18th January 2008, 19th February 2010, and 15th June 2011
    respectively who are dependants in the asylum claim.

 4. The Claimant's application for asylum was refused on 2nd October  2013.
    Her appeal was initially heard  on  8th  January  2014  and  dismissed.
    Permission to appeal  against  that  decision  was  granted  and  there
    followed an Upper Tribunal hearing on 20th May 2015  conducted  by  the
    judge, sitting as a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge,  who  found  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained material errors  of  law,
    and the decision was set aside and the appeal remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

 5. The judge  subsequently  heard  the  appeal  sitting  as  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge on 11th December 2014, and allowed the appeal on asylum
    and human rights grounds.

 6. This caused the Secretary of State to apply for permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal relying  upon  two  grounds,  which  are  summarised
    below.

 7. Firstly it was noted that the judge was aware  that  the  Claimant  had
    admitted a number of untruths in her  claim  and  that  she  "had  made
    things up that she thought would get her  asylum."   It  was  submitted
    that in those circumstances the judge was required to take  account  of
    this behaviour as  damaging  the  Claimant's  credibility  pursuant  to
    section 8(2)(b) of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,
    etc.) Act 2004 (the 2004 Act).  It was contended that the judge had not
    made any reference to the 2004 Act and had not taken into  account  the
    Claimant's behaviour as damaging her  credibility.   It  was  contended
    that the judge had given inadequate reasons, in addition to  neglecting
    her section 8 duty, for finding the Claimant to be credible.

 8. Secondly in relation to the risk of FGM to the Claimant's daughter,  it
    was contended that the  judge  had  failed  to  adequately  reason  her
    conclusion that the Claimant's daughter was at risk of FGM.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge P J  M  Hollingworth  in  the
    following terms;

         "At paragraph 52 the judge reminds himself that the credibility  of
         the Appellant  as  a  witness  is  still  hotly  contested  by  the
         Respondent.  The judge states that  considerable  weight  has  been
         given to the fact that the  Appellant  lied  in  her  original  and
         subsequent application  to  the  Respondent.   The  judge  has  not
         referred to  the  application  of  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
         Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.  The judge has
         not dealt adequately with the application of  this  section  across
         the spectrum of fact-finding in the determination."

10. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Oral Submissions

11. Mr Harrison, on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State,  relied  upon  the
    grounds contained within the application for permission to appeal.

12. Mr Brown relied upon a written response which had been lodged with  the
    Tribunal on 4th March  2015,  pursuant  to  rule  24  of  The  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   In  brief  summary  it  was
    submitted, in relation to the first ground, that the  judge  had  taken
    properly into account that the Claimant had initially lied when  making
    her application.  The judge had given adequate and sustainable  reasons
    for concluding that the Claimant had been trafficked, and the  lack  of
    any specific reference to section 8 of the 2004 Act was not a  material
    error.

13. In relation to the second ground, it was again contended that the judge
    had given  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    Claimant's daughter would be at risk of FGM, and it was submitted  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should stand.

14. In response, Mr Harrison submitted that section 8 of the 2004  Act  had
    not been addressed by the judge, and inadequate reasons had been  given
    as to why the judge found aspects of the Claimant's appeal, that  being
    that she had been trafficked, credible.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. Dealing with the first ground of appeal, I set out below  section  8(1)
    and (2)(b) of the 2004 Act;

         8.   (1) In determining whether to believe a statement made  by  or
                  on behalf of a person who makes an asylum claim or a human
                  rights claim, a deciding authority shall take account,  as
                  damaging the claimant's credibility, of any  behaviour  to
                  which this section applies.
             (2)  This section applies to any  behaviour  by  the  claimant
                  that the deciding authority thinks -
                  (b)  is designed or likely to mislead.

16. Guidance on the correct approach to section 8 of the 2004 Act was given
    by the Court of Appeal in  JT  (Cameroon)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  878.   In
    paragraph 19 of that decision it is confirmed that a global  assessment
    of credibility is required.

17. In paragraph 20 it was stated;

         "The section 8 factors shall be taken  into  account  in  assessing
         credibility, and are capable of damaging it, but the  section  does
         not  dictate  that  relevant  damage  to   credibility   inevitably
         results."

18. I set out below paragraph 21;

         "21.     Section 8 can thus be construed as not  offending  against
             constitutional principles.  It is no more than a  reminder  to
             fact-finding  Tribunals  that  conduct   coming   within   the
             categories stated in section 8 shall be taken into account  in
             assessing credibility.  If there was a tendency for  Tribunals
             simply to ignore these  matters  when  assessing  credibility,
             they were in error.  It is necessary to take account of  them.
             However, at one end of the spectrum, there may, unusually,  be
             cases in which conduct of the kind identified in section 8  is
             held to carry no weight at all in the  overall  assessment  of
             credibility on the particular facts.  I do  not  consider  the
             section prevents that finding in an appropriate case.  Subject
             to  that,  I respectfully  agree  with  Baroness  Scotland's
             assessment, when  introducing  the  Bill,  of  the  effect  of
             section 8.  Where section 8 matters are held to be entitled to
             some weight, the weight to be given  to  them  is  entirely  a
             matter for the fact-finder."

19. The judge does not specifically refer to section 8, or  JT  (Cameroon),
    but that, without more, is not an error of law,  provided  the  correct
    principles have been applied, and having considered the  decision  made
    by the judge, I am satisfied that they were.

20. The judge dealt with the Claimant's initial appeal, sitting as a Deputy
    Judge in the Upper Tribunal and in setting aside the  initial  decision
    by the First-tier Tribunal said this in paragraph 10;

         "10.     To say that this  Appellant  has  an  uphill  struggle  to
             establish  that  her  evidence  should  be  accepted  may   be
             something of an understatement.  She is  entitled  however  to
             have all of the evidence she submits considered in the  round,
             and the lower standard of proof applied.  It is not sufficient
             to point to an earlier untruth and  conclude  that  everything
             she now says is a lie.  That is precisely what paragraph 43 of
             the determination appears  to  do.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
             further erred in finding that 'no explanation whatsoever'  had
             been given as to why the Appellant had concealed what she  now
             claims to be the true account.   A  detailed  explanation  had
             been given and that required consideration."

    In the decision that is now the subject of this appeal by the Secretary
    of State, the judge at paragraph 6  explained  that  the  Claimant  had
    subsequently admitted that much of what  she  had  initially  told  the
    Secretary of State was untrue, and that she had made things up that she
    thought would get her asylum.

21. I set out in part what the judge found in paragraph 48;

         "48.      I  have  considered  all  the  evidence  on  her  claimed
             trafficking in the round with the evidence as a whole.  At the
             forefront of my  mind  is  the  fact  that  she  has  shown  a
             willingness not just to lie but to rely  on  forged  documents
             specifically purchased for the purpose of deceiving  the  Home
             Office.  I am  however  satisfied  that  some  truths  can  be
             extracted  from  the  morass  of  the   Appellant's   previous
             evidence.  Some  features  of  the  trafficking  account  have
             remained constant."

22. The judge went on to record in paragraph 52;

         "I have given considerable weight to the fact  that  the  Appellant
         lied in her original, and  subsequent,  applications  to  the  Home
         Office."

23. It is clear from the decision that the judge took into account that the
    Claimant had lied to the Home Office when making  her  application  for
    asylum.  The judge has attached weight  to  that,  but  notwithstanding
    those findings, the judge  having  thoroughly  examined  the  evidence,
    concludes that the Claimant was trafficked.  That finding was  open  to
    the judge, and sustainable reasons given.

24. Therefore the judge has taken fully into account the earlier lies  told
    by the Claimant, and has taken that behaviour into account as  required
    by section 8.  It is evident that the  judge  found  that  the  initial
    application by the Claimant to the Home Office was  not  credible,  and
    that was subsequently accepted by the Claimant.  The judge weighed that
    up, in  concluding  that  the  trafficking  aspect  of  the  Claimant's
    application was credible.  The weight to  be  given  to  the  behaviour
    covered by section 8, is, as confirmed in JT (Cameroon)  a  matter  for
    the fact-finder.  I conclude that the judge did not err in law on  this
    issue.

25. Dealing with the second ground of appeal, the duty to give reasons  for
    decisions was considered in Budhathoki (reasons for  decisions)  [2014]
    UKUT 00341 (IAC) and I set out below the head note of that decision;

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

26. I find that the judge has complied with the principles set  out  above,
    when giving reasons for her conclusion, that taking  into  account  the
    lower standard of proof, the Claimant's daughter may be at risk of FGM.
     The judge was entitled to rely upon the  expert  report  of  Professor
    Aguilar as to the "main indicator" of risk, and it is telling that  the
    expert report was not simply accepted in its entirety, as the judge  in
    paragraph  53  went  on  to  reject  "Professor  Aguilar's   apparently
    unfounded speculation that any member of the Urhobo Tribe,  identifying
    the Claimant as one of their number, would seek  to  cut  her  daughter
    themselves."

27. The judge records that the Claimant did not wish  her  daughter  to  be
    subjected to FGM, but faced with the  task  of  integrating  her  young
    family into Nigerian  society,  the  Claimant  may  permit  this.   The
    finding was open to the judge to make on the evidence.

28. In any event, even if, which I do not accept, the judge erred  on  that
    issue, the error  would  not  be  material,  taking  into  account  the
    findings made by the judge, that the  Claimant  would  be  at  risk  of
    retribution, if not re-trafficking,  from  her  former  traffickers  in
    either Edo or Delta  states,  and  that  there  is  no  sufficiency  of
    protection or reasonable option of internal relocation.

29. The grounds contained within the application for permission  to  appeal
    disclose a disagreement with the findings made by the judge, but do not
    disclose an error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law such that the decision must be set aside.  I do  not
set aside the decision,  and  the  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
dismissed.

Anonymity

An anonymity direction was made by the judge, and I continue that  direction
pursuant to rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of  her  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 11th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or is payable.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date 11th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

