
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/09774/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11th May 2016                          |On 20th May 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     AOM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:           Ms Mensah, Counsel instructed by AJO
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a male  national  of  Sudan  born  in  1994.   He  has
    permission to appeal[1] against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Cruthers)[2] to dismiss his appeal against a decision to  remove
    him from the United Kingdom pursuant to  s10  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999.  That  immigration  decision  had  followed  from  the
    rejection of the Appellant's asylum and human rights claim.



    Background and Matters in Issue


 2. The basis of the Appellant's protection claim was that he is  a  member
    of the non-Arab Tunjur tribe of North Darfur and that there was a  real
    risk of persecution  for  reasons  of  his  political  opinion  by  the
    authorities in Sudan.  He gave a history of persecution for reasons  of
    his ethnicity and imputed political opinion which included a  detention
    in 2008.


 3. The Respondent accepted that the Appellant was Sudanese,  but  not  any
    other element of his claim.

 4. On appeal the Appellant gave oral  evidence.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    accepted that the Appellant was from the  Tunjur  tribe  and  that  his
    origins  lay  in  North  Darfur.  It  rejected  core  elements  of  the
    Appellant's historical account, including his claim that  he  had  been
    detained in 2008. Turning to  the  country  guidance  in  AA  (non-Arab
    Darfuris-relocation) Sudan CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00056  the  determination
    notes that five years had passed since that decision.   It  found  that
    tensions had eased since that decision had been taken.  At paragraph 49
    the Tribunal finds that the Appellant  would  not  be  "relocating"  to
    Khartoum because he had lived there for 11 years  before  he  left  the
    country: Khartoum was in effect his home area. There  was  no  risk  of
    persecution to him there. The appeal was thereby dismissed.

 5. The grounds  of  appeal  raise  various  points  but  in  view  of  the
    concession made by the Respondent I need not address  them  in  detail.
    The central complaint was that having found the Appellant to be a  non-
    Arab Darfuri it was not open to the Tribunal to go behind  the  country
    guidance in AA, which stated in terms that persons in  that  class  are
    refugees.   The fact that he had previously lived in Khartoum  did  not
    affect that analysis. Mr McVeety conceded that the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in departing from the country guidance and on  the  basis  of
    the facts found invited me to allow the appeal.

 6. Although the First-tier Tribunal cannot have known this,  on  the  very
    same day that its decision  was  promulgated  the  Upper  Tribunal  had
    issued new country guidance on the very same point.  In  MM  (Darfuris)
    Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010 (IAC) it heard uncontested  expert  evidence
    from Mr Peter Verney about whether there had been  any  improvement  in
    the situation faced by non-Arab Darfuris.  It held that the authorities
    in Khartoum were not interested in  whether  the  individual  concerned
    lived in Darfur or indeed had ever been  there.  The  focus  for  their
    adverse  attention  was  the  individual's  ethnic  origins,  and  upon
    arrival, (or in any other interaction) these  would  be  evident.   The
    Respondent submitted no evidence to  contradict  the  testimony  of  Mr
    Verney that in his opinion non-Arab Darfuris (Tunjur and Berti) were at
    risk no matter their geographical origins.  The headnote summarises the
    Tribunal's findings:
         In the country guidance case of AA (Non-Arab Darfuris-relocation)
         Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056, where it is stated that if a claimant
         from Sudan is a non-Arab Darfuri he must succeed in an
         international protection claim, "Darfuri" is to be understood as an
         ethnic term relating to origins, not as a geographical term.
         Accordingly it covers even Darfuris who were not born in Darfur.
    The guidance in AA is expressly maintained. It follows that Mr  McVeety
    was correct to have made the concession that he does.


      Decisions

 7. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


 8. The appeal is re-made in the following terms:


        i) The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds


       ii) The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because
           he is a refugee

      iii) The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.








                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               11th May 2016
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission refused by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Manuell on the 29th January 2015 but was granted upon renewed application
by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds on the 15th May 2015
[2] Determination promulgated 5th January 2015

