
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/09464/2015
     AA/08552/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th July 2017                              |On 12th July 2017             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                    k b s
                                     o s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss M Vidal of Haris Ali Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Afghanistan.  The  first  Appellant  was
    born on 1st January 1944 and is now 73 years of age.  She is  the  aunt
    of the second Appellant born 1st January 1998, who is 29 years of age.

 2. The Appellants appealed to the  FtT  following  the  refusal  of  their
    asylum and human rights claims.  The FtT heard the appeals together  on
    6th February 2017.  The appeals were dismissed on all grounds.  The FtT
    did not find that the Appellants  would  be  at  risk  if  returned  to
    Afghanistan, and did not find that the Appellants had proved that there
    would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  their   integration   into
    Afghanistan, and therefore they could not  succeed  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  The FtT also considered Article 8 of the 1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention)  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, concluding that the public interest  in  maintaining
    effective immigration control, required the  Appellants'  removal  from
    the UK, and their removal would not be disproportionate  and  therefore
    there was no breach of Article 8.

 3. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    There was no challenge to the FtT findings in  relation  to  asylum  or
    risk on return.  The Appellants contended that the  FtT  had  erred  in
    considering  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  Article   8   outside   the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. In relation to paragraph  276ADE(1)  it  was  contended  that  the  FtT
    accepted that the  Appellants  left  Afghanistan  approximately  twenty
    years  ago,  and  that  the  first  Appellant  suffers  from   paranoid
    schizophrenia,  and  the  second  Appellant  suffers  from  depression,
    anxiety and PTSD.  It was contended that  the  FtT's  approach  to  the
    issue of integration into  Afghanistan  was  fundamentally  flawed  and
    lacked adequate reasoning, and the FtT had  failed  to  apply  guidance
    given in Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813.

 5. With reference to Article 8 it was accepted that the FtT had  correctly
    cited the law, but it was contended that the FtT materially erred  when
    conducting  the  proportionality  balancing  exercise  by  failing   to
    consider three material matters.

 6. Those matters were the first Appellant's age and serious mental  health
    condition, the length of time that the Appellants had  been  away  from
    Afghanistan which was approximately twenty  years,  together  with  the
    human rights and security position in Afghanistan at present.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the FtT Adio on 19th April
    2017.

 8. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary it was contended that the  FtT  had  directed  itself
    appropriately, and properly considered whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the Appellants to return and live in Kabul, had fully considered
    the medical issues, and the grounds upon which permission  was  granted
    amounted to a disagreement with findings properly made by the FtT.

 9. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FtT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should set aside.

Oral Submissions

10. Miss Vidal relied upon the grounds contained within the application for
    permission to appeal.  I was asked to note that it  was  accepted  that
    both Appellants had been outside Afghanistan for twenty years, and that
    twenty years is significant.  It was not contended that the  Appellants
    had resided in the UK for twenty years, but the fact that they had been
    away from Afghanistan for such a  length  of  time  was  relevant  when
    considering reintegration.  I was asked to accept that the FtT had  not
    considered the guidance on integration given by the Court of Appeal  in
    Kamara.  I was asked to find the FtT reasoning in relation to paragraph
    276ADE(1) inadequate.

11. With reference to Article 8 I was asked to find that the  FtT  had  not
    taken into account and properly considered the first  Appellant's  age,
    not taken into account in the balancing exercise, the length of absence
    from Afghanistan, and not taken into account the mental health  issues.
    There was no reference to current background evidence  on  Afghanistan,
    which was included in the Appellants' bundle  of  documents  which  was
    before the FtT.

12. Mr McVeety contended that the FtT decision disclosed no  error  of  law
    and relied upon the rule 24 response.  I was asked  to  find  that  the
    weight to be attached to evidence was a matter for  the  FtT,  provided
    all the issues had been considered.

13. Mr McVeety submitted that the FtT had considered all  material  issues.
    The relevance of the reference to twenty years in paragraph  276ADE(1),
    is that if an Appellant has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least
    twenty years, then paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) would be  satisfied.   That
    was not the case with these Appellants, as at the date of hearing  they
    had lived in the UK for three or four years.

14. Mr McVeety submitted that the FtT was aware  that  the  Appellants  had
    been away from Afghanistan for twenty years, and had  fully  considered
    the medical issues.  The FtT had set out  background  evidence  on  the
    medical facilities in Afghanistan, finding that medical treatment would
    be available.

15. It was not the case that the FtT  had  failed  to  consider  background
    evidence, and Mr McVeety pointed to paragraphs 50-53, 64 and 82 of  the
    FtT decision in support of that submission.

16. By way of response, Miss Vidal stated that it  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellants had not resided in the UK for twenty years, and  their  case
    was not put on that basis.  They had however been away from Afghanistan
    for twenty years, and that was relevant to reintegration.

17. For the reasons contained in  the  grounds  upon  which  permission  to
    appeal was granted, and in her  earlier  oral  submissions  Miss  Vidal
    submitted that the FtT decision in relation to paragraph 276ADE(1)  and
    Article 8 outside the rules, was materially flawed and  should  be  set
    aside.

18. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) requires than an individual  must  be  aged  18
    years or above, have lived continuously in the UK for less than  twenty
    years,  but  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   that
    individual's integration into the country to which he would have to  go
    if required to leave the UK.

20. Guidance on integration has been given by the Court of Appeal in Kamara
    at paragraph 14 which is set out below in part;

         "14. It is not confined to the mere ability to find  a  job  or  to
             sustain life while living in the other  country.   It  is  not
             appropriate to treat the statutory language as subject to some
             gloss and it  will  usually  be  sufficient  for  a  court  or
             Tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms that  Parliament
             has chosen to use.  The idea of integration calls for a  broad
             evaluative judgment to be made as to  whether  the  individual
             will be enough of an insider in  terms  of  understanding  how
             life in the society in that other country is carried on and  a
             capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
             opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate  on  a
             day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
             reasonable time a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give
             substance to the individual's private or family life."

21. Integration is one limb of the test, the other  is  whether  there  are
    very significant obstacles, and on that issue guidance was given by the
    Upper Tribunal in Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC)  at  paragraph  37
    which is set out below in part;

         "37. The other limb of the test, very significant obstacles, erects
             a self-evidently elevated threshold, such that mere  hardship,
             mere  difficulty,  mere   hurdles   and   mere   upheaval   or
             inconvenience,  even  where  multiplied,  will  generally   be
             insufficient in this context."

22. The FtT did not specifically refer to Kamara or Treebhawon,  but  that,
    without more,  is  not  an  error  of  law,  provided  the  appropriate
    principles and guidance have been applied.  I do not find that the  FtT
    erred in law on this issue for the following reasons.

23. The FtT considered whether it would be reasonable for the Appellants to
    live in Kabul.  This is  not  as  high  a  threshold  as  contained  in
    paragraph 276ADE(1) and the FtT concluded that it would be  reasonable.
    This was considered in the context of whether there  was  a  reasonable
    internal relocation option when the  FtT  was  considering  the  asylum
    claim.

24. The FtT  in  considering  whether   it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
    Appellants to live in Kabul took  into  account  the  relevant  country
    guidance case law and background evidence.  There is reference to  this
    in paragraphs 51-53, 64, 65 and 82 of the FtT decision.

25. The FtT appreciated that the mental health conditions of the Appellants
    must be considered, and in relation to the  first  Appellant  this  was
    considered and findings  made  thereon  at  paragraphs  67-71,  and  in
    relation to the second Appellant at paragraphs 73-74.

26. In relation to availability of medical treatment, the FtT considered  a
    report submitted on behalf of  the  Appellants  at  paragraph  68,  and
    background evidence supplied by the Respondent at paragraphs 69,70  and
    73.

27. The FtT at paragraph 61 did not accept that  the  Appellants  would  be
    perceived as having been  "westernised"  noting  that  both  spoke  the
    indigenous languages of Afghanistan, and practised the religion of that
    country.  The FtT noted  at  paragraph  66  the  lack  of  evidence  to
    indicate that the Appellants would have difficulties in  relocating  to
    Kabul because of ethnic or cultural issues.

28. In my view the FtT considered all material evidence placed  before  it,
    and was entitled to take the view, notwithstanding  the  mental  health
    difficulties of the Appellants, that  they  could  reasonably  live  in
    Kabul.  It would not be the case that  the  first  Appellant  would  be
    returned as a lone woman, as the Appellants would be  living  together,
    and as stated in paragraph 74 of the FtT decision;

         "74. In addition, the report indicated that treatment and  medicine
             for PTSD was also available in Kabul.  In the  light  of  this
             evidence therefore I conclude that there is a  sufficiency  of
             physical, medical and psychological care available for  A2  in
             Kabul to allow him to live a reasonable life  there  and  look
             after A1 as he does in the UK.  In those  circumstances  there
             is no reason to conclude that with such services he would  not
             be able to find work and provide for A1."

29.  The  FtT  applied  the  correct  test   when   considering   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) and did not materially err in law.

30. With reference to Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules,  I  do  not
    accept that the  FtT  erred  by  failing  to  consider  three  material
    matters.

31. The FtT did take into account the first Appellant's age.  Her  date  of
    birth is set out in paragraph 2, and in  paragraph  68  the  FtT  makes
    reference to a report submitted on behalf of the Appellants, and  makes
    specific  reference  to  the  report  author  referring  to  the  first
    Appellant as "a lone elderly woman who is in poor health", although the
    FtT goes on to find that the first Appellant would not be returning  as
    a lone woman.

32. It is not the case that the FtT failed to  consider  in  the  balancing
    exercise the  first  Appellant's  mental  health.   There  is  specific
    reference at paragraph 116g to the Appellants not proving on a  balance
    of probabilities that  they  will  not  receive  adequate  medical  and
    psychological treatment in Afghanistan.   It  is  clear  that  the  FtT
    considered the availability of medical facilities in  Afghanistan,  and
    took into account the mental health issues of both Appellants.

33. I do not accept that the FtT failed to appreciate and take into account
    the length of time that the Appellants had  been  outside  Afghanistan.
    There is specific reference at paragraph 57 to the FtT  accepting  that
    the first Appellant left Afghanistan in 1997 together with  the  second
    Appellant.   There  is  further  reference  at  paragraph  60  to  both
    Appellants having "been away from Afghanistan for a prolonged  period".
    The length of absence from Afghanistan was properly considered  by  the
    FtT.

34. The FtT did consider the security  position  in  Afghanistan.   It  was
    found that the Appellants would not be at risk, and  this  finding  has
    not been challenged.  The FtT does not need to refer to each individual
    piece of evidence  submitted  by  the  parties,  provided  that  it  is
    apparent from  the  decision,  that  all  material  evidence  has  been
    considered.  In my view that is the case in  these  appeals.   The  FtT
    considered  country  guidance  case  law  at  paragraphs   51-53,   and
    considered background evidence  at  paragraph  64.   There  is  further
    reference to country guidance case law at paragraphs 65 and 82.

35. It may be that  another  FtT  judge  might  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion when considering these appeals, but that  is  not  relevant,
    and not the appropriate test.  I find that the FtT made findings  which
    were open to it on the evidence, and provided adequate and  sustainable
    reasons  for  those  findings.   The  grounds  contained   within   the
    application for permission to appeal demonstrate a  clear  disagreement
    with the findings made by the FtT, but do not disclose a material error
    of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a material error of law.  The  FtT
decision stands and the appeals are dismissed.

Anonymity

I make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date: 7th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals are dismissed.  There are no fee awards.






Signed                              Date: 7th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


