
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09289/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination promulgated    |
|14 March 2014                                 |2 April 2014                 |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     R M
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Walker, Counsel, instructed by D V Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 2 March 1983 and is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka.
    He appeals, with permission, against the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Boyd, dated 24  November  2011,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the respondent's decision to refuse his claim for asylum and to
    remove him from the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant applied for permission to appeal and the matter then came
    before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Peart  on  30  May  2012.  For  the
    reasons set out in his decision of that  date,  Judge  Peart  found  an
    error of law in Judge Boyd's determination and set it aside,  directing
    that it was to be remade.

 3. Although the matter should then have been  relisted  within  the  Upper
    Tier for a further hearing so that the appeal could be remade, this did
    not occur, owing to an administrative error.

 4. It appears that the decision of Judge  Peart  was  interpreted  by  the
    respondent as a direction to remake their decision which she then  did,
    issuing both a fresh refusal notice and refusal  letter  on  25  August
    2013. That triggered a fresh  appeal  heard,  reference  AA/10033/2013,
    which was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Thanki who  dismissed  the
    appeal on asylum grounds but allowed  it  on  article  8  grounds.  The
    respondent was then granted permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tier
    against that decision.

 5. The grant of permission  in the later appeal appears to  have  breathed
    new life into this appeal, and both were listed before me.

 6. It was agreed by the parties that this matter needs to be determined. I
    indicated that it was my understanding that the effect of the issue  of
    the new notice of decision was to withdraw the decision made on 28 July
    2011 giving rise to this appeal. There cannot  be  two  live  decisions
    relating to the same issue. Neither party disputed  this  analysis;  it
    was agreed that I should proceed  on  the  basis  that  the  underlying
    decision had been withdrawn and in line with SM (withdrawal of appealed
    decision: effect) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 00064 (IAC). In  any  event,  as
    the appellant's case was considered afresh by the  respondent  and  the
    First-tier Tribunal, it is difficult to see what prejudice, if any,  he
    has suffered.

 7. The effect of the withdrawal of the underlying decision in  before  the
    Upper Tribunal is that the  Tribunal  continues  to  have  jurisdiction
    under the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to decide  whether
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal should be  set  aside  for
    error of law and, if  so,  to  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal,
    notwithstanding the withdrawal of the appealed decision.

 8. As noted above, there has been a decision  that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error of  law  and  it
    was set aside.  I must therefore decide whether to proceed formally  to
    dismiss or  allow  the  appeal;  or,  consider  whether  it  should  be
    considered substantively. In doing  so  I  bear  in  mind  the  factors
    identified in SM ( Pakistan):


      (4) In deciding between (i) and (ii) above, the  Upper  Tribunal  will
      apply the overriding objective in rule 2 of  the  2008  Rules,  having
      regard to all relevant matters, including:-


          (a) the principle that the Secretary of State should,  ordinarily,
          be the primary decision-maker in the immigration field;


          (b) whether the matters  potentially  in  issue  are  such  as  to
          require the Tribunal to give general legal or procedural guidance,
          including country guidance;


          (c) the reasons underlying the Secretary of State's withdrawal  of
          the appealed decision;


          (d) the appeal history, including the timing  of  the  withdrawal;
          and


          (e) the views of the parties.




 9. In this case, the  appeal  has  been  determined  again,  both  by  the
    Secretary of State and the First-tier Tribunal. This is not a  case  in
    which issues of general legal or  procedural  guidance  are  likely  to
    arise, and neither party has put forward cogent reasons why the  matter
    should proceed. In reality, the appeal has been superseded  by  events,
    and there is no useful purpose to be served in proceeding substantively
    to determine the appeal.

10. Accordingly, I formally dismiss the appeal



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS AND DECISIONS

 1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of
    an error of law.  It is set aside.

 2. The determination is remade by dismissing the appeal on all grounds

 3. The parties are reminded of the anonymity order made.

Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul                 31 March 2014


