


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09457/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Birmingham                     |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 30 June 2016                             |On: 12 July 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DLR
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Rutherford, instructed by Coventry Law Centre


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of  DLR  against
the decision to refuse his protection and human rights claim.

For the purposes  of  this  decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
Secretary of State as the respondent and DLR as  the  appellant,  reflecting
their positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, born on [ ] 1986. He arrived in  the  UK
on 28 September 2003 and claimed asylum the same day. His claim was  refused
on 8 November 2003. He appealed against that decision  and  his  appeal  was
heard on 2 February 2004 and dismissed on 23 March 2004.  He  became  appeal
rights  exhausted  on  21  May  2004  and  was  subsequently  listed  as  an
absconder.


On 29 June 2005 the appellant was arrested and charged with  two  counts  of
robbery. He and two others had stolen a  mobile  telephone  at  knife  point
from a taxi driver and had made off without payment. He was convicted on  26
September 2005 at Derby Crown  Court  of  robbery  and  making  off  without
paying and was sentenced to 20 months' imprisonment.


On 27 April 2006 the  appellant  was  informed  of  a  decision  to  make  a
deportation order against  him.  He  appealed  against  that  decision.  His
appeal was heard on 25 May 2006 and  was  dismissed  on  15  June  2006.  He
became appeal rights exhausted on 23 June  2006.  A  Deportation  Order  was
signed on 19 December 2006. However that was revoked on  25  September  2008
when it was decided to reconsider his case in the light of the  case  of  HH
Iraq. A new decision to make a deportation order was made  on  26  September
2008. In the meantime the appellant was arrested on  17  December  2008  and
charged with offences relating to GBH with intent.  The  appellant's  appeal
against the new deportation decision was heard  on  3  April  2009  and  was
dismissed on 16 April 2009. On 21 May 2009 he was found not  guilty  of  GBH
with intent. He became appeal rights exhausted on 17 June 2009.


A signed Deportation Order was obtained against the appellant on  28  August
2009 which was served to file as he had  not  complied  with  his  reporting
restrictions. He was classed as an absconder. The appellant was served  with
the Deportation Order on  28  August  2010  after  he  was  encountered  and
arrested by immigration officials.  Removal  directions  were  set  for  his
removal on 6 September 2010. His solicitors made  asylum  and  human  rights
submissions on 3 September 2010, in relation to his fear of return  to  Iraq
and his relationship with a British citizen partner. These  were  considered
as an application to revoke the deportation order  previously  made  against
him, and a decision was made on 6 September 2010 to  refuse  to  revoke  the
deportation order and to certify  his  claim  under  section  94(2)  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. An application for  permission
to seek  judicial  review  was  refused  on  26  October  2010  and  removal
directions were set for 29 November 2010.


The appellant's removal was aborted due to his disruptive behaviour  on  the
aircraft. New removal directions were set for  13  December  2010  but  were
cancelled when judicial review  proceedings  were  commenced  following  the
making, and rejection, of  further  submissions.  Further  submissions  were
made on 24 February 2011 in regard to the appellant's  relationship  with  a
British citizen and  on  Article  3  grounds  in  relation  to  his  medical
condition. A High Court  Judge  accepted  that  the  submissions  should  be
considered as  a  fresh  claim.  There  followed  several  sets  of  further
submissions on Article 8 family and private life grounds in relation to  the
appellant's relationship with his British partner, AN, whom he then  married
on 30 June 2011, and further submissions  thereafter  on  Article  8  and  3
grounds. It was claimed that the appellant  had  been  diagnosed  as  having
severe depressive symptoms and suffering from PTSD.  Submissions  were  also
made in regard to the security situation in Iraq, in September 2012, and  in
relation to the appellant's and his partner's health issues.  A  psychiatric
report was submitted, from Dr  Katona,  together  with  a  letter  from  the
appellant's therapist, Yusuf Mangera. Further  representations  followed  in
2013 in relation to the appellant's mental health and  judicial  review  was
threatened as  a  result  of  the  respondent's  delay  in  determining  the
appellant's case.

On 24 February 2014 the appellant was served with a notice of  liability  to
deport and the appellant's representatives responded with  submissions  made
in regard to Article 8 and 3. There followed a complaint made  to  the  Home
Office about the managing of the appellant's case, when the Home Office  was
unable to locate the representations previously made.


Finally, on 29 October 2014, the respondent made a decision  to  refuse  the
appellant's protection and Article 8 claim. He  was  granted  an  in-country
right of appeal.


The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard  on  3
July 2015 in the First-tier Tribunal. The appeal  was  dismissed  on  asylum
grounds but allowed on human rights grounds.

The Appellant's Protection and Human Rights Claim.

The appellant's claim was summarised by the respondent in  the  decision  of
29 October 2014 as follows.

The appellant claimed that his removal to Iraq would breach  his  Article  3
and 8 human rights. The appellant claimed that he and his  brother  suffered
harassment from their father owing to their refusal to join and be  involved
in the Islamic Movement of Iraqi Kurds, IMIK, an Islamic terrorist group  of
which their father was a member. They fled Iraq as a result.  The  appellant
claimed that his brother was returned to Greece  in  2006  and  was  removed
from there to Iraq, where he was murdered by their father.  His  cousin  was
also shot and killed and the appellant was accused of  his  murder.  He  was
told that there was a warrant out for his arrest. He was therefore  at  risk
on return to Iraq. The appellant claimed further that he had  established  a
family and private life in the UK. He was married to a British  citizen  and
he suffered from depression, PTSD and other disorders and  was  at  risk  of
committing suicide. He would not be able  to  access  medical  treatment  in
Iraq. His wife  also  suffered  from  various  physical  ailments  and  from
depression and relied upon him  for  emotional  and  physical  support.  She
could not access treatment in Iraq.

The respondent noted that the appellant's asylum claim had  been  considered
in previous appeals and had been rejected as  lacking  in  credibility.  The
respondent  considered  in  any  event  that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
protection available to the appellant in Iraq.  It  was  not  accepted  that
there was a risk of the appellant suffering indiscriminate violence in  Iraq
under Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive and it was  not  accepted
that he was at risk on return. With regard  to  Article  8,  the  respondent
accepted that the appellant was in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
with his British wife. It was noted, however, that  the  relationship  began
when he was in the UK unlawfully. It was  not  accepted  that  it  would  be
unduly harsh for the appellant's wife to relocate to Iraq with him.  It  was
noted that she previously  held  Barbadian  nationality  and  that  she  had
managed to adjust to a new  country  when  relocating  to  the  UK.  It  was
considered that there was medical treatment available in Iraq. It  was  also
not accepted that it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant's  wife  to
remain in the UK whilst he was  deported.  There  was  no  evidence  of  any
practical care that the appellant provided to his wife and  no  confirmation
that there was no other support she could access. The  respondent  did  not,
therefore accept that the appellant could meet  the  criteria  in  paragraph
399(b) of the immigration rules. Neither was it accepted that he could  meet
the requirements in paragraph 399A on the basis  of  private  life  or  that
there were very compelling circumstances for the purposes of paragraph  398.
With regard to Article 3,  the  respondent  considered  that  the  appellant
could access any necessary treatment  in  Iraq.  The  respondent  considered
that the appellant did not meet the test in J v Secretary of State  for  the
Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629 as a suicide risk.


Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal


The appellant's appeal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hubball.
Further to the  request  of  the  appellant's  representatives,  the  appeal
proceeded by way of submissions only, owing, it  was  said,  to  the  health
issues of the appellant  and  his  wife,  AN.  The  appellant's  asylum  and
protection claims  were  not  pursued  and  the  appeal  proceeded  only  on
Articles 3 and 8 grounds, in relation to the health issues.

 The judge noted that it was accepted that the appellant could not meet  the
criteria in paragraph 399A in regard to private  life.  He  noted  that  the
appellant could not qualify under paragraph 399(b) because  he  was  not  in
the UK lawfully and therefore the  case  before  the  Tribunal  was  whether
there were very compelling circumstances over and above those  in  paragraph
399 and 399A, for the purposes of paragraph 398. The judge accepted that  it
would be unduly harsh for the appellant's wife  to  relocate  to  Iraq.  The
judge noted  the  submission  made  for  the  respondent  that  the  medical
evidence relied upon by the appellant was almost three  years  out  of  date
but accepted the submission  made  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  his
psychiatric condition was ongoing. The judge noted the  delay  over  a  five
year  period  in  considering  the  appellant's  representations  and   also
accepted that the appellant had not offended since 2005.  He  took  note  of
the respondent's acceptance that the appellant may be at risk of suicide  on
return to Iraq and considered an expert report from Sheri Laizer  in  regard
to the inadequate medical care available in Iraq. He  concluded  that  there
was not an availability of treatment in  Iraq  to  prevent  the  appellant's
suicidal impulses and therefore found that there was an  Article  3  suicide
risk on return to Iraq. With regard to Article 8, he found that  the  effect
of the appellant's deportation on his wife would be unduly harsh,  owing  to
her severe disability and her reliance upon the appellant  for  support.  He
concluded that there were  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
those in paragraph 399 and 399A and that the appellant's removal would  also
breach Article  8.  Accordingly  he  allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
grounds.

The respondent sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
following grounds: that the judge, in  making  his  findings  on  Article  3
suicide risk, had erred by failing to have proper regard  to  the  objective
evidence in the refusal letter as to medical  facilities  in  Iraq  and  had
relied upon outdated medical opinions and risk assessments; that the  judge,
in considering the "unduly harsh test", had erred by mistakenly  considering
that the respondent had accepted that  the  appellant's  wife  was  severely
disabled and had failed to have regard to the high threshold in  the  unduly
harsh test; and that the judge  had  failed  to  have  regard  to  the  many
adverse factors against the appellant in section 117 of the 2002 Act.


Permission was granted on 12 August 2015.

Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

The main premise upon which Judge Hubball allowed the  appellant  's  appeal
was that he remained a suicide risk and that,  whilst  that  risk  could  be
managed in the UK and on removal to Iraq, the facilities did  not  exist  in
Iraq to prevent his suicidal impulses. The starting point for  that  premise
appears to have been what was said by the  respondent  at  [168]  which  was
considered as an acceptance by the respondent that Article 3 was engaged  on
the basis of the appellant being a suicide risk.  Ms  Aboni  submitted  that
there was no such concession. That certainly seems to be borne  out  by  the
fact that the Home Office presenting  officer,  at  the  hearing,  submitted
that there was no evidence before the Tribunal to show  that  the  appellant
was currently a suicide risk. I find myself in  agreement  with  Ms  Aboni's
submission,  and  with  the  second  ground  of  appeal,  that   the   judge
misdirected himself as to the existence of a real risk of suicide  and  that
his reliance on medical evidence which was three years out of date  rendered
his findings unsafe. Although the judge was aware  that  that  was  a  point
relied upon by the respondent, he accepted submissions  made  on  behalf  of
the appellant that the appellant's psychiatric condition was ongoing,  based
upon a more recent medical report referred to at [93]. However that  report,
from Dr Neil Basu, at page 26 of the appeal bundle, concluded  that  he  was
not actively  suicidal.  Accordingly,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  judge's
finding, that the appellant was a suicide risk, was simply unsustainable  on
the evidence before him.


Likewise, it seems to me  that  the  judge's  findings  on  the  appellant's
wife's circumstances were also unsustainable. The judge found that it  would
be unduly harsh for the appellant's wife to be separated from the  appellant
and based that finding, at [112], upon an understanding that  paragraph  118
of the refusal letter made it clear  that  she  was  severely  disabled  and
relied on the appellant to perform the everyday tasks of life. However,  the
judge appears to have misunderstood what was said at paragraph  118  of  the
refusal letter, since it is clear  that  the  respondent,  whilst  accepting
that the appellant's wife suffered from a range of health  issues,  did  not
accept that she was severely disabled and did not accept that  the  evidence
showed that she was dependent upon the appellant for her care. The  document
relied upon by  the  judge,  in  the  form  of  a  decision  of  the  Social
Entitlement Chamber, made no mention of any dependency upon the appellant.


Finally, I find merit in the last ground of appeal, in which it is  asserted
that the judge failed to have regard to the adverse factors in  section  117
of the 2002 Act. Whilst the judge referred  to  section  117  at  [111]  and
[112], and at [114] to the "competing interests", it seems that he  did  not
in fact give any, or any proper, consideration to the  factors  set  out  at
paragraph 19 of the grounds.


In the circumstances it seems to me that Judge Hubball's decision has to  be
set aside. His findings on the availability of  medical  treatment  in  Iraq
were premised upon the conclusion that the appellant  was  a  suicide  risk,
and given that that premise has been found to  be  unsafe  on  the  evidence
available, the entire matter has  to  be  revisited  in  a  fresh  decision.
Likewise, given the unsafe basis upon which the  judge  concluded  that  the
appellant's circumstances were very compelling,  his  Article  8  assessment
cannot be preserved in part and must be conducted afresh.


Accordingly, whilst I indicated at the hearing that the  appropriate  course
would be for there to be a resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal,  it  seems
to me, upon reflection, that the appropriate course would  in  fact  be  for
the case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to consider  afresh  with
the benefit of up to date medical evidence for both the  appellant  and  his
wife. The appeal will therefore be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
be heard de novo, on the same basis as previously, namely on Article  3  and
8 grounds.


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal  is  allowed.
The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh, pursuant to section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
before any judge aside from Judge Hubball.


    .














                               Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
                               12 July 2016
