
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09716/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 July 2016                               |On 4 August 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     A C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, Counsel, instructed by Marsha and
Partners
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmed, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Majid (the judge), promulgated on 5 May 2016,  in  which
    he dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  The Appellant, a  national  of
    Albania, had claimed asylum in the United Kingdom based upon issues  of
    trafficking and sexual abuse.  The Respondent  refused  the  protection
    and human rights claims by a decision of 5 May 2015.




Error of Law

 2. This is a case in which  both  parties  are  agreed  that  the  judge's
    decision contains material errors of law.  These errors were  initially
    set out in the grounds of appeal and then, having had an opportunity to
    consider the challenge, the Respondent, by way of a  Rule  24  response
    dated 22 June 2016, accepted that there were errors as set out  in  the
    grounds.

 3. In light  of  the  positions  of  the  respective  parties  and  having
    carefully considered the decision and the grounds  for  myself,  it  is
    abundantly clear that there are numerous material errors of law.

 4. This is a decision best described as poor in  both  its  structure  and
    content.  There are no findings of fact on any material matters,  there
    are no conclusions, and there are statements of principles of  the  law
    which are either irrelevant or simply wrong. On any view this  decision
    simply cannot stand.

 5. I therefore set aside the judge's decision.




Disposal

 6. This appeal must be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  complete
    rehearing.  There are no findings to preserve.  I will  issue  relevant
    directions below.



Notice of Decision

    The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  material  errors  of
    law.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal and parties:

         1. This appeal is to be reheard afresh, with no preserved findings;

         2. The  Appellant  relies  on  both  protection  and  human  rights
            grounds;

         3. The parties shall comply with any further directions  issued  by
            the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions for listing:

         1. This appeal is  remitted  for  rehearing  at  the  Taylor  House
            hearing centre on a date to be fixed;

         2. This appeal shall not be reheard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
            Majid;

         3. There is a 3 hour time estimate for the remitted hearing;

         4. An Albanian interpreter is required.



Signed                                  Date: 2 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


