
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/09122/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 11 March 2016                           |On 5  April 2016           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                               MARIAM SIMPARA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr B Hawkin, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence Lupin,
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Farmer promulgated on 4 December 2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1990 and is a national of Mali.

4. On  2nd  June  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for asylum.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Farmer ("the Judge") dismissed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  28  January  2016  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Coker gave permission to appeal stating inter alia


      "It is arguable that the First-tier Judge reached a decision on  delay
      without fully considering  the  evidence  of  previous  references  to
      forced marriage  such  that  infected  the  findings  overall.  It  is
      arguable that the Judge failed to give adequate  or  any  reasons  for
      placing little weight on the message from  the  brother  despite  this
      going to the overall claim. It is arguable that to dismiss  a  witness
      statement as self-serving because it was produced for an appeal  could
      render any witness statements of little evidential value and thus  the
      dismissal of  the  evidence  in  the  witness  statement  is  arguably
      irrational when considered in the context of the evidence overall.  It
      is arguable that the Judge failed to  take  adequate  account  of  the
      father's claimed power although there is no finding by  the  Judge  of
      the weight he placed on the "expert report"."

The Hearing

7. (a) Mr Hawkin, counsel for the appellant, moved the  grounds  of  appeal.
He explained that although there  are  several  grounds  of  appeal,  spread
across 22 paragraphs, in the  notice  of  appeal,  those  grounds  could  be
categorised simply as a failure to  make  adequately  reasoned  findings  in
fact, and a failure to properly assess an  expert  report.  He  adopted  the
terms of the grounds of appeal and argued  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to
properly  engage  with  the  evidence  before  making  a  finding  that  the
appellant had delayed in making a claim  for  asylum.  He  took  me  to  the
appellant's immigration history and explained that the appellant first  gave
an account  of  her  fear  of  forced  marriage  to  the  respondent  in  an
application for leave to remain in the UK made of September 2014. He  argued
that the Judge's findings the delay undermine  the  appellant's  credibility
was not sustainable.

(b) Mr Hawkin referred me to the documentary evidence  produced  and  argued
that the Judge's findings of fact did not take account  of  the  documentary
evidence from the appellant's mother, which is notarised and so should  have
been treated as a statutory declaration. Mr Hawkin referred me  specifically
to [26], [27] & [28] of the decision and argued that, there, the Judge  does
not give  adequate  reasons  for  either  rejecting  evidence  presented  to
support the appellant or giving "little weight" to that evidence.

(c) Between [29] and [31]  the  Judge  deals  with  the  report  from  Bruce
Whitehouse Ph.D. dated 24 November 2015.  There,  Mr  Hawkin  told  me,  the
Judge did not take proper account of the expert evidence nor the  background
materials produced which indicate the appellant's father is  an  influential
man in Mali.

(d) Mr Hawkin asked me to allow the appeal, to set the  decision  aside  and
to remit the case to the First-tier to be determined of new.

8. Mr Tarlow, for the respondent, relied on the terms of the rule  24  reply
submitted for the respondent. He told me that the decision does not  contain
any errors, material or otherwise; that the decision is a carefully  worded,
well-reasoned decision containing adequate findings of  fact  leading  to  a
conclusion which is manifestly open to the Judge to reach. He  and  told  me
that it would be unrealistic for  the  Judge  to  refer  to  each  paragraph
contained in a lengthy expert report. He  told  me  that,  in  reality,  the
challenge is simply disagreement with the Judge's findings  of  fact  rather
than an argument that a material error of law has been made. He urged me  to
dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

9. The Judge only mentions  the  expert  report  in  one  paragraph  of  the
decision. At [13] the Judge quotes one paragraph from the report.

10. It is not sufficient for the Judge to say  that  she  is  simply  taking
account of the expert report. It is not clear from [13] which  part  of  the
expert report the Judge accepts and which part she  rejects.  The  objective
reader cannot tell what weight has  been  attached  to  the  expert  report.
There is no meaningful analysis of the contents of the  expert  report,  not
even a comparison between the expert's conclusions and what is found in  the
background material.

11.   In NA v UK Application 25904/07 2008 ECHR 616 it  was  said  that  "in
assessing such material, consideration  must  be  given  to  is  source,  in
particular its independence, reliability  and  objectivity.  In  respect  of
reports, the authority and reputation of the author, the seriousness of  the
investigations by means of which  they  are  compiled,  the  consistency  of
their conclusions and that corroboration by other sources are  all  relevant
considerations."

12. The Judge gives the expert report superficial attention at [13] &  fails
to reach a conclusion - or to make findings - in relation to the quality  of
the evidence from the  expert.  The  superficial  treatment  of  the  expert
report amounts to a material error of law.

13. At [29] the Judge finds that it is  likely  that  a  marriage  has  been
arranged for the appellant by  her  father.  The  appellant  finds  that  an
arranged marriage is consistent  with  Malian  tradition,  but  goes  on  to
boldly state that she does not accept that  the  appellant  will  be  forced
into marriage. The Judge's conclusion at [29] is not properly reasoned.

14. The Judge's findings are contained at [21] to [29] of the  decision.  In
each of those paragraphs the Judge sets out parts of the evidence  and  then
sets out her rejection of each of the various parts of the account given  by
the appellant. What is missing is a link between  the  Judge's  findings  of
fact and the Judge's rejection of the appellant's account. The missing  part
of the equation is an analysis of the evidence  and  a  clear  statement  of
reasons for accepting parts of the evidence and  rejecting  other  parts  of
the evidence. As Mr Hawkin succinctly put it, the error in this case  is  an
adequacy of the reasoning. There is a material error of law in the  decision
because the Judge's conclusions are not adequately reasoned.

15.  In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

16. I find that the inadequacy of analysis and findings in relation  to  the
detailed expert evidence placed before  the  First-Tier  together  with  the
lack of reasoning to  support  the  Judge's  findings  amounts  to  material
errors of law. I consider the error to be material because had the  Tribunal
conducted a properly reasoned fact finding exercise, based  on  an  analysis
of the evidence, the outcome could have been different.

17.  I therefore find that the decision is tainted by a material  errors  of
law. I must set the decision aside.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

18. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 a case may  be  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:


    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

19.  Both Mr Hawkin and Mr Tarlow agreed that if I find a material error  of
law, this case should be remitted to the First-tier because  of  the  nature
of the fact finding exercise still required in this case.  In  this  case  I
have determined that the case should be remitted because of the  nature  and
extent of the fact finding exercise necessary to reach a  just  decision  in
this appeal. None of the findings of fact are  to  stand;   a  complete  re-
hearing is necessary.

20. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Harmondsworth
or Hatton Cross to be heard before any First-tier  Judge  other  than  Judge
Farmer.

CONCLUSION

Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

22. I set the decision aside. The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                                                              Date 18
March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


