
IAC-fH-ar-V3
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09799/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 April 2015                             |On 29 April 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD BANNATYNE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                             BLESSING NYATSANZA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of the appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr A Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe.  She appealed to  a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's decision of 4 November
    2014 refusing to vary leave to enter the United  Kingdom  and  refusing
    asylum.

2.   In essence, the appellant claimed to be at risk on return  to  Zimbabwe
    because she had expressed a view when asked by some men of her  opinion
    about investing in Zimbabwe that they should wait until after the  next
    elections which she thought would see a change in government and  bring
    about the date of the 49:51 shareholding policy which she  thought  was
    unfair.

3.   This occurred in the United Kingdom which  she  had  been  visiting  in
    November 2012.  She worked for the Ministry of Economic Planning as  an
    investment officer in  charge  of  marketing.   Her  superior  was  the
    minister, Mr Mashakada.

4.   Subsequent to the questioning about  investing  in  Zimbabwe  she  said
    that the next month three men came to her house in Zimbabwe  and  asked
    her questions about her visit to the United Kingdom and accused her  of
    criticising Zimbabwe and the current government.  Some two months later
    she saw two of these men and one of them  made  a  threatening  gesture
    towards her and she felt scared  about  this  and  moved  elsewhere  in
    Harare.  Later that month she was back in the United Kingdom to arrange
    further meetings for the Minster and at the  Zimbabwean  Embassy  where
    she had gone to collect some documents she saw one of the three men  to
    whom she had spoken at the seminar in November 2012 and believed it was
    he who had given information about her to the authorities in  Zimbabwe.
    The next month she was told by her cousin that she was receiving  phone
    calls from an unknown person asking where the appellant  was  and  when
    she would be returning to Zimbabwe.  A few weeks  later  the  appellant
    telephoned Mr Mashakada and told him she would be seeking asylum in the
    United Kingdom and would not be returning to Zimbabwe.  She  said  that
    her telephone call to him was in response to an email he had  sent  her
    from  his  private  email  asking  her  why  she  had   not   returned.
    Subsequently she said that in June 2013 her daughter was beaten  up  in
    the appellant's home by CIO officers who had gone to the house  looking
    for the appellant.

5.   The judge did not find the appellant to  be  a  credible  witness.   He
    noted an absence of corroboration from her children and  cousin  as  to
    her version of events.  The judge did  not  find  it  credible  that  a
    person working at the embassy, as was likely to be the   case  as  that
    was where she had seen him  subsequently,  would  have  approached  the
    appellant for an investment advice in his own country.   There  was  no
    documentary evidence to support the claim that the appellant's daughter
    had been attacked and no statement from the daughter or from the cousin
    who was looking after her.  There was an affidavit and  email  from  Mr
    Mashakada which the judge doubted the credibility of since  there  were
    inconsistencies in the affidavit as regards the time when  the  Minster
    was in post, the  same  paragraph  about  the  appellant's  failure  to
    arrange meetings for him appeared  twice  and  the  affidavit  was  not
    dated.  She had not produced call logs to evidence calls said  to  have
    been made to her phone in Zimbabwe answered by her cousin in which  men
    asked about her whereabouts and when she would return to Zimbabwe.  The
    judge took into account relevant background evidence  which  considered
    risk on return and also Article 8 issues in concluding that the  appeal
    was to be dismissed.

6.   The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal on the  basis
    that the judge had relied on the  lack  of  corroborative  evidence  to
    support the appellant's account and also challenging the findings about
    whether an embassy official would have approached  her  for  investment
    advice, and coming to the conclusion that it was not plausible that  an
    official searching for the  appellant  would  not  have  contacted  the
    Minister who was aware of her whereabouts.  It had not  been  explained
    why typographical errors were implausible and  the  delay  in  claiming
    asylum was in fact significantly shorter than the  judge  had  thought.
    She would be perceived as a political opponent and that was why despite
    the fact that she worked for an MDC ministry she would face a  risk  on
    return.

7.   There was, as noted above,  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant at the hearing.  We are satisfied that notice of hearing  was
    sent out by first-class post to the appellant and to her representative
    on 5 March 2015 and therefore that it was appropriate to go  ahead  and
    consider the appeal.

8.   We see no merit to the challenge in this  case.   The  judge's  adverse
    credibility  findings  are  not  fully  founded  on  the   absence   of
    corroborative evidence.   He  was  entitled  to  note  the  absence  of
    corroboration but he found the evidence to be  lacking  in  credibility
    for a number of other reasons as set out above.  It was clearly open to
    the judge to express the concerns that he did about the  affidavit  and
    email from Mr Mashakada, and the challenge to that and also in  respect
    of the visa and the view that a government official  could  simply  ask
    the  Minister  about  the  appellant's  whereabouts  are   matters   of
    disagreement  only.   The  judge  gave  careful  consideration  to  the
    evidence and came to clearly sustainable conclusions.  The challenge in
    the grounds is a matter of disagreement only.  It has  not  been  shown
    that the  judge  erred  in  law  and  as  a  consequence  his  decision
    dismissing this appeal is upheld.



Signed        Date 14 April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen



No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 14 April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
