
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09752/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 June 2015                      |On 22 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Harnek Chand Bhatti
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss C Charlton, Legal Representative, Bhogal
Partners Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. We see no need for, and do not make, a direction restricting  reporting
    about this case.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant", against a  decision  refusing  him  asylum  and  giving
    directions for his removal.  The appeal was  allowed  solely  on  human
    rights grounds with reference to Article 8 of the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights and is challenged by the Secretary of State essentially
    on two grounds alleging misdirection and failure to follow properly the
    Rules.

 3. The claimant is a national of India. He came to the United  Kingdom  in
    the year 2000 and claimed asylum but he  did  not  cooperate  with  the
    asylum process.  He absconded and his whereabouts were unknown  to  the
    Home Office until October 2010 when a data protection request was made.
     It follows that for much of his long stay in the United Kingdom he was
    absconding and so preventing the authorities knowing  his  whereabouts.
    However, it is also right to say that although after he renewed contact
    with the authorities in 2010 it was not until almost exactly four years
    later, in October 2014, that the Secretary of State finally refused his
    application.

 4. The asylum appeal was dealt with briskly  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and no criticism is made of the decision to dismiss the appeal on
    asylum grounds.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard  the  claimant  give  evidence  and
    heard evidence from people called on his behalf.  They clearly  made  a
    very  good  impression.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  them
    truthful, that the appellant had established  a  private  life  in  the
    United   Kingdom   and   found    that    removal    would    interfere
    disproportionately with that private and family life.

 6. The difficulty is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  reached  that
    conclusion without any  real  consideration  of  the  Rules  or  proper
    consideration of the statute.

 7. Miss Charlton says that it was obvious  that  the  claimant  could  not
    satisfy the Rules and therefore the judge is  to  be  excused  for  not
    setting out in great detail Rules that could not be met.  We understand
    her point and it is not entirely without merit.  We do not find  it  at
    all helpful when, as is often the  case,  we  see  refusal  letters  of
    considerable length dealing with non-existent points but  we  must  not
    lose sight of the fact that the Rules set out the Secretary of  State's
    version of where  the  public  interest  generally  lies  and  where  a
    balancing exercise would  normally  fall  and  it  draws  attention  to
    particular points.

 8. On the facts of this case full consideration of the  rules  would  have
    drawn attention to the requirement under 276ADE(1)(vi) for there to  be
    "there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   the   applicant's
    integration". This requirement has really not been  considered  at  all
    and it should have been.  The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  India.  He
    appears to be a fit man and an industrious  man.  There  is  really  no
    reason why he cannot re-establish himself there.

 9. The Secretary of State maintains, we find correctly,  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal also  erred  by  not  considering  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   This  sets  out  with
    statutory authority certain things that are  in  the  public  interest.
    One of the  things  in  the  public  interest  is  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control.  The claimant is a man  who  has  defied
    effective immigration  control  by  hiding  from  the  authorities  and
    working when he should not have been  working.  Apart  from  any  other
    consideration it is not fair to other people who might want to live  in
    the United Kingdom but who would only do so lawfully  and  properly  to
    see people who are not anxious to comply with the Rules succeeding  and
    prospering.

10. We agree with Miss Charlton that it is  in  a  way  to  the  claimant's
    credit that he supported himself  by  his  labours.   Certainly  it  is
    better than stealing or scrounging but it is not such a good  point  as
    he thinks  it  to  be.   By  working  in  the  United  Kingdom  without
    permission he was doing something he ought not to have been  doing.  We
    agree with Miss Fijiwala that effective immigration control is achieved
    by removing those who act as though the Rules were  of  no  consequence
    and ignore them.

11. The claimant clearly did not satisfy the requirements of the  Rules  to
    remain.  He had not been in the United Kingdom for nearly long  enough.
    He did not explain why he could not be returned to India.  He certainly
    was not entitled to asylum.  This is not  a  case  where  the  claimant
    relies on the very strong personal relationships that  are  within  the
    "family life" element of private and family  life  that  can  sometimes
    make a difference, not for the sake of the appellant but for  the  sake
    of those close to him.  We are certainly not saying  that  this  is  an
    appeal that would have been allowed if  the  claimant  had  a  wife  or
    children.  Far from it but they would have been additional  factors  to
    consider that do not exist here.  He is a single man.

12. The First-tier Tribunal has nodded to the requirements of the Rules and
    the obligation imposed by Section  117B  but  having  recognised  these
    things  the  Decision  shows  not  engagement  with  them.   The   only
    justification given for the decision is the amount of time the claimant
    has spent in the United Kingdom.

13. Although the First-tier  Tribunal  clearly  referred  to  the  claimant
    having absconded, it  seems  to  have  lost  sight  of  the  fact  when
    conducting the balancing exercise.

14. Miss Charlton had to agree that once the claimant came to  light  there
    was no good reason to prioritise this claimant's case at the expense of
    people who were pursuing applications in a more responsible  way.   The
    Secretary of State's delay is unimpressive but, given  the  history  of
    this case, it is not the kind of culpable or outrageous delay which  we
    regard as particularly significant.  This is  especially  the  case  as
    there is a clear statutory authority requiring the decision  maker  not
    to give much weight to a private life developed  at  a  time  when  the
    immigration status was precarious.

15. We are quite satisfied that this claimant's immigration status  in  the
    United Kingdom has been precarious at all material times because he has
    had no right to be here except insofar as he had a limited right  while
    the claim was being pursued. This is a further reason for  saying  that
    the appeal should not have been allowed.

16. We are quite satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred.  It did  not
    explain why this was an exceptional case.  It did not explain  why  the
    pointers in the Rules that were in favour of the appeal being dismissed
    were given little or no weight.  It did not show that proper weight had
    been given to the statutory obligation to give little weight to private
    life established during the precarious time.

17. We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

18. We then have to ask ourselves what to do next.   This  is  not  a  case
    where it is necessary for wholesale fact-finding again.  The facts  are
    clear and we have alluded to the relevant ones already.

19. We do make  the  point  and  emphasise  that  we  have  considered  the
    statements that were provided in support of the claimant.  It is  quite
    obvious that he is a man who makes  a  very  favourable  impression  on
    those who know him and deal  with  him  and  this  is  because  of  his
    hardworking and positive attitude.  That is to his credit, even in  the
    case of someone living unlawfully in the United Kingdom. However  these
    are not weighty points in the  balancing  exercise.   They  cannot  be.
    They are perhaps only ways of saying he is not as bad as he might  have
    been.  What he did was to live in the United  Kingdom  in  a  way  that
    showed no proper regard at all  for  the  requirements  of  immigration
    control.  He has not built up any of the  special  relationships  which
    might for the sake of people concerned lead to a different  conclusion.
    His case is not allowable under the Rules and we  are  quite  satisfied
    should not be allowed outside the Rules.

20. We therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  we
    substitute a decision dismissing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision.

Notice of Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed. We set aside  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and substitute  a  decision  dismissing  the
    claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.





|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 19 June 2015                   |

