

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09518/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 13 April 2015                              |on 17 April 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             IBRAHIM SHIRE ABDI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C McGinley, of Gray & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Agnew, promulgated on 15 December  2014,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against refusal of recognition as a refugee from Somalia.

 2. The appellant entered the UK on 14 February 2014 in the identity  of  a
    citizen of Kenya on a student visa.  He did not enrol  on  the  course.
    His visa was curtailed on 4 April 2014.  He sought  asylum  on  16  May
    2014.

 3. The appellant's first ground of appeal alleges material  error  in  the
    judge's use of notes by a social worker.  The grounds state that  these
    notes should have been given no evidential weight because they did  not
    constitute a valid age assessment and were not supported by the  social
    worker  providing  a  witness  statement  or   attending   for   cross-
    examination.  Mr McGinley submitted that the document (page J2  of  the
    Home Office bundle) could not be considered to be  an  age  assessment.
    The judge at paragraphs 17 and 18 made strong findings on the basis  of
    this evidence, which should have been given no weight at all.

 4. Ground 2 criticises the judge's finding at paragraph 47 that there  had
    been  deliberate  deception  by  the  appellant  with  respect  to  his
    knowledge of English.  This assessment is reached with reference to the
    screening  interview,  the  university  application,  the   substantive
    interview, the oral evidence at the hearing, and so  on,  running  from
    paragraph 30 to 46.  Mr McGinley  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not
    stated what standard of proof she applied in this branch of  the  case.
    The finding she reached was essentially one of  criminality,  a  fraud.
    The judge had not said what standard she applied  but  it  should  have
    been higher than real risk.  If the appellant had been formally charged
    with fraud, the case against him would have had to be proved  beyond  a
    reasonable doubt.  Although these were not criminal proceedings, such a
    finding should not have been made  on  any  lesser  standard  than  the
    balance of probability.

 5. Ground 3 criticises the  judge's  assessment  of  a  language  analysis
    report provided by an organisation entitled  "Verified".   Mr  McGinley
    said that as far as he  was  aware  there  was  no  court  or  tribunal
    authority dealing with evidence from this  source.   There  is  however
    well  known  authority  on  difficulties  with  such  evidence  and  in
    particular with the organisation previously used by  the  Home  Office,
    "Sprakab".  The ground submits that the report  reaches  no  conclusion
    sufficient to undermine the appellant's credibility and that it  should
    not have been taken into account at all.

 6. In submissions, Mr McGinley developed under  Ground  3  a  point  about
    paragraph 54 of  the  determination  where  the  judge  says  that  the
    appellant "seemed somewhat reticent  when  asked  by  the  interviewing
    officer if he would be willing to undergo a  language  analysis."   The
    ground says this is speculative, and points out that the appellant  did
    take part in the analysis.  Mr McGinley referred to Q/A 164  where  the
    appellant responds, "But I want to tell you that I was living  for  one
    year in Kenya.  But some of my words you can find the Kenyan but  I  am
    ready to take the telephone and tell that while I was there maybe there
    is some change."  Mr McGinley said this did not disclose any  reticence
    and to the extent that the appellant offered an explanation in advance,
    that did not count against him.

 7. Mr McGinley submitted finally that while none  of  these  errors  might
    have been sufficient alone to undermine the determination, cumulatively
    they were such that there should be a fresh hearing in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 8. Mrs O'Brien submitted on Ground 1 that the appellant had  been  put  on
    notice at an early stage that his identity and his claimed age were not
    accepted by the respondent.  The social worker did not accept that  his
    age was as claimed.  The note indicated that a  formal  age  assessment
    might be carried out but none had been.  The judge did not  think  that
    there had been one, or that the notes constituted such  an  assessment,
    and was entitled to give that evidence such weight as  she  did.    The
    appellant did not put forward any further evidence regarding  his  age.
    He might have sought his own assessment.  It was open to the  judge  to
    find that his age was not as he claimed.  The discussion  at  paragraph
    16-20 and the conclusions reached at paragraph 20, for 3 reasons,  were
    cogent and unassailable.

 9. Regarding Ground 2 Mrs O'Brien said that the judge set out the  correct
    standard of proof  at  paragraph  13  and  applied  it  throughout  the
    determination.  The finding of deliberate deception  was  not  a  legal
    term of art but a factual finding about what the  appellant  did.   The
    judge analysed the evidence thoroughly and in detail from paragraphs 15-
    63.  Under several headings and for numerous good reasons the appellant
    was found not to have established his case.  There was no  standard  of
    proof error.

10. The result of the language analysis is expressed in somewhat convoluted
    terms at page 8 of the report (page I8 of the respondent's bundle):

         The hypothesis [tested] is that the  person  belongs  to  a  Somali
         linguistic community that occurs in Afmadow

         ...

         To the extent given below, the subject's speech in  the  sample  is
         consistent with the hypothesis about linguistic community

         ...

         [chosen from a list of options ranging from  plus  three  to  minus
         three ] ...

         Minus one: the language analysis somewhat suggests that the results
         obtained more likely than not are inconsistent with the  linguistic
         community as stated in the hypothesis.

11. Mrs O'Brien accepted that this is only a  faint  conclusion.   However,
    she said that all the points made in the grounds are reflected  in  the
    qualifications expressed in the report itself.  It did  not  appear  to
    have been submitted in the First-tier Tribunal that the report  was  to
    be disregarded entirely.  There was no reason why it should be.

12. Mrs O'Brien submitted that the judge's observation on  the  appellant's
    response to the prospect of the language  analysis  was  a  justifiable
    one.

13. In the round, Mrs O'Brien submitted that the grounds disclosed no error
    of any significance and  that  the  determination,  read  as  a  whole,
    strongly supported its adverse overall conclusion.

14. Mr McGinley in response said that the judge's finding of  reticence  at
    paragraph 54 was a misunderstanding of what the appellant said and  was
    not a fair point to be taken against him.

15. I reserved my determination.

16. The case for the appellant has been pressed as strongly as it  properly
    might have been, both in the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  However, I do not think that any  of  the  grounds  disclose
    material error in the determination.

17. The judge did not mistake the social worker's notes for  a  formal  age
    assessment.   Her  finding  at  paragraph   20   that   the   appellant
    deliberately lied about his age is not based only on those  notes.   It
    is based on his changing evidence about his age, his  inaccuracy  about
    his age at the time of events, and the documentation he produced to the
    Entry Clearance Officer in Nairobi which showed  a  different  date  of
    birth.  Those reasons are not flawed.

18. The burden was on the appellant throughout to establish his case to the
    lower standard.   Judges  are  entitled  to  make  some  findings  more
    conclusively than others, according  to  the  state  of  the  evidence,
    provided that they apply the appropriate standard overall.  There is no
    error in the finding that the appellant used  deliberate  deception  in
    various respects.  The particular context where this phrase is used  is
    after substantial analysis at paragraphs 30-47, leading to the  overall
    conclusion that the appellant throughout has tried  to  play  down  his
    ability to speak English in order to support the assertion that he is a
    national not of Kenya but of Somalia.  No error is shown therein.

19. The judge at paragraph 55 accepted the submissions by Mr McGinley about
    the limitations of the language report.  She went on,  "On  its  own  I
    would agree.  However, with all the other evidence  the  conclusion  is
    something I consider should be  taken  into  account."   She  does  not
    quantify exactly its degree of significance, but the  question  is  not
    mathematical and to do so would be impossible.  It is  plain  that  the
    report was given little significance, no more than was justified.

20. The points picked on by the grounds  are  only  a  small  part  of  the
    determination.  Read fairly and as  a  whole,  it  is  a  comprehensive
    analysis which  rejects  the  appellant's  account  for  numerous  good
    reasons.

21. The determination shall stand.

22. No anonymity order has been requested or made.


           [pic]


           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
           15 April 2015


