
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09596/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 May 2016                             |On 18 May 2016                    |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                              Quoc Khanh NGHIEM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Mair, instructed by Prolegis, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Quoc Khanh Nghiem, was born on 2 September 1968 and is a
    male citizen of Vietnam.  He  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to remove him from the United Kingdom  having  rejected  his
    asylum appeal which is dated 25 June  2015.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Kelly) in a decision promulgated on 2 December  2015,  dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a businessman who has interests in  Russia  and  China
    where he has spent much of his working life.  Judge Kelly accepted that
    the appellant had become  disaffected  with  the  Vietnamese  communist
    regime when his paternal grandfather had  been  executed  by  it.   The
    judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  developed  an  interest  in
    democracy and in educating young Vietnamese people in  how  to  protect
    their rights in the workplace.  He became involved with a Mr  Minh  Duc
    Phung and together in 2008 they had established a Chinese branch of  an
    organisation called "Viet Youth for  Democracy".   The  judge  made  it
    clear [32]  that,  "I  find  that  there  is  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that the matters which I  have  summarised  in  paragraph  3
    (above) are true."  Those are  the  matters  which  I  have,  in  turn,
    summarised immediately above.  Judge Kelly otherwise took a  much  less
    positive view of the accuracy and truth of the appellant's account.  He
    did not accept certain documents adduced by the appellant  in  evidence
    as adding weight to the account [25].  He attached  significant  weight
    to the failure of the appellant to claim asylum at  Manchester  Airport
    [26]; he was "not impressed" by  the  testimony  of  the  witnesses  Mr
    Nguyen and Mr Phong; he was not satisfied that photographs  adduced  in
    evidence had been taken in Vietnam as claimed  by  the  appellant;  the
    judge did not accept that the events in Vietnam  which  had  supposedly
    triggered the appellant's flight  from  the  country  had  occurred  as
    described by the appellant or at all [31].

 3. Under the heading "legal analysis" the judge considered  whether  there
    was a real risk that the appellant would be ill-treated  or  persecuted
    upon return to Vietnam having the profile and characteristics which  he
    had summarised in paragraph 3 of his decision.   Two  experts'  reports
    have been adduced in evidence on behalf of the appellant (Dr  Tran  and
    Professor Bluth) that indicated the appellant would be questioned  upon
    his return to Vietnam.  The judge found that he could,

         see no evidence that such questioning would be about anything other
         than his political  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom.   As  the
         appellant does not claim to have  undertaken  any  such  activities
         whilst he has been in the United Kingdom, he  would  truthfully  be
         able to say that he has not done so.

    The grounds of appeal challenge that analysis, asserting that there was
    nothing in the experts' reports to support such a finding.  I agree.  I
    cannot see why the questioning of the Vietnamese authorities should  be
    so specific as to deal with the appellant's activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom only.  It is accepted by both  parties  that  the  organisation
    Viet Youth for Democracy is banned in Vietnam and that membership of it
    gives rise to a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment  in  Vietnam.
    Judge Kelly found that the appellant's  activities  on  behalf  of  the
    organisation had taken place only in China.   I  have  to  say,  having
    considered the evidence (in particular, the experts' reports)  and  the
    fact that the appellant has travelled and worked in  several  countries
    that there must be a reasonable likelihood that the appellant would  be
    asked questions about his political activities other than in the United
    Kingdom.  The appellant cannot be expected  to  dissemble  and,  if  he
    disclosed the extent of his involvement with the democracy organisation
    in China, there is a real  risk  that  he  would  be  exposed  to  ill-
    treatment.

 4. There is also perhaps a more fundamental  problem  with  Judge  Kelly's
    analysis of risk on  return.   As  I  have  noted  above,  Judge  Kelly
    accepted that  the  appellant  had  been  actively  involved  with  the
    organisation Viet Youth for Democracy helping to  set  up  its  Chinese
    branch in 2008 [3].  At [34], Judge Kelly found that he was

         satisfied that his future political activities  will  be  conducted
         from what has proved to be the safety of China and will not involve
         him becoming directly involved in political  activity  in  Vietnam.
         The essence of those  activities  will  be,  as  in  the  past,  to
         encourage Vietnamese visitors to China to promote the aims of 'Viet
         Youth for Democracy' and Lao Dong Viet upon their return.

    The question  arises  as  to  why  the  appellant  would  restrict  his
    political activity with  those  organisations  to  China,  rather  than
    Vietnam itself.  The judge has found that the  appellant  is  genuinely
    politically committed to these  organisations  promoting  democracy  in
    Vietnam.  There was no evidence that his  commitment  to  democracy  is
    limited only to its  promotion  in  China.   Judge  Kelly  should  have
    considered why the appellant would refrain from political  activity  in
    Vietnam.   Given  the  unlikelihood  that  he  is  interested  only  in
    promoting democracy to Vietnamese  youth  in  China,  the  most  likely
    answer is that he would not pursue these activities in Vietnam for fear
    of being persecuted by the authorities there (see HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC
    31).  On the facts as Judge Kelly found them, therefore, the  appellant
    is a refugee in the United Kingdom.  For  the  reasons  I  have  stated
    above, I set aside Judge Kelly's decision and have remade the  decision
    allowing the appeal on asylum and Articles 2/3 human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  2
    December  2015  is  set  aside.   I  have  remade  the  decision.   The
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 25 June
    2015 is allowed on asylum and human rights (Articles 2/3) grounds.

 6. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 13 May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

