
IAC-TH-WYL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09675/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Determination Promulgated         |
|On 27th November 2014             |On 30th December 2014             |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     Pb
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Paramjorthy, Counsel for Marsh & Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, born on 26th August 1987, is a citizen of Sri  Lanka  of
    Tamil ethnicity.  He appealed the Respondent's decision of 4th  October
    2013, refusing to grant him asylum.  His appeal was heard by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Widdup on 8th September 2014 and dismissed in a
    determination promulgated on 28th September 2014.

 2. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Reid  on  22nd  October
    2014.  The permission states that it is arguable that the judge did not
    give sufficient regard to the  medical  reports  and  the  Respondent's
    concessions when carrying out his analysis of the case  in  respect  of
    risk on return.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response dated 14th November 2014.  This states that
    the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately and
    at paragraphs 60  and  61  of  the  determination  he  found  that  the
    Appellant does not fall into the risk categories set out in GJ & Others
    [2013] UKUT 00319.  It goes on to state that the  judge  gave  adequate
    reasons for his findings, which were open to him on the facts.

The Hearing

 4. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that he is adopting the grounds  of
    application.  He submitted that there is a deficiency in the First-tier
    Judge's  reasoning.   I  was  referred   to   paragraph   60   of   the
    determination.  In this paragraph the judge states that as a matter  of
    law the risk factors defined by the said case  of  GJ  do  not  include
    scarring and even when scarring was considered a risk factor it had  to
    be accompanied by other significant  factors  and  there  are  no  such
    factors in this case.  I was then referred to paragraphs 41 and  42  of
    the  determination.   Counsel  submitted  that  the  judge  deals  with
    scarring based on old cases, in particular the case of TK  (Sri  Lanka)
    which case was decided in 2009.  Counsel submitted that the judge erred
    by doing this as that case was based on the background evidence at that
    time.  He submitted that the relevant case is now the said case of  GJ.
    At paragraph 42 of the determination the judge refers to minor scarring
    which could have been caused by minor accidents  and  states  that  the
    Appellant can conceal the cigarette burn scars if he wears a shirt with
    long sleeves.  Counsel submitted that scarring  is  considered  in  the
    case of GJ and the case of GJ is the relevant case when risk on  return
    is being assessed.  Counsel submitted that scarring has to be addressed
    and the judge has  to  decide  if  the  medical  evidence  provided  is
    clinically corroborative of the Appellant being ill-treated.

 5. I was referred to paragraph 37 of the determination in which the  judge
    refers to Dr Lingam's report.  At paragraph 38 the judge states that Dr
    Lingam confirmed that the linear scars on the appellant's forehead  and
    knees are consistent with the history  given  by  the  Appellant.   The
    judge goes on to state that Dr Lingam was unable to  distinguish  other
    scars from scars caused by torture and scars caused by a third party at
    the Appellant's behest.   The  judge  at  paragraph  39  refers  to  Dr
    Lingam's observations on the three cigarette  burns  which  the  doctor
    said were typical of torture but did not specifically  eliminate  SIBP.
    At paragraph 40 the judge states that no  reference  was  made  by  the
    Appellant to cigarette burns and concluded that the  scarring  was  not
    determinative of the Appellant's evidence.

 6. Counsel submitted that based on the said case of TK,  if  an  Appellant
    could wear long sleeves that was alright but that is not now  the  case
    and I was again referred to the case of GJ.

 7. Counsel then referred to the second ground and how post-conflict arrest
    should be  assessed.   He  submitted  that  the  Appellant  escaped  in
    December 2009 and the Appellant's evidence  is  that  he  was  an  LTTE
    fighter.  At paragraph 47 of the determination the judge accepts  this.
    Counsel submitted that the Respondent accepted the Appellant's  account
    of his arrest and detention.  He again referred to the said case of GJ.
      He submitted that on return the authorities in  Sri  Lanka  may  find
    that the appellant was an LTTE fighter and GJ states that civilians who
    are thought to have been LTTE fighters may be in danger on  return.  At
    paragraph 40  of  the  determination  the  judge  states  that  as  the
    Appellant left on his own passport and has had no political involvement
    in the United Kingdom, he will not be at risk on  return  but  we  were
    referred to paragraph 394 of the said case of  GJ.   Counsel  submitted
    that in our case  bribery  and  corruption  were  used  to  enable  the
    appellant to escape and although he managed to fly to India  and  back,
    in February 2010 when he came to the United Kingdom he used  an  agent.
    He submitted that because he went to India on his own passport  without
    an agent does not mean that he will not be at risk  on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka now.

 8. Counsel then submitted that  the  judge  failed  to  properly  consider
    paragraph 50 of the case of MP and NT (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ  829.
    He submitted that at the First-tier hearing questions were asked to the
    Appellant as to why he did not remain in India.  At paragraph 50 of  MP
    and NT it is stated that that Appellant  would  still  be  at  risk  on
    return to Sri Lanka in the absence of post-war separatism and that  his
    profile would still place him arguably  at  risk  on  return.   Counsel
    submitted that the judge did not give  proper  consideration  to  this.
    Counsel submitted that at paragraph 52 of the determination  the  judge
    seems  to  have  forgotten  that  the  Respondent  accepts   that   the
    Appellant's brother paid a bribe.  The judge refers to the  appellant's
    brother not attending the hearing and Counsel submitted that the  judge
    has put too much weight on this.

 9. Counsel submitted that the judge refers to the scarring issue again  at
    paragraph 57.  He finds that there is insufficient  evidence  that  all
    the Appellant's scars relate to  ill-treatment  in  detention  and  the
    judge did not  accept  that  the  linear  scars  were  caused  by  ill-
    treatment.  He goes on however  to  state  that  he  accepts  that  the
    Appellant experienced some ill-treatment during his detention and  that
    he was burnt three times by cigarettes.  He then quotes paragraph 48 of
    the said case of GJ:

        "The effect of that provision is that where the  circumstances  are
        the same then past persecution or serious harm is to be regarded as
        predictive of future persecution or serious harm absent a change of
        circumstances."

    The judge goes on to state that the circumstances in Sri Lanka are  now
    very different to what they  were  when  the  Appellant  left.   I  was
    referred to the last page of the said case of MP and  NT  which  states
    that the government in Sri Lanka might regard the appellant as posing a
    current threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state, even in
    the absence of evidence that he has been involved in diaspora activism.



10. Counsel submitted that insufficient regard  was  paid  to  the  medical
    report and the Respondent's concessions and there would be  a  risk  to
    this Appellant on return to Sri Lanka.

11. The Presenting Officer submitted that what Counsel is stating  is  that
    the judge erred by failing to engage with  some  medical  evidence  and
    engaged with the wrong case law.   She  submitted  that  she  does  not
    accept this and it is not material that the judge applied earlier  case
    law.  She submitted that the judge accepts that the Appellant was  ill-
    treated in detention at paragraph 57 but then states that he  does  not
    accept that the linear scars were caused by  this  ill-treatment.   She
    submitted that it is clear that the judge accepts  some  parts  of  the
    evidence but not others and that he was entitled to this finding.   She
    submitted that at paragraph 42 of the determination the judge refers to
    the linear scars being minor and states that they are  consistent  with
    common injuries caused by minor accidents.   He  therefore  finds  that
    these scars are unlikely to alert the authorities.  She submitted  that
    the judge has factored torture into his findings and his determination,
    so considering the case promulgated in 2009 made no difference  to  the
    determination  as  a  whole.   She  submitted  that  there  is  nothing
    irrational  in  what  the  judge  states   about   the   matter   under
    consideration.

12. The Presenting Officer referred to the ground in which  Counsel  states
    that the judge mis-applied the Appellant's profile.  She submitted that
    Counsel is stating that the judge did  not  properly  engage  with  the
    Appellant's LTTE work and she submitted that there is  no  error  here.
    The judge made numerous references to the appellant's LTTE training and
    his work for the LTTE.  She submitted that  there  is  no  evidence  to
    indicate that  the  Appellant  wants  a  Tamil  homeland.   He  has  no
    political profile and he will not be on a  stop-list  on  return.   She
    submitted that Appendix C of the case of GJ is only a description of  a
    procedure.  Counsel is suggesting that the judge has mis-construed  the
    Appellant's evidence  and  paragraph  51  of  the  determination  could
    suggest this but even if it does, this is extremely minor and will  not
    require the determination to be set aside.

13. At paragraph 52 the judge concedes that  the  Respondent  has  accepted
    that a bribe was paid but the judge was not  happy  with  the  lack  of
    detail about this and the fact that the  appellant's  brother  did  not
    attend the hearing.  The judge correctly states that his brother  could
    have described the handing over of the  bribe  and  the  circumstances.
    She submitted that it was open to the judge to make the finding that he
    did.

14. With regard to Counsel's submission  that  the  judge  gave  inadequate
    consideration to the case of MP and NT I was referred to  paragraph  50
    of that case.  The Presenting Officer  submitted  that  this  paragraph
    does not support the Appellant's case.  All it does  is  refer  to  the
    Upper Tribunal's guidance in which it is found that past LTTE  activism
    does not necessarily mean risk on return.  She submitted that the Upper
    Tribunal was entitled to come to that conclusion and this is  something
    that should be considered when a decision  about  returning  Tamils  is
    being made but the judge found that when considering our  case  on  its
    facts, this Appellant will not be at risk on return.  The  judge  finds
    that in this case, having considered all the facts in  the  round,  the
    Appellant is not somebody who  will  be  at  risk  on  return.   I  was
    referred to paragraph 50 of the case of MP and NT where  it  is  stated
    that there may, "though untypically", be other cases where the evidence
    shows particular grounds  for  concluding  that  the  government  might
    regard the appellant as posing a current threat to the integrity of Sri
    Lanka as a single state, even in the absence of evidence  that  he  has
    been involved in diaspora activism.  I was asked to give weight to  the
    words "though untypically".  She submitted that there is  no  error  of
    law by the judge.

15. The Presenting  Officer  then  referred  me  to  paragraph  53  of  the
    determination  which  refers  to  the  lack  of  credibility   in   the
    Appellant's evidence.  She submitted that this has not been  challenged
    and at paragraph 54 the fact that  the  Appellant  waited  three  years
    before claiming asylum must go against his credibility.  She  submitted
    that there  is  nothing  in  the  grounds  which  could  undermine  the
    determination.

16. She submitted that the Respondent has accepted that the  Appellant  was
    detained but he did travel to India and back without an agent  and  his
    evidence is that he came to the United Kingdom  on  his  own  passport.
    The judge finds that this is significant and  at  paragraph  56  states
    that the Appellant's involvement with the LTTE was at the lowest  level
    for a very brief time.  She submitted that on  the  lower  standard  of
    proof the judge finds that this Appellant is an  economic  migrant  and
    based on the facts of  the  case  and  the  evidence  before  him,  the
    Appellant will not be on a stop-list on return. I was asked  to  uphold
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

17. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the judge gave too much weight
    to the fact that the Appellant's brother did not attend the hearing and
    did not give reasons for finding  that  the  linear  scarring  did  not
    indicate torture.  He submitted that  the  judge  also  gave  too  much
    weight to the Appellant's departure from Sri Lanka on his own  passport
    and on the absence of a political profile, finding that  these  matters
    show that there would be no  risk  to  the  Appellant  on  return.   He
    submitted  that  the  judge  accepts  that  the  cigarette  burns  were
    inflicted while he was detained and he was wrong  to  find  the  linear
    scars point to a credibility issue.

18. Counsel submitted that the  Section  8  matter  of  the  delay  in  the
    Appellant claiming asylum is not sufficient for the Appellant  to  have
    no problems on return.  He submitted that this is not a logical finding
    and the judge has misconstrued the evidence.

19. I was asked to find that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination and that the decision should be overturned.

Determination

20. The  judge  has  properly  considered  the  medical  evidence  and  the
    Appellant's scarring.  I  find  that  the  fact  that  he  applied  the
    guidance in TK (Sri Lanka) and LP (Sri Lanka)  not  to  be  a  material
    error.  He accepts  that  the  Appellant  was  detained  and  may  have
    suffered some ill-treatment while he was detained but he  gives  weight
    to Dr Lingam's evidence and at paragraph 38 notes the doctor's  report,
    relating to linear scars.  At paragraph 41 he refers to the  said  case
    of GJ and in that paragraph he makes it clear that he is aware that  GJ
    is the relevant case but he still finds it necessary  to  consider  the
    scarring as a risk factor, in line with the old  guidance.   The  judge
    did not have to do that but in this case  this  must  surely  help  the
    Appellant.  He gives reasons for finding that the  linear  scars  would
    not put the Appellant in danger  and  he  accepts  that  the  cigarette
    burns, three in number, may have been inflicted on the  Appellant  when
    he was detained.  He goes on to  refer  to  Dr  Lawrence's  report  and
    states at paragraph 55 that he has attempted to make allowances for the
    Appellant's psychiatric condition but finds  that  although  these  can
    explain away the identified weaknesses in the appellant's evidence they
    do not address the central issue in this case,  which  is  whether  the
    Appellant is someone who would  be  perceived  to  be  a  risk  to  the
    stability of Sri Lanka.  He finds at paragraph 56 that the  Appellant's
    involvement with the LTTE was at the lowest  level  for  a  very  brief
    time.  Although he has accepted that the  appellant  was  detained,  he
    notes that in 2009 many Tamils were detained just for  their  ethnicity
    and finds that there is insufficient evidence that all the  Appellant's
    scars relate to ill-treatment in detention.  It is clear that the judge
    has  properly  considered  the  medical  evidence  and  came   to   his
    conclusions accordingly.  At paragraph  60  he  states  that  the  risk
    factors defined by GJ do not include scarring and he states  that  even
    when scarring was considered a risk factor it had to be accompanied  by
    other significant factors and there are no such factors in  this  case.
    He also finds that  the  report  of  Dr  Lawrence  does  not  take  the
    Appellant's case very much further.

21. The  second  ground,  being  the  mis-application  of  the  Appellant's
    profile, has also been properly considered by the judge.   The  grounds
    refer to Appendix C and the case of GJ.  Again the judge has found that
    the appellant was detained and had fought with the LTTE.   The  grounds
    state that the judge should have found that this profile places him  at
    risk on return to Sri Lanka but the judge has properly considered  this
    and has found that the Appellant is a Tamil from the north of Sri Lanka
    who has never been involved in political activity on behalf of the LTTE
    although he was forcibly recruited into  the  LTTE  and  received  some
    training.  The judge finds that the  Appellant  was  no  more  than  an
    ordinary foot soldier and after a  short  while  he  escaped,  was  not
    captured, left the fighting, and fled with other civilians.  The  judge
    is concerned about  credibility  and  notes  that  in  the  appellant's
    screening interview he stated that he had never been  detained  but  he
    notes that the Respondent accepts that he was detained.  He also  notes
    that the Respondent also accepts that the  Appellant  was  released  on
    payment of a bribe.  The judge notes that  the  appellant  remained  in
    Colombo for a year, apart from a brief visit to India and then left Sri
    Lanka on his own passport without difficulty and  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  At paragraph 50 the judge states that there  is  no  evidence
    that the authorities in Sri Lanka would have issued an  arrest  warrant
    for the Appellant.  He points out that after the Appellant  escaped  he
    visited the British  High  Commission  twice  and  travelled  to  India
    without difficulty on his own  passport.   He  then  travelled  to  the
    United Kingdom using his own  passport  and  there  is  no  documentary
    evidence about the death of any of his close relatives.   He  qualifies
    this at paragraph 51, accepting that a bribe was paid.  This  is  where
    he states that it would have been helpful if  the  Appellant's  brother
    had attended the hearing.   That  is  really  all  he  says  about  the
    Appellant's brother and it clearly  would  have  been  helpful  if  his
    brother had been at the hearing to clarify the paying of the bribe  but
    as he was not, the judge had to make his findings on  what  was  before
    him.

22. One of the main issues in this claim is the lack of credibility in  the
    Appellant's evidence.  This is mentioned  a  number  of  times  in  the
    determination under  the  heading,  "Findings  of  Fact".   There  were
    contradictions in his evidence which are referred to  at  paragraph  53
    and he delayed claiming asylum for three years.  This was mentioned  at
    paragraph 54.  At paragraph 55 the judge refers to  the  flaws  in  the
    Appellant's case and the factors which damaged his credibility.  All in
    all the judge is satisfied that the  Appellant  experienced  some  ill-
    treatment during his detention but does not find that  this  in  itself
    would put him in danger on return.  It is clear from the  determination
    that all the facts of the case have been considered by the judge in the
    round.

23. The third ground is the inadequate consideration of the case of MP  and
    NT (Sri Lanka).  Paragraph 50 of that case is quoted  in  the  grounds.
    It is clear that Lord Justice Underhill in that  case  found  that  the
    government in Sri Lanka's  concern  is  only  with  current  or  future
    threats to the integrity of Sri Lanka  as  a  unitary  state.   Counsel
    states that our appellant may be regarded as posing a current threat to
    the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state even  in  the  absence  of
    evidence that he  or  she  has  been  involved  in  diaspora  activism.
    Paragraph 50 states that it is not typical for this to be the case  and
    the judge clearly finds that the Appellant in this case  would  not  be
    regarded as posing a current threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as  a
    single state.  At paragraph 62 the judge states that on return, at  the
    most, the authorities will know of him  as  someone  who  was  involved
    briefly in the fighting at the end of  the  war.   He  surrendered  and
    admitted his role and his detention ended informally.  The judge  finds
    that sophisticated intelligence will establish the lack  of  any  other
    political activity in the past, either in Sri Lanka or in  the  UK  and
    the judge finds that based on what was before him  the  Appellant  will
    not be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

24. The judge's findings are properly explained and there is  no  error  of
    law in the determination.

Decision

25. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination promulgated on 28th September 2014.

26. The First-tier Tribunal's determination, promulgated on that date, must
    stand.

27. Anonymity has been directed.



Signed        Date 30th December 2014


Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
