

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA093752014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17th May 2016                              |On 24th May 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                               AYED K EL INAZI
                         (Anonymity order not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Aghayere, counsel, instructed by A2 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the  grounds  the  First-
      tier Tribunal judge failed to have regard  to  material  evidence  and
      matters. In particular
   i) failed to consider the SPRAKAB report which accepted the appellant was
      Kuwaiti;
  ii) rejected Dr George's expert evidence regarding the genuineness of  the
      Kuwaiti documents because  it  was  not  clear  whether  he  had  been
      provided with the screening and substantive interview notes: Dr George
      had  not  been  instructed  to  consider  the  plausibility   of   the
      applicant's account but the genuineness of the documents only;
 iii) rejecting the appellant's evidence as to whether he was educated given
      that English was not the appellant's first language and there had been
      no 'read-back';
  iv) failed to consider relevant background country material;
   v) concluded that because the applicant had been granted a  visa  on  his
      allegedly false passport, then the passport was genuine;
  vi) failed to consider that a fingerprint match at the US Embassy does not
      necessarily mean the appellant is Iraqi;
 vii) the CID notes should not be regarded as evidence;
viii) in not accepting the appellant's explanation for his  wife's  name  in
      screening fails to consider that English is not his first language and
      the screening interview was not read back;
  ix) failed to have adequate regard to the witnesses' evidence and  origins
      and failed  to  have  adequate  regard  to  background  material  that
      supported the applicant's claim.


   2. Permission was granted principally on (v) above but permission was not
      refused on other grounds.


   3. The applicant successfully claimed asylum as an undocumented Bidoon in
      the identity of Ayed Khazai El Inazi born in Saihat Al  Awazim  Kuwait
      on 15th November 1971. He arrived in the UK on 12th February 2013  and
      claimed asylum on 13th February 2013; he was recognised as  a  refugee
      in the identity of Ayed Khazai El Inazi on 17 April 2013  and  granted
      leave to  enter  until  17  April  2018.  On  24th  October  2014  the
      respondent cancelled  the  appellant's  refugee  status  and  on  15th
      December served a decision to remove him  under  s10  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 1999.  The  respondent  notified  the  appellant  that  she
      considered his true identity  to  be  Ayyed  Khazzl  Hayef,  an  Iraqi
      Citizen born 1 January 1971 and that he had obtained a  visa  for  the
      USA from Baghdad on his own passport. The appellant's  appeal  against
      that decision was heard by First-tier Tribunal Malik and dismissed  in
      a decision promulgated on 27th March 2015.


   4. Before me Mr Aghayere sought permission to adduce  evidence  that  had
      not been before the First-tier Tribunal namely a LandInfo report which
      he asserted went directly to the reference in [47] of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal decision:


        "....he is an Iraqi national and the Iraqi  passport,  rather  than
        being  obtained  by  a  bribe  or  being  false,  is  in  fact  the
        appellant's own passport. In making this finding, it appears to  me
        incredible the US authorities in Iraq would have granted a visa  on
        an Iraqi passport without first making further checks to  establish
        the identify of the passport holder  and  the  bona  fides  of  the
        applicant for the visa: that the US authorities did grant the  visa
        causes me to find it was validly issued to the appellant as an Iraq
        national."


        Mr Aghayere (who had only received his brief the previous  evening)
        had not made an application prior to the hearing for  admission  of
        the evidence at this  stage.  Nor  did  he  establish  whether  the
        admission of the document satisfied the Ladd and Marshal  test.  He
        stated that it  was  not  until  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal was received was the appellant aware that  the  judge  was
        going to make findings as to his nationality other than that he was
        or was not a Bidoon. Had he known this the document would have been
        submitted for the First-tier Tribunal. This is not strictly correct
        - the appellant was aware from the reasons for cancellation of  his
        status that the respondent had concluded that the appellant was  an
        Iraqi national who had applied for a visa  to  travel  to  the  USA
        using an Iraqi passport. There  is  no  plausible  reason  for  the
        appellant having failed  to  adduce  such  evidence  as  he  wished
        relating to the Iraqi passport before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
        refused to admit the evidence during the course of  my  determining
        whether there was a material error of law.

     5. The First-tier Tribunal considers the evidence of Dr George who has
        stated in very strong terms that the Kuwaiti documents are, in  his
        opinion, genuine. Dr George  is  a  freelance  writer,  journalist,
        academic and expert witness who has given evidence to the  tribunal
        on a number of occasions. His CV is impressive. He states  that  he
        is very familiar with the style and format of Kuwaiti documents and
        keeps  numerous  copies  of  such  documents,  both   genuine   and
        counterfeit that he has acquired in the course of his  work  as  an
        expert witness. It is not clear from his CV that  he  has  specific
        forensic expertise but he states that over the course of  his  work
        he has  prepared  some  500  authentication  reports  on  documents
        dealing with several separate documents. Dr George  considered  the
        authenticity of a residence permit issued  to  Khazal  Nayef  Saleh
        dated 6th June 1978 and a certificate dated 10th March 1993  issued
        by the Ministry of Education affirming the  educational  record  of
        Ayed Khazal Nayef Saleh. It does not appear that  he  was  provided
        with the appellant's witness statements or the respondent's reasons
        for refusal of asylum letter or his screening or asylum interviews.
        He confirms that, although he  does  not  have  in  his  possession
        documents of that specific type, he does hold a variety of official
        documents issued in the same period and he concludes that there was
        nothing about the two documents that would cause him to doubt their
        authenticity.


     6. The First-tier Tribunal judge  places  no  weight  upon  these  two
        documents because Dr George was not provided with  the  appellant's
        screening and asylum interview which indicated that he had not been
        educated and because the documents fail to mention the  appellant's
        claimed family name of El Inazi. Dr George was not asked to comment
        on this  or  whether  that  information  would  have  affected  his
        assessment of the genuineness of the two documents. It is of course
        possible that the documents are genuine - they just do  not  belong
        to this appellant.


     7.  The  judge  considers  the  evidence  in  the   context   of   the
        inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence notably  his  statement
        initially that his father worked as a shepherd  and  then  that  he
        worked for a Government department;  that  "they"  were  not  given
        death or birth certificates and yet he produced documents  for  his
        appeal that contradicted this; that he had never been educated  and
        then that he had been lucky and been able to be educated hence  the
        school certificate; that he had never applied for a visa to another
        country and then that he had a US visa; that the appellant gave his
        family name as El Inazi and yet no  other  documents  produced  had
        that  family  name  on  them.  The  letter  from  the  Ministry  of
        Education, the school certificates and the residence permit do  not
        have the appellant's family name on them.  There  was  no  evidence
        from Dr George as to the  possible  significance/insignificance  of
        this. It was plainly reasonable for the judge to take the  lack  of
        family name into account in his consideration  of  the  appellant's
        account.

     8. The judge also considers the evidence that someone entering the  UK
        on 12 February 2013 used an Iraqi passport in  the  name  of  Ayyed
        Khazaal Hayif born 1 January 1971 and that fingerprints produced in
        Baghdad to obtain a US visa on that passport  matched  fingerprints
        given by the appellant on claiming asylum. The appellant  does  not
        deny travelling on the passport but states that  it  is  false  and
        obtained through an agent and he travelled from UAE. The  appellant
        states the person named on the passport  was  not  him.  The  judge
        considers the  evidence  that  the  appellant's  wife  subsequently
        travelled to the UK from the USA on a  passport  bearing  the  same
        name - "Hayif"; he considers the appellant's  explanation  that  it
        was a coincidence because they may have used  the  same  agent  and
        that he had told her of  the  name  he  was  using  when  he  first
        contacted the agent; his evidence was that he had not realised that
        he was using a passport that had been previously arranged  for  him
        but not used at the time it  was  originally  obtained.  The  judge
        notes the appellant gave his wife's name as Hayef at screening  and
        this was the name of his wife as recorded in the passport  he  used
        to enter the UK. In evidence before the judge  the  appellant  says
        that was an error and he had actually said "Nayef".

     9. The  judge  considers  the  witness  evidence  and  refers  to  the
        inconsistencies and the lack  of  reference  by  the  witnesses  to
        events described by the appellant  despite  them  allegedly  having
        discussed the appellant's status and that they had been friends  in
        Kuwait. The judge notes that the witnesses  obtained  their  status
        without court proceedings and refers to the lack of an  independent
        judicial test of their claim.

    10. The judge acknowledges that the  appellant  provided  a  number  of
        answers consistent with knowledge of Kuwait.  The  judge  considers
        the Sprakab report in the context of the evidence as  a  whole.  He
        refers to the influx of Iraqi workers into Kuwait and  acknowledges
        that  the  appellant  speaks  Arabic  as  spoken  in  Kuwait.   The
        inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence were put to him and the
        judge has noted his explanation.

    11. The judge draws all of these matters together, along  with  the  US
        fingerprint and visa evidence. He  self  directed  himself  to  the
        correct burden and standard of proof ([6], [55]) and there  was  no
        challenge in the grounds to  his  application  of  that  burden  or
        standard.

    12. The First-tier Tribunal judge considered the  evidence  before  him
        and reached reasoned and sustainable conclusions supported  by  the
        evidence that  were  plainly  open  to  him.  The  grounds  seeking
        permission are no more than a dispute as to the weight placed  upon
        elements of the evidence, weight which the judge  was  entitled  to
        determine.

    13. There is no material error of law in the decision by the judge  and
        I do not set aside the decision.

         Conclusions:

         The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
        involve the making of an error on a point of law.

         I do not set aside the decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

[pic]
                                    Date 22nd May 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
