
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09847/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 January 2019                    |On 23 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                     SS
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                         Appellant
                                     and

                    SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                              Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Jegarajah of counsel, instructed by Greater
                    London Solicitors Limited
For the Respondents:   Mr. S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS







BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka and is a Tamil by origin.  She
    was born in Pupungunduthivu and later moved with her parents to  Jaffna
    and then to Kilonochi and  later  to  Vavuniya.  On  11  May  2001  the
    Appellant was sent to live in Chennai with her grandmother. Whilst  she
    was living there, her older sister was an active supporter of the  LTTE
    between 2004 and 2007 and she was subsequently granted  asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom. Another of the Appellant's maternal aunts was  also  an
    LTTE supporter.

2.   In 2007 she met and started a relationship with an Indian national  who
    is also a Muslim and they married in  secret  on  24  April  2009.  Her
    husband's family did not approve of his marriage and, when  they  found
    out about in in 2010, they would not let him live with  the  Appellant.
    However, the Appellant  obtained  a  place  at  the  London  School  of
    Business and Finance to study for an MBA in Project Management and  she
    entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  14  November  2011and  her   husband
    accompanied her as her dependent.

3.   The Appellant travelled to Sri Lanka on 25 January  2013  in  order  to
    visit her mother who had had a stroke. She was detained for about  four
    hours on her arrival at the airport and questioned  for  some  of  that
    time.

4.   Her uncle collected her from the airport and took her  to  register  in
    Omanthai, as she did not have a Sri Lankan identity card, and she  gave
    them her mother's address. On 28 January 2014, members of the  TID  and
    some police officers arrived and detained the Appellant. She  was  then
    taken on a journey of about seven or eight hours and placed in  a  cell
    with other people. Both police and army officers were present  at  this
    location. The next day she was stripped to see if she had any scars  on
    her body. She was then interrogated.  She  was  shown  photographs  and
    asked further questions about her life in the United  Kingdom  and  her
    family's involvement with the LTTE. In the evening of that day she  was
    beaten,  burnt  with  cigarettes  and  raped.  Two   days   later   she
    blindfolded, placed  in  a  vehicle,  driven  some  distance  and  then
    released into the care of her uncle who had after he had paid a bribe.

5.   She travelled back to the United Kingdom on 8 February 2013 via  Muscat
    and applied for asylum on 5 March 2013. Her application was refused  on
    19 June 2015. Her appeal  against  this  decision  most  recently  came
    before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Obhi  on  14  February  2018.  She
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal in a decision promulgated on  6  March
    2018.

6.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio refused her permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal on 8 August 2018 but Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  granted
    her permission to appeal on 15 November 2018.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

7.   Both counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    made oral submissions  and  I  have  taken  them  into  account  before
    reaching my decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

8.   Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb gave the Appellant permission to  appeal  on
    all four grounds of appeal.  The second ground  submitted  that  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Obhi had failed to take into account the fact  that
    the Appellant was a vulnerable witness by virtue of the fact  that  the
    expert psychiatric evidence and her NHS records confirmed that  she  is
    suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder

9.   The Joint Presidential Guidance Note  No.  2  of  2010  issued  by  the
    Presidents of the Upper and First-tier Tribunals of the Immigration and
    Asylum  Chamber,  entitled  Child,  vulnerable  adult   and   sensitive
    appellant guidance recommended that judges recognise that mental health
    problems,  social  or  learning  difficulties,  religious  beliefs  and
    practices, sexual orientation, ethnic social and  cultural  background,
    domestic  and  employment  circumstances  and  physical  disability  or
    impairment could all render an  appellant  vulnerable.  In  particular,
    paragraph 3 states that:

         "The consequences of such vulnerability  differ  according  to  the
         degree to which an individual is affected. It is a matter  for  you
         to determine the extent of an identified vulnerability, the  effect
         on the quality of the evidence and the weight to be placed on  such
         vulnerability in assessing the evidence  before  you,  taking  into
         account the evidence as a whole".

10.  In paragraph 15 of the Guidance it is also said that:

         "The decision should record whether the Tribunal has concluded  the
         appellant (or a witness) is a child, vulnerable or  sensitive,  the
         effect the Tribunal considered the identified vulnerability had  in
         assessing the evidence before it and thus whether the Tribunal  was
         satisfied whether the appellant had established his or her case  to
         the relevant standard of proof. In asylum appeals, weight should be
         given to objective indications of risk rather than necessarily to a
         state of mind"

11.  It is clear from her decision, that First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi  did
    not follow this guidance.   This is despite the views expressed by  the
    Court of Appeal in In AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123, where Sir  Ernest  Ryder,  Senior
    President, gave guidance on the general approach to be adopted  in  law
    and practice by the First-tier and Upper Tribunals to ensure that  fair
    determination  of  appeals  from  children,  young  people  and   other
    incapacitated  or  vulnerable  persons  whose  ability  to  effectively
    participate in proceedings may be limited.

12.  First-tier Tribunal Judge  Obhi  did  take  into  account  the  medical
    evidence provided by the Appellant but, when assessing the weight  that
    she could give to it, she concentrated on the fact that Dr. Halari  had
    not been  provided  with  the  Appellant's  NHS  medical  records.  The
    psychological report provided by Dr. Halari gave very full  details  of
    her qualifications and experience and no  point  was  taken  about  her
    expertise. In addition, at paragraph 202 of her report she  found  that
    the Appellant fulfilled the World Health Organisation criteria for Post-
    traumatic  Stress  Disorder  as  she  had  the  co-occurrence  of   the
    characteristic symptoms of avoidance, repeated reliving of  the  trauma
    in the form of flashbacks and  nightmares  and  symptoms  of  autonomic
    hyperarousal  as  well  as  auditory  and  visual  hallucinations.   In
    paragraph 103 she also explained that "the evidence for this is in  her
    account and the development of her  symptoms  following  the  traumatic
    events and the findings on psychological examination". Therefore, it is
    clear that she did not merely rely on the  narrative  provided  by  the
    Appellant herself.

13.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi accepted that the  Appellant  had  told
    her GP of the events she relied upon in March 2013 and that her GP  had
    diagnosed that she was suffering from PTSD. But in my view, she did not
    give sufficient weight to the fact that the Appellant continued to seek
    assistance from her GP. For example, on 4 September 2013 it  was  noted
    that she was also suffering from a depressive disorder and on 13  March
    2015 it was noted that she was suffering from suicidal  thoughts.  Then
    on 1 April 2015 it was noted that she had attempted to  cut  her  wrist
    and take an overdose in the past. None  of  this  conflicted  with  the
    opinion reached by Dr. Halari. This lessened the importance that  could
    be given  to  the  fact  that  she  had  not  been  provided  with  the
    Appellant's NHS medical notes.

14.  It was also not strictly accurate  to  find  that  the  Appellant  "was
    twice referred for psychological  counselling  and  on  both  occasions
    failed to take it up". The  entry  in  her  NHS  Medical  Notes  for  4
    September 2013 states that she had had two counselling sessions and was
    then discharged. But it also states that she was  still  depressed  and
    had started  to  self-harm.  It  is  also  clear  that  she  was  being
    prescribed with Setraline,  an  anti-depressant,  and  the  dosage  was
    increased on 1 April 2013. In  addition,  the  letter  from  the  Luton
    Wellbeing Service, dated 12 January 2016, explained that  she  had  not
    continued her CBT sessions due to her fear of reliving her  trauma  and
    that she had been recommended for EMDR therapy.

15.  In addition, I have noted that, as  submitted  in  ground  one  of  the
    grounds of appeal, the factors which First-tier Judge Obhi referred  to
    were not raised in the Refusal letter, contained in submissions made by
    the Home Office Presenting Officer or raised  in  cross-examination  or
    any questions asked by First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi.  Therefore,  the
    Appellant was not offered  a  proper  opportunity  to  respond  to  the
    Judge's concerns before she reached her decision.

16.  In relation to ground  three  of  the  grounds  of  appeal,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Obhi also failed to make any  findings  in  relation  to
    aspects of the Appellant's case which were central to whether she has a
    well-founded fear of persecution in Sri Lanka.  She did not address the
    possible consequences of the fact that the Respondent had accepted that
    the Appellant's older sister had been active  with  the  LTTE  and  was
    entitled to refugee status.  Neither  did  she  make  any  findings  in
    relation to this sister's oral evidence at the  hearing  in  which  she
    confirmed that she had been told that the Appellant had  been  detained
    and tortured in Sri Lanka. In addition, she did not take  into  account
    the fact that Dr. Arnold had found that the two of the scars  on  which
    the Appellant relied were typical of cigarette burns. It was  also  the
    case that he did discuss the causation of each of the scars on the body
    map, explain that  she  did  not  attribute  any  other  scars  to  her
    experience of torture and that he also discounted  the  possibility  of
    any scars being self-inflicted.

17.  In paragraphs 40 and 41 of  her  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Obhi doubted whether the Appellant had returned to Sri Lanka  to  visit
    her mother who was ill. When considering  whether  she  had  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Obhi failed to take into account  the  letter  from  Dr.
    Vaasuthevaa, dated 21 January 2013, which confirmed that her mother had
    been ill as claimed.  Neither did  she  take  into  account  the  email
    written by the Appellant to her college on 22 January  2013  explaining
    that she needed an extension of time to complete her course work as she
    had to visit her mother in  Sri  Lanka.  This  evidence  pre-dated  the
    Appellant's visit to Sri Lanka.

18.  The evidence from the Gowri Clinic also supported her account of  being
    sexually assaulted; albeit that it was not conclusive.

19.  In relation to ground four and the weight that should have  been  given
    to the findings in GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka
    CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  It is clear from this  case,  that  it  is
    more likely that, where a person is not on  a  watch  list  but  is  of
    interest to the authorities, they will be detained  after  and  not  on
    arrival. The account given by the Appellant is  consistent  with  this.
    She had to register her address and was detained from that address.  It
    was the Appellant's account that the authorities' suspicion arose  from
    the fact that she had previously left Sri Lanka to live in India during
    the period of the civil war and the  fact  that  her  sister  had  been
    active in the LTTE. Neither  of  these  facts  was  challenged  by  the
    Respondent.

20.  In addition, in paragraph 39 of her decision First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Obhi did not take into account the manner in which many people had been
    able to evade the attention of the Sri Lankan authorities when  leaving
    the country.

21.  As a consequence, there were  errors  of  law  in  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Obhi's decision, which undermined her overall decision.

Decision
(1)  The appeal is allowed.
(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi is set aside.
(3)  The appeal is remitted to be heard de novo  by  a  salaried  first-tier
    judge at Taylor House and, in any event, the appeal should not  be  re-
    listed before First-tier Tribunal Judges Adio, Broe, Grant, Grubb, Obhi
    or Parkes.


Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 11 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


