
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09465/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons                   |
|On 18 May 2016                         |On 29 July 2016                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    Mr ah
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E King, Counsel, instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Afghanistan,  date  of  birth  [  ]  1994,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 29 October  2014,  to
    refuse to vary leave to enter or remain and to make removal  directions
    under Section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum and Nationality Act  2006.
    The appeal against the decision came before First-tier Tribunal Judge A
    M S Green whose decision [D], on 30 March 2016, dismissed those appeals
    with reference to both refugee and protection claims as well as Article
    8 ECHR.

2.   Permission was given by FtT Judge  Pullig,  on  22  April  2016.  There
    really was no argument that the Appellant ever met the requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended.  The  only
    issue related to whether or not a claim fell  to  be  considered  under
    Article 8 ECHR outside of the Rules on the basis that the  Respondent's
    decision was not compliant with those requirements.

3.   The judge in looking at  the  matter,  [D  38]  found  that  there  was
    nothing exceptional about the case to warrant  looking  at  the  matter
    outside of the Immigration Rules.

4.   It is clear that the judge did have regard to  the  family  life  claim
    and there was no challenge to his conclusion that family life rights or
    that part of private and family life rights was not  engaged.   Rather,
    the complaint  was  that  the  judge  did  not  carry  out  a  detailed
    examination of all the evidence, including matters not actually adduced
    before him, to satisfy himself that the Respondent's case was made out.
     Thus it was said the judge failed to make enquiries into the extent to
    which, although he did not know of it, the Appellant might have been in
    work and earning.  It was said that the Appellant came to  the  hearing
    before the judge with payslips but it is common ground that  they  were
    not produced to the judge, nor was Miss Manning, who appeared  for  the
    Appellant, informed of the matter and nor  did  she  put  the  earnings
    issue before the judge.

5.   I find the "omission" by the judge simply does not disclose  any  error
    of law by the Original Tribunal in failing to address  a  matter  which
    had not been raised for consideration.  Nor was the issue of employment
    a Robinson obvious point, R v SSHD ex parte Robinson [1997] 3 WLR 1162,
    not least in the context  that the parties would have been  aware  with
    reference to Section 117A-C of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 to such matters.

6.   It appears that also the Appellant did not call any live  witnesses  to
    speak to his activities in the UK, the significance of his private life
    in the UK whether to himself or to others, or the part he played in the
    community other than some correspondence which, it is accepted by  Miss
    King, the judge made reference to.

7.   It was said by Miss King that the judge also failed to investigate  the
    extent to which there had been past fallings to trace  the  Appellant's
    family circumstances in Afghanistan.   The fact of the matter was  that
    those were not issues that were raised, unsurprisingly given  that  the
    Appellant had already had an asylum claim determined in  2010  and  the
    Appellant was appeals rights exhausted in December 2010.

8.   Whilst I have sympathy for the  position that Miss King is in,  in  the
    light of the facts, she did not have conduct of the matter  below,  did
    not settle the grounds of appeal, did not seek to amend the grounds  of
    appeal and she was left seeking to make a case without any  substantial
    material to work with.  Having considered her arguments it seemed to me
    that the length of time the Appellant had been in the  United  Kingdom,
    his status whilst he was here and the circumstances in which he came to
    be here must have been considered on a fair reading of the decision  as
    a whole.  It did not seem to me there was any evidence, had  the  judge
    been specifically pointed to, that any different  decision  would  have
    been arrived at.

9.   In the circumstances I find that even if this matter  was  to  go  back
    for a further consideration, assuming there  was  any  material  error,
    there is nothing to indicate any other  Tribunal  properly  considering
    the same evidence would have come to any different decision.


Notice of Decision

10.  The Original Tribunal's decision does not disclose any  error  of  law.
    The Original Tribunal decision stands.

11.  The appeal is dismissed

12.   The  anonymity  direction  that  was  made  was  not  the  subject  of
    representations but I am satisfied  it  should  be  continued  for  the
    purposes of this appeal.

ANONYNMITY
No anonymity order was sought.


Signed                                  Date 27 July 2916


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
P.S. I regret the delay in promulgation which is due to the file being  mis-
    located








