

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09450/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |         Decision and Reasons       |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 14 October 2015                     |         On 14 October 2015         |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between


                                     M A
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                               CASE MANAGEMENT

                            ORDER AND DIRECTIONS

    1. This appeal  concerns  the  risk  on  return  to  Pakistan  for  the
       appellant. On 14 September 2011, First-tier Tribunal Judge Wellesley-
       Cole accepted his account that he was an  Ahmadi  but  rejected  the
       rest of his core account of his treatment in Pakistan before he left
       the country in 1989.  Permission to appeal was granted by the  Upper
       Tribunal, not in relation to the negative credibility  finding,  but
       limited to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's failure to  consider  the
       Upper Tribunal's  earlier  decision  in  MT  (Ahmadi  -  HJ  (Iran))
       Pakistan [2011] UKUT 277 (IAC) which was reported,  not  as  country
       guidance, but for the proposition that;

           "Where it is found that an Ahmadi will be "discreet"  on  return
           the reasons for such discretion will need to  be  considered  in
           the light of HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31."

    2. The attention of the  parties  is  drawn  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's
       subsequent country guidance decision in MN  and  others  (Ahmadis  -
       country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC) which
       considered more fully the post-HJ position for Ahmadis in  Pakistan.



    3. At a hearing on 14 March 2012 before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Holmes, the respondent conceded that the credibility findings by the
       First-tier Tribunal were inadequately reasoned and unsafe, and  that
       no findings of fact should be preserved.

    4. The hearing of the appeal  was  then  adjourned  to  be  listed  for
       mention before me on the first available date after 1  August  2012.
       Unfortunately, no such hearing took place because the decision in MN
       and others was not promulgated until November 2012.   The  appellant
       had filed further evidence and wished to give oral evidence  at  the
       resumed hearing.  The parties were given liberty to  apply  to  vary
       the directions, but no such application has been made.

    5. The appellant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  11
       September 2013 and were told that the appeal was awaiting listing in
       the Upper Tribunal.  By an administrative error, it was not  listed.
       On 17 July 2015, the appellant's solicitors wrote  again  seeking  a
       hearing.  They stated that:

           "The applicant has to put his life on hold, he is now married in
           the United Kingdom and is expecting his first child next  month.
           He is unable to take any  employment  due  to  the  restrictions
           imposed upon him by the Home Office and is therefore  unable  to
           support his family."

    6. That letter has been brought  to  my  attention  today  and  I  have
       considered how best to proceed  to  resolve  this  long  outstanding
       appeal.  It seems that the appellant's factual position has  changed
       significantly, and I note that no findings of  fact  or  credibility
       have been preserved.  It is open to the appellant  to  make  further
       submissions  to  the  respondent  in   relation   to   his   changed
       circumstances, if he has not already done so, or for the  respondent
       to reconsider this appeal of her own motion, given the change in the
       country guidance and the length of time which has elapsed.  That  is
       a matter for the parties.

    7. Fresh findings of fact and credibility will need to be made in  this
       appeal and then considered in the light of the country  guidance  in
       MN and others. The appellant may wish to give further oral evidence,
       in which case he will need to bring  his  witness  statement  up  to
       date.  I note that he had an interpreter originally but  given  that
       he has not lived  in  Pakistan  since  1989,  it  may  be  that  the
       appellant is able to give his evidence in English.  That will  be  a
       matter for him to consider with his representatives.

    8. I consider that the appropriate course is to remit  this  appeal  to
       the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing and for the decision to
       be remade afresh.

       DIRECTIONS

       1) This appeal shall be listed before the First-tier Tribunal on the
          first available date with a time estimate of 2 hours.  If  either
          party considers such time estimate to be insufficient,  they  may
          apply to the First-tier Tribunal for a longer time on receipt  of
          the hearing notice, giving reasons.

       2) No interpreter will be booked for such hearing unless  within  14
          days of the  sending  to  him  of  the  notice  of  hearing,  the
          appellant applies for an interpreter, giving reasons.

       3) All other directions in relation to the resumed hearing shall  be
          made by the First-tier Tribunal.
|                                      |[pic]                                |
|Date:  28 April 2016                  |Signed:                              |
|                                      |Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson         |




