
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09495/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 27 May 2016                       |On 7 June 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     RP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nathan, counsel instructed by Birnberg Peirce &
Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe,
    promulgated on 19 January 2016.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 5 April 2016.

    Background


 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom  during  September  2009  with
    leave to enter as a Tier 4 migrant, valid until 28  February  2011.  He
    was granted further leave to remain  in  the  same  capacity  until  26
    August 2011 and as a Tier 1 (Highly Skilled Migrant) until 28 September
    2013. The appellant travelled  to  Sri  Lanka  on  23  April  2013  and
    returned to the United Kingdom on 5 May 2013. He applied for asylum  on
    3 July 2013. In essence, his claim is that he is of Tamil ethnicity and
    lived in India from 1990 until 2005. Shortly after returning  to  India
    in 2005, the appellant was arrested during a  round-up  of  youths,  on
    suspicion of being responsible for a  bomb  blast  which  had  recently
    taken place. He was subjected to torture and was released on payment of
    a bribe, following which the  appellant  returned  to  India  where  he
    remained until travelling to the United Kingdom in 2009.

 3. The appellant attended demonstrations in the United Kingdom in 2011 and
    2013. He travelled to Sri Lanka in 2013 in relation  to  his  plans  to
    marry. While there, a mobile telephone which the appellant  gave  to  a
    relative came into the possession of the Sri Lankan  authorities.  That
    telephone was said to contain photographs of  the  appellant  attending
    demonstrations in the United Kingdom. The  appellant  was  abducted  by
    armed men in a van, ill-treated and forced to sign  a  blank  piece  of
    paper and a document written in Sinhalese. He  was  released  after  an
    uncle intervened and returned to the United Kingdom using his passport.



 4. The Secretary of State refused the application for  asylum  on  5  June
    2015.  Essentially,  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  claim  was
    comprehensively rejected owing to what were said  to  be  internal  and
    external inconsistencies as well as the appellant's delay  in  applying
    for asylum.

 5. During the course of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    judge heard evidence from  the  appellant  alone.  The  appellant  also
    relied on a report from Dr Callaway, described  as  a  "lead  GP."  The
    judge dismissed the appeal on credibility grounds; concluding that  the
    medical evidence provided very little support for the appellant's claim
    to have been detained in 2013.

    Error of law


 6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on the basis that
    it was arguable that the judge failed to properly take account  of  the
    medical report and the appellant's mental health; that the  judge  made
    an error of fact in relation to the date of the scars by burning;  that
    he failed to properly consider  the  appellant's  diaspora  activities;
    failed to make a finding regarding  ongoing  adverse  interest  in  the
    appellant's family and that he failed to properly consider  the  appeal
    under Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.

 7. The Upper Tribunal Judge granting permission did so on all grounds.

 8. The Secretary of State's response of 29 April 2016 indicated  that  the
    respondent opposed the appellant's application for permission to appeal
    with the caveat that the response had been drafted without recourse  to
    the Home Office file.




The hearing


 9. Mr Nathan argued that the grounds could be divided into  those  dealing
    with credibility (grounds 1, 2 and 4) and the remainder which concerned
    a lack of reasoning.

10. Ground 2 was considered to be the strongest ground. This concerned  the
    judge's understanding that the  scars  to  the  appellant's  back  were
    caused by burning were caused in  2005  rather  than  2013.  Mr  Nathan
    argued that the judge had looked at the  doctor's  conclusions  in  the
    medical report, rather than reading the document as a whole. A  reading
    of the entire report showed that  the  appellant  attributed  the  burn
    scars to his ill-treatment in 2013. While it had  been  argued  in  the
    grounds that the doctor made a typographical error in  the  conclusions
    to her report, the matter had been put beyond doubt in  a  letter  from
    the doctor concerned which had been written for these  proceedings.  Mr
    Nathan argued that the error was  material,  in  view  of  the  judge's
    acceptance of the medical evidence in relation to the  2005  detention.
    He submitted that had the judge not been mistaken as to when the  burns
    had been caused, it was likely that he would have accepted the evidence
    for the 2013 incident.

11. Mr Nathan submitted that the decision ought to  be  set  aside  on  the
    basis of ground 2 alone, however if I was not with him he  also  sought
    to rely upon grounds 3 and 5. With regard to ground 3,  the  judge  had
    made comments at [45] but no clear findings on the appellant's diaspora
    activities. In relation to ground 5, the judge had  failed  to  address
    the relevant case law.

12. In reply,  Mr  Walker  concurred  that  the  judge's  reliance  on  the
    typographical error made in the medical report coloured the rest of his
    findings regarding the 2013 detention.

Decision on Error of Law

13. The judge accepted, at [41], that the appellant had been  detained  and
    ill-treated in 2005 and took into consideration the medical evidence in
    doing so. Owing to his understanding that the burns were  inflicted  on
    the appellant in 2005 as opposed to 2013, the judge concluded that  the
    medical evidence provided "very  little  support"  to  the  appellant's
    claim to  have  been  detained  in  2013.  Unfortunately,  the  judge's
    understanding was mistaken and the  report  provided  support  for  the
    appellant's account of being of recent  adverse  interest  to  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities. In view of the judge's apparent acceptance  of  the
    medical evidence before him, it could not be  said  that  his  decision
    would have been the same, had he not been mistaken as to  the  doctor's
    evidence.

14. The judge also erred in failing to assess the  appellant's  account  of
    diaspora  activities.  His  comments  at  [45]  of  the  decision   are
    inadequate and do not engage with the appellant's evidence.

15. Finally, the judge did not consider the risk of suicide  identified  in
    the medical report, which was described as "significant in the event of
    removal." Nor is there any reference in the decision  to  the  relevant
    findings in GJ regarding the claimant MP, or the  cases  of  J  v  SSHD
    [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and Y and Anor v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362 in  terms
    of assessing whether there would be a breach of the appellant's Article
    3 or 8 rights.

16. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there are errors of law such
    that the decision be set aside to be remade. None of  the  findings  of
    the judge are to stand.

17. I considered listing this matter to be heard in the Upper Tribunal,  in
    view of  practice  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010 (as amended), however the appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of his asylum appeal at the First-
    tier  Tribunal  and  it  would  be  unfair  to  deprive  him  of   such
    consideration.

18. Further directions are set out below.

19. An anonymity direction was made by the judge. I consider it appropriate
    for  anonymity  to  be  continued  and  therefore  make  the  following
    anonymity direction:

    "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. "

Conclusions


     The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
     making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision to be re-made.

    Directions


       . This appeal is remitted to be  heard  de  novo  by  any  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge except Judge Broe.

       . The appeal should be listed for a hearing at Taylor House.

       . An interpreter in the Tamil language is required.

       . Time estimate is half a day.


Signed      Date: 5 June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
