
[pic]
IAC-TH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09267/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24th March 2014                              |15th April 2014            |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                Bilal Rahimi
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Khan of Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Shimmin
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 22nd November 2013.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on  15th  October  1990.
    He arrived in the UK on 29th January 2007, was detained  and  taken  to
    Coventry police  station.  He  was  sent  to  a  hotel  from  which  he
    absconded.

 3. On 20th June 2011 he made an appointment with the asylum  seekers  unit
    but failed to attend the interview as arranged.

 4. He subsequently made a series of applications for an EEA residence card
    on the basis of his relationship with his  partner  Ausra  Blazgyte,  a
    citizen of Lithuania and finally claimed asylum on 14th February  2013.
    He was refused on 20th September 2013.

 5. The Appellant claimed that his older brother  used  to  work  with  the
    Taliban and disappeared in 2003.  Three  Taliban  members  visited  his
    home and asked the Appellant to join them.  In 2004 he started to train
    with them, under duress.  He was taken to a training camp two or  three
    times a week for about six months.  In November 2005, when  his  father
    found out that he had joined the Taliban, he tried to stop  him  going.
    He locked the Appellant in his room, and when the Taliban came  looking
    for him and his father refused to hand him over, they killed him.

 6. In 2006 the Taliban put a suicide bomber jacket on the  Appellant.   He
    was driven on a motorcycle by a man named Habib but jumped  off,  threw
    the jacket away and escaped without returning home.  It  took  him  two
    weeks to get to Iran but he was then detained by  the  authorities  and
    returned to Afghanistan.  He made  it  back  to  Iran  on  two  further
    occasions before managing to pay an agent to bring him to the UK.

 7. The Immigration Judge said that although the Appellant was only just 17
    when he arrived in the UK, he must  have  been  mature  for  his  years
    having been trained by and fought for the Taliban.   He  was  obviously
    astute and resourceful.  He held it against him that he  did  not  take
    the opportunity to explain his situation to  the  authorities  when  he
    first arrived.  He observed that the Appellant was treated humanely  in
    the UK and provided with  a  hotel  which  should  have  compared  very
    favourably in his mind with the peremptory returns  to  Afghanistan  by
    the Iranian authorities.

 8. The judge did not accept the Appellant's explanation for his failure to
    attend the screening interview, which was because his partner was  ill.
    He had several friends who had written in support of  his  appeal,  who
    had known him since 2007  and  2008.   They  had  successfully  claimed
    asylum and one is now a British citizen.   The  judge  concluded  that,
    from as early as 2007, the Appellant would have  been  able  to  source
    reliable information as to the  immigration  process.   The  inordinate
    delay in making the claim seriously damaged his credibility.

 9. The  judge  considered  the  Appellant's  evidence  about  the  Taliban
    training camp.  He noted that at interview he was unable  to  give  any
    details at all about being able to  clean  and  reload  a  Kalashnikov,
    knowledge which he would have expected him to have had his  story  been
    true.

10. The judge  noted  that  the  Appellant's  account  of  his  escape  was
    discrepant.  In his asylum interview he said that Habib ran behind  him
    but he managed to escape and in oral evidence he said  that  Habib  was
    lying on the ground.

11. The judge considered  the  expert  report  from  Tim  Foxley  MBE.   He
    concluded that even if he was wrong  as  to  the  truthfulness  of  the
    account the Appellant had an internal relocation alternative in  Kabul.
    Mr Foxley did not reach any firm conclusion as to the reasonableness of
    relocation but said that as the Appellant is a fit  young  man  with  a
    good command of the English language it would not  be  unreasonable  to
    expect him to live there.  Given the  passage  of  time,  even  if  the
    Appellant's account was correct, he would not be at  real  risk  either
    from the Taliban or from the authorities.  According to  the  objective
    evidence thousands of former Taliban fighters have agreed  peace  deals
    with the authorities in recent years.

12. The judge considered the evidence in relation to the Appellant and  his
    EEA partner and concluded that he was in a  durable  relationship  with
    her.  He also accepted that she  was  a  qualifying  person  exercising
    treaty rights in the UK.  He therefore allowed the appeal to the extent
    that the Secretary of State consider the Appellant's application for  a
    residence card in the light of his findings.

13. Finally he considered whether there would be a breach of Article  8  by
    his removal.  He found that the couple could continue  family  life  in
    Lithuania or the Appellant could return and apply for  entry  clearance
    under the Immigration Rules.

The Grounds of Application

14. The Grounds of Appeal argue at some length that the judge erred in  his
    assessment of credibility, in particular that the  Tribunal  had  given
    inadequate and irrational reasons for concluding that the Appellant had
    been mature for his years.  There was a factual  mistake  in  that  the
    Appellant had only just turned 16 on arrival and  not  17.   Miss  Khan
    said that the findings of the judge  were  internally  inconsistent  in
    that he had rejected the Appellant's claim to have been trained by  the
    Taliban and yet cited this as a reason for the Appellant's maturity.

15. She submitted  that  the  Appellant  had  produced  a  huge  amount  of
    evidence, including a sixteen page statement  which  had  not  properly
    been considered by the judge.

16. Miss Khan also argued, in reliance on the grounds, that the  judge  had
    not engaged with the Appellant's argument that he feared  a  return  to
    Afghanistan, which is why he did not bring himself to the attention  of
    the authorities at an  earlier  date.   Neither  did  he  consider  the
    evidence that it would be a more certain route  for  the  Appellant  to
    apply to stay as the partner of an EEA national  rather  than  claiming
    asylum.  There were specific reasons for the delay which the judge  had
    not taken into account.

17. The grounds also argue that the judge erred in  his  interpretation  of
    the evidence in relation to the Kalashnikov.  It was not his case  that
    he trained solely  in  the  use  of  Kalashnikovs  and  the  judge  had
    speculated in relation to what knowledge the Appellant  was  likely  to
    have had.

18. Finally, the judge had  misinterpreted  the  expert  evidence  and  had
    failed to address the detailed submissions  as  to  why  the  Appellant
    could not reasonably relocate in Kabul or why his knowledge of  English
    would mitigate against the unreasonableness of detention.  He  had  not
    properly engaged with the argument that the Appellant would be at  risk
    in Kabul.

19. The grounds also argue that the judge had erred in  his  assessment  of
    Article 8.  Miss Khan submitted that, given that the judge had found in
    the Appellant's favour so far as his relationship with his partner  was
    concerned, it was not possible to make a decision on Article 8 at  this
    stage, since if he was entitled to a residence card his  removal  would
    clearly not be lawful.  She suggested, and this was not resisted by  Mr
    Dinowycz, that the correct course would  be  to  allow  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds to the limited extent that Article 8 would need to be
    reassessed when the decision on the residence card was made.

Findings and Conclusions

20. So far as the asylum claim  is  concerned,  the  grounds  amount  to  a
    lengthy and discursive disagreement with the decision.  This is a  very
    thorough and well-reasoned determination. It was open to the  judge  to
    reach the conclusions which he did for the reasons which he gave.

21. There was an inordinate delay in the claim for  asylum  in  this  case.
    The Appellant came to the UK in 2007 and did not claim  for  a  further
    six years.  During that period he had two instances of contact with the
    authorities - on the first occasion he  absconded  and  on  the  second
    failed to attend an interview.  The judge was  entitled  to  note  that
    during this period the Appellant had two close Afghan friends who  were
    supporting him in his appeal and who had successfully  claimed  asylum.
    The conclusion  that  the  Appellant  would  have  been  aware  of  the
    immigration process is unassailable.  The fact that four years after he
    arrived, it was possible for him to seek to remain  in  the  UK  on  an
    alternative basis, is not an adequate explanation for the delay.

22. So far as the contradictions in the evidence are concerned, it was  the
    Appellant's own case that he was trained  to  use  a  Kalashnikov.  The
    judge was entitled to take his case at face value and to decide that it
    was internally inconsistent.  Moreover the grounds fail to mention  the
    significant inconsistency in  the  evidence  of  the  escape  from  the
    Taliban which, as the judge said,  should  have  been  a  dramatic  and
    memorable event for the Appellant.

23. There is no misinterpretation  of  the  expert  report.   The  relevant
    paragraph reads as follows:-

         "It is hard to say with certainty.  I would see this as a low  risk
         but much would depend on what he was doing in the city.   There  is
         too little detail provided in your client's statement regarding his
         activities.  If he was regularly  entering  Kabul  using  the  same
         routes and patterns of behaviour and movement he might well  return
         to the attention of Taliban groups; if he were  to  return  to  the
         same parts of the city - perhaps frequenting the houses and  hotels
         in which he used to stay and meeting friends from that time  -  the
         risk of coming into contact adversely with  Taliban  would  perhaps
         move from low risk to medium."

24. The Appellant said that he went to Kabul ten  to  fifteen  times  eight
    years ago.  This is a large city of over 8,000,000 people.   The  Judge
    was plainly entitled to find that he would not be at risk on return and
    that it would not be unduly harsh to expect him to locate there.

25. The grounds do not establish any error of law so  far  as  the  judge's
    consideration of risk on return.  However, by  consent  it  was  agreed
    that his conclusions on Article 8 should not stand.

Decision.

The judge did not err in law in respect of his  conclusions  on  the  asylum
claim nor the Qualification Directive nor in respect of his  conclusions  on
the residence card.  Those decisions stand. So far as his dismissal  of  the
Article 8 claim is concerned  the  decision  is  set  aside  and  remade  as
follows.  The appeal is allowed to the limited extent that the Secretary  of
State should reassess the claim when a decision is made on whether to  issue
the Appellant with a residence card.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor                      2nd April 2014


