

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09935/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport      |               Decision    |
|                                       |promulgated                |
|On: 20 April 2015                      |               On 7 May    |
|                                       |2015                       |
|                                       |                           |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                 KEN KAH LOW
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:         Mr G Hodgetts, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:        Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Buckwell in which he dismissed the appeal  of  the  Appellant,  a
    citizen of Malaysia, against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    refuse leave to remain.

 2. The application under appeal was  made  on  15  October  2013  and  was
    refused on 30 October 2013 on asylum grounds by reference to  paragraph
    336 of the Immigration Rules (HC395) and removal directions were given.
     The  Appellant  exercised  her  right  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appeal came before Judge Brennells on 31 March 2014  and
    was dismissed. The Appellant's application for permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 6  June
    2014. At a hearing before the Upper Tribunal  on  29  October  2014  Mr
    Justice Davis and Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun  upheld  the  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds  but  found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in its application of paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules and set aside the decision in this  respect
    to be reheard by the First-tier Tribunal. This is the appeal which came
    before Judge Buckwell on 4 December 2014 and  was  dismissed  on  human
    rights grounds and by virtue of the Immigration  Rules.  The  Appellant
    applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper   Tribunal.    The
    application was granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge  French
    on 27 January 2015 in the following terms

       The grounds are lengthy and detailed. It  is  first  said  that  the
       judge misdirected himself in treating the appeal as  based  only  on
       Article 8 ECHR grounds when the terms of remittal made it clear that
       the issue was whether the appellant succeeded under Appendix FM EX1.
       It is also said (ground 5) that the judge did not address the  issue
       raised in the decision on remittal as to where the burden  of  proof
       lay in considering the existence of  'insurmountable  obstacles'  to
       the appellant  continuing  her  family  life  with  her  partner  in
       Malaysia. Both points have arguable substance.


       It is argued that the judge when considering  Article  8  failed  to
       apply the 'Two stage approach' of first considering the rules, which
       would have led him first to EX.1. This may  be  an  ancillary  point
       entwined  with  the  other  issues  but  it  is  arguable   in   the
       circumstances.


       It is further contended that  to  the  extent  that  the  judge  did
       consider EX.1, he failed to take account or give weight to  relevant
       factors  including  the  inability  of  the  partner  to  meet   the
       requirements for permanent settlement and he erred by giving  weight
       to the appellant's unlawful presence in the UK and finding  that  it
       would be reasonable to expect the couple to behave in their personal
       lives in such a way that they would not come to the attention of the
       authorities. The latter point is also taken up at ground 4, which is
       a criticism of the proportionality assessment under Article 8. These
       grounds also are arguable.

 3. At the hearing  before  me  Mr  Hodgetts  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant and Mr  Richards  represented  the  Respondent.  Mr  Richards
    revealed that in a Rule 24 response dated 12 February 2015,  which  had
    not come to the attention of either the Appellant's  representative  or
    the Tribunal, the Respondent had conceded  that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law.



Background

 4.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Appellant came to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor on 21 October 2008 and when her  leave  to  remain  expired  in
    April 2009 she stayed in the United Kingdom without leave and  did  not
    come to attention until her detention on 10 October 2013.  Having  been
    detained the Appellant claimed asylum. The  basis  of  the  Appellant's
    claim for asylum was her homosexuality and the Appellant  also  claimed
    that her removal would be in breach of the Immigration  Rules  and  her
    protected right to a family and private life under Article 8 ECHR.

 5. The basis of the Appellant's claim to a protected  family  and  private
    life is her relationship with her partner. In 2009 the Appellant met  a
    British citizen, Sarah Morgan. They commenced a  relationship  in  2011
    and  began  living  together.  This  relationship  is  continuing.  The
    Appellant's asylum claim having been dismissed it is this  relationship
    that remains the only basis of  her  claim  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The Respondent accepts that this  is  subsisting  relationship
    that has endured for more than five years.


Submissions

 6. For the Appellant Mr  Hodgetts  referred  to  the  written  submissions
    prepared for the hearing before the  First-tier  tribunal  in  December
    2014. He also referred to the Angloinfo document giving details for the
    acquisition of permanent residency in Malaysia  (a  document  that  was
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal),  the  latest  Home  Office  Guidance
    relating to paragraph  EX.1.,  the  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  YM
    (Uganda) [2014] EWCA Civ 1292, the  Supreme  Court  decision  in  Quila
    [2011] UKSC 45 and the ECHR decision in Boultif  v  Switzerland  [2001]
    ECHR  497.  Mr  Hodgetts  submitted   that   the   Angloinfo   document
    demonstrates  that  the  Appellant's  partner  would  not  qualify  for
    admission to Malaysia to work under their points based system. She  has
    insufficient skills or qualifications. Clearly, he said, she would  not
    qualify for admission as a  partner  as  homosexuality  is  illegal  in
    Malaysia. There are therefore insurmountable obstacles in  the  way  of
    her admission to that country. The  Respondent's  guidance  as  to  the
    definition of 'insurmountable obstacles' shows that  this  means  'very
    significant difficulties ... which  could  not  be  overcome  or  would
    entail very serious hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their  partner'.
    Assessment of these obstacles includes taking account of the ability to
    enter and stay  in  another  country  and  cultural  barriers.  Boultif
    considers the practical possibility of living elsewhere.


 7. Mr Hodgetts summarised. The Appellant's partner cannot be  admitted  to
    Malaysia as a spouse. She has no other basis for  admission.  Were  she
    nevertheless to find some way to be  admitted  she  and  the  Appellant
    would face societal discrimination and in this respect Judge  Brennells
    had found that there had been threats from family members. There is the
    ongoing threat of criminalisation. In any event the Appellant's partner
    is British and she has never been to Malaysia.

 8. For the Respondent Mr Richards said there seemed little reason to delve
    into the issue of burden of proof. This appeal is being dealt  with  on
    the basis that the First-tier Tribunal dealt with Article 8 when it was
    primarily an Immigration Rules matter. It is for the Appellant to  show
    that she meets the  requirements  of  the  rules  and  that  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to her family life with her partner continuing
    in Malaysia. The rules cannot be interpreted as shifting the burden  of
    proof to the Secretary of State.

 9. In respect of 'insurmountable obstacles'  Mr  Hodgetts  has  taken  the
    Tribunal through the most  relevant  parts  of  the  evidence  and  the
    authorities including the Secretary of State's guidance. Clearly it was
    wrong of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to expect the Appellant and  her
    partner to disguise their  sexuality  or  tone  down  their  behaviour.
    Clearly there would be difficulties in Malaysia  both  in  relation  to
    meeting the requirements of the Immigration Rules for admission to that
    country and in facing societal attitudes to same sex relationships. The
    Tribunal needs to ask  itself  whether  cumulatively  the  difficulties
    amount to  insurmountable  obstacles  and  if  the  answer  is  in  the
    affirmative the appeal must succeed.

10. I reserved my decision.


Error of law

11. The Appellant asserts that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  in  law
    by approaching the appeal on the basis that it was an appeal on Article
    8 ECHR grounds and that having done so he failed to apply the necessary
    two stage approach dealing firstly  with  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    Respondent concedes that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  in  this
    respect.

12. It is a  concession  that  is,  in  my  judgement,  properly  made.  In
    remitting the matter to the First-tier Tribunal the Upper Tribunal made
    it clear (paragraph 5) that that the First-tier Tribunal should first

        "determine whether the appellant does indeed on the  facts  of  the
        case satisfy Appendix FM".

    In his decision Judge Buckwell dealt with Article 8 ECHR (paragraphs 26
    - 33) before adding towards the end of paragraph 33


        "Equally in consideration of the exception  EX.1  with  respect  to
        paragraph E-LTRP.2.2 of  Appendix  FM,  I  do  not  find  that  any
        potential inability of Ms Morgan to satisfy the  Immigration  Rules
        in Malaysia, for long term or permanent residence,  can  constitute
        insurmountable obstacles."


    There was both a failure to  follow  the  two  stage  approach  dealing
    firstly with the Immigration Rules and a failure to  properly  consider
    the application of the Immigration Rules with particular  reference  to
    EX.1 and indeed the purported consideration of EX.1 was informed by the
    findings already made in respect of Article 8. This is an error of  law
    that was material to the decision to dismiss  the  appeal.  I  set  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside.



Remaking the decision

13. In remaking the decision there is but a single matter to  consider  and
    that it whether the Appellant meets the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules and in particular paragraph EX.1. Paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix  FM
    states the following

        "This paragraph applies if ... the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and
        subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a
        British Citizen, settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee  leave
        or humanitarian protection, and there are insurmountable  obstacles
        to family life with that partner continuing outside the UK"

14. The facts are not in dispute. The Appellant and Ms  Morgan,  who  is  a
    British Citizen, are in a continuing same  sex  relationship  that  has
    subsisted for more than 5 years. The Appellant is in the United Kingdom
    in breach of the immigration laws  and  therefore  can  only  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, by virtue of paragraph  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM, if there are insurmountable obstacles to family life  with
    her partner continuing outside the UK.

15. The evidence put forward on behalf of the Appellant was not  challenged
    by the Respondent  before  me.  Firstly  homosexuality  is  illegal  in
    Malaysia. This not only precludes any  admission  to  Malaysia  on  the
    basis of a same sex relationship but also means that if  admission  was
    gained by other means the continuation of the relationship in  an  open
    fashion would result in  societal  discrimination  and  potentially  in
    prosecution. Secondly Ms Morgan is a person  of  little  net  financial
    worth and with no qualifications whose employment  experience  consists
    of working in a fast food takeaway. As such  there  is  no  basis  upon
    which she would meet the requirements for admission to  Malaysia  other
    than as a short term tourist.

16. The decisions made by both  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brennells  and
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell accepted that the Appellant  and  Ms
    Morgan were in a genuine and subsisting same sex relationship.  Whereas
    both  considered  the  issue  of  whether  there  were   insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with her partner continuing outside the United
    Kingdom neither did so by reference to the  Immigration  rules  or  the
    guidance given  in  this  respect  by  caselaw.  Judge  Brennells  held
    adversely against the Appellant her partner's unwillingness to relocate
    to Malaysia whilst Judge  Buckwell  took  adverse  inference  from  the
    Appellant's immigration history and suggested that she  and  Ms  Morgan
    could behave in their personal lives in such a way that they would  not
    come to the attention of the authorities. Both of these approaches were
    wrong.

17. The  various  authorities  quoted  by  Mr  Hodgetts  including  Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC),  MF
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, Izuazu (Article 8 - new  rules)  [2013]
    UKUT 00045 and YM (Uganda) [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 all make it clear  that
    the term 'insurmountable obstacles' does not mean  obstacles  that  are
    literally impossible to surmount rather that the Tribunal  is  required
    to address  the  practical  possibilities  of  relocation  against  the
    difficulties that  are  likely  to  be  encountered.  The  Respondent's
    guidance IDI: Family Members Under the Immigration  Rules  follows  the
    same approach

        "When  assessing  an  application  under  paragraph  EX.1.(b).   in
        determining  whether  there  are  "insurmountable  obstacles",  the
        decision-maker should consider the seriousness of the  difficulties
        which the applicant and their  partner  would  face  in  continuing
        their family life outside the UK, and whether they entail something
        that could not (or could not be expected to) be overcome, even with
        a degree of hardship for one or more of the individuals concerned".



18.  In these respects the Appellant submitted evidence to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that was not challenged before me. Firstly an expert's  report
    from Professor Harding  showing that same sex  relationships  were  not
    only unlawful in Malaysia and not a basis upon  which  entry  clearance
    could be granted but also that persons in such relationships  would  be
    likely to suffer substantial societal discrimination. Secondly the same
    report shows that foreigners could not obtain  permanent  residence  in
    Malaysia  without  a  work  permit.  Thirdly  the  Angloinfo   document
    detailing the requirements for permanent residence  in  Malaysia  along
    with the point system calculator helpfully  completed  by  Mr  Hodgetts
    that demonstrated that  Ms  Morgan  would  not  qualify  for  permanent
    residence.

19. Having considered Mr Hodgetts submissions and the written evidence I am
    satisfied that the Appellant has satisfied the burden of proof, and  in
    this  respect  the  burden  falls  upon  her,  of  showing   that   the
    difficulties that she and Ms Morgan  would  face  in  continuing  their
    family life  in  Malaysia  are  real  and  substantial  and  amount  to
    insurmountable obstacles within the terms of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix
    FM. Indeed it is very clear from  the  evidence  presented  that  these
    difficulties render the admission of Ms Morgan to Malaysia  based  upon
    the family life that she shares with the Appellant impossible  and  her
    admission in any other capacity in order to continue her family life so
    unlikely  as  to  be  to  all  practical   purposes   impossible.   The
    difficulties are ones that cannot be overcome even  with  a  reasonable
    degree of hardship  but  ones  that  upon  the  evidence  and  for  all
    practical purposes cannot be overcome at all.

20. For all of these reasons it is my judgment that the Appellant meets the
    requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  her  appeal  is  therefore
    allowed.


 Summary


21. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law. I set aside  that  decision  and  remake  it  by
    allowing the Appellant's appeal by virtue of the Immigration Rules.




Signed:                                                  Date:



J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
