

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: AA 09728-11

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At    North Shields                           |                             |
|                                              |signed:   15.07.2013         |
|on    07.09.2012 & 05.07.2013                 |                             |
|                                              |Date sent out: 16.07.2013    |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                              Bahman Ali AHMADI
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Miss Susan Harrison, solicitor, hallidayreeves,
Gateshead
For the respondent: Mr Clive Dewison

                           DETERMINATION & REASONS

1.     This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge  Laurence  Sacks),  sitting  at  North  Shields  on  21
    September 2011, to  what had been an asylum and human rights appeal  by
    a citizen of Afghanistan, born 21 August 1989. Permission to appeal was
    asked for and given solely on the issue of the appellant's son L,  born
    in 2009 to a British citizen,  SH[?],  as  to  whom  I  make  an  order
    forbidding publication of  any  information  that  might  lead  to  the
    child's identification.

 2. At the date of the judge's decision, L's situation  was  this:  he  had
    only seen the appellant once, when he was a fortnight old.  Since  then
    his mother had taken to drink, and so on 11 April 2011 a district judge
    had made a final residence order for  him  to  go  and  live  with  his
    maternal grandparents, with no direct contact with  the  appellant.  If
    things had stopped there, there could have been no  possible  challenge
    to the judge's decision on this front; but they did not.

 3. Some time after 11 April, and before 21 September last year (I have not
    been given the date), L's grandparents decided they couldn't cope  with
    him, and returned him to the care of the local authority. This  led  to
    further public law proceedings about him, to which the appellant  would
    automatically have been made a party, if he had been lawfully  resident
    in this country.  The  judge  was  aware  of  this  position  (see  his
    paragraph 19 (g)); but he did not accept, in view  of  the  appellant's
    past conduct and immigration history, that he would be likely  to  seek
    direct contact with L for his and the  child's  sake,  rather  than  to
    prevent his own removal to Afghanistan.

 4. At the time permission to appeal was given  on  19  October  2011,  the
    appellant had applied to be made a party to the  proceedings  about  L,
    and a final hearing was expected in January 2012. It is not clear  from
    the grant whether that was to be a final hearing of his application, or
    of the proceedings as a whole.

 5. RS (immigration and family court proceedings)  India  [2012]  UKUT  218
    (IAC) poses the following questions for judges in  situations  of  this
    kind: see the judicial head-note

       1.     Where a claimant appeals against  a  decision  to  deport  or
             remove and there are outstanding family proceedings relating to
             a child of the claimant,  the  judge  of  the  Immigration  and
             Asylum Chamber should first consider:

          i) Is the outcome of the contemplated family proceedings likely to
             be material to the immigration decision?
         ii)  Are there compelling public interest reasons  to  exclude  the
             claimant from the United Kingdom irrespective of the outcome of
             the family proceedings or the best interest of the child?
        iii) In the case of contact proceedings initiated by an appellant in
             an immigration appeal, is there any reason to believe that  the
             family proceedings have been instituted to delay  or  frustrate
             removal and not to promote the child's welfare?

 6. The action to be taken by judges is set out as follows:

       2.     In assessing the above questions, the judge will normally want
             to consider: the degree of the claimant's previous interest  in
             and contact with the child, the timing of  contact  proceedings
             and the commitment with which they have been progressed, when a
             decision is likely to be reached, what materials (if  any)  are
             already available or can be made available to identify pointers
             to where the child's welfare lies?

       3.     Having considered these matters the judge will then  have  to
             decide:

          i) Does the claimant have at least an Article 8  right  to  remain
             until the conclusion of the family proceedings?
         ii) If so, should the appeal be allowed to a limited extent  and  a
             discretionary leave be directed  as  per  the  decision  on  MS
             (Ivory Coast) [2007] EWCA Civ 133?
        iii) Alternatively, is it more appropriate for a short period of  an
             adjournment to be granted to enable the  core  decision  to  be
             made in the family proceedings?
         iv) Is it likely that the family court would be assisted by a  view
             on the present state of  knowledge  of  whether  the  appellant
             would be allowed to remain in the event that the outcome of the
             family proceedings is the maintenance of family contact between
             him or her and a child resident here?

ERROR OF LAW

 7. The judge in this case cannot  of  course  be  blamed  for  failing  to
    anticipate the decision in RS, and to construct his own  in  accordance
    with it; but the principles set out  in  it  still  have  to  guide  my
    decision as to whether he was entitled or not in law to  decide  as  he
    did. If he had given detailed  consideration  to  the  history  of  the
    appellant's attempts to maintain indirect contact  with  L,  or  to  be
    joined in the  proceedings  about  him,  and  then  given  reasons  for
    concluding that whatever apparent enthusiasm the appellant  showed  was
    no more than a sham, then that would most likely have been  an  end  of
    this appeal, whatever was going on in the care proceedings.

 8. However, the judge gave no more  than  general  consideration  to  this
    question, and, even if it is assumed, in favour of the validity of  his
    decision, that he took the view that the  answer  provided  'compelling
    public interest reasons' for the appellant's removal  before  the  care
    proceedings were resolved, I do not consider that his consideration  of
    the question provided a satisfactory basis for that.

 9. It follows that I need to re-make the decision  which  was  before  the
    judge, but on the basis of the present state of affairs about L, and in
    line with RS. Since the position at  the  date  of  the  first  hearing
    before me was that an interim hearing of the care proceedings had  been
    listed for 10 September, with a full hearing on the 24th, there  seemed
    no need for any limited period of discretionary leave to remain, as  in
    MS (Ivory Coast) [2007] EWCA Civ 133. On the other hand,  neither  were
    there any 'compelling public interest reasons' for the appellant to  be
    removed before the decision in those proceedings was available.

10. In the circumstances, the right decision for me as of 7  September  was
    to adjourn the hearing of this appeal, as happened in RS. What happened
    to it from there on depended of course on the decision reached  in  the
    care proceedings. I shall go on to  explain  what  happened  there:  it
    seems that HH Judge Matthews QC heard them  in  full  on  24  September
    2012, and gave a reasoned judgment;  but  it  seems  to  have  taken  a
    considerable time, for one  reason  or  another,  for  the  appellant's
    solicitors not only to get a  copy  of  her  order  and  judgment,  but
    permission to use them in these proceedings. Eventually the process was
    helped by direct e-mail contact between Judge Matthews, to  whom  I  am
    grateful, and me.

CARE PROCEEDINGS

11. The orders made by Judge Matthews about L were that there should be

     a)  a  special  guardianship  order  in   favour   of   his   maternal
        grandparents;

     b) continued indirect contact for the appellant, by way of writing, or
        passing on presents through the grandparents once a quarter; and

     c) no contact, direct or indirect, with him for his mother SH.


12. Judge Matthews set out L's general situation as follows:

    [pic]

13. Judge Matthews went on to set  out  the  position  for  the  future  as
    follows:

    [pic]

14. Dealing with the appellant's own position, Judge Matthews said this:

    [pic]

15. However, the reasons why Judge Matthews was unwilling to  order  direct
    contact between the appellant and L were these:

    [pic]

    [pic]


16. Judge Matthews certainly recognized the difficulties in the appellant's
    way, as shown in this passage:

    [pic]

17. Finally Judge Matthews said this:

    [pic]

FINAL HEARING

18.   Since   the   previous   hearing,   the   final   decision   in    RS
    (immigration/family court liaison: outcome) India [2013]  UKUT  82  had
    become available. In that case the family court had taken the view that
    the children's best interests would be served by annual visits to their
    father in India. While recognizing that the result of every case  about
    children must depend on the individual best interests of each child,  I
    plan to follow the general approach taken at this stage of RS too.

19. The appellant has also met a British citizen,  Gemma  Crooks,  who  was
    present in court and is expecting his child. The judge's  treatment  of
    this is relationship, which had not got so far at the date of the first-
    tier hearing, was not challenged in the proceedings before me, and both
    sides agreed that I was not concerned with it; so I simply  record  it,
    without dealing with it.

20. What I am concerned with is the appellant's relationship with L.  Judge
    Matthews accepted that he genuinely wished to pursue it:  however  they
    had only spent half an hour together in L's first three years of  life;
    L's special needs made it imperative for him to be  allowed  to  settle
    down with his grandparents, and the appellant's precarious  immigration
    status made it undesirable for him now to have direct contact  with  L,
    which might be cut short by his removal.

21. Miss Harrison in her  skeleton  argument  pointed  to  Judge  Matthews'
    recognition that this  was  a  'chicken  and  egg'  situation  for  the
    appellant, and that the question of direct contact could be  looked  at
    again if he were allowed to stay in this country. She also  pointed  to
    L's likely long-term need for care and attention, and to the fact that,
    so far as his family members are concerned, he now has  direct  contact
    only with his grandparents, who in the nature of things are  likely  to
    die many years before him.

22. Miss Harrison recognized herself that  the  authorities,  including  RS
    (immigration/family court liaison: outcome) India [2013]  UKUT  82,  do
    not favour fathers who have indirect contact with children living  here
    being allowed to stay  in  this  country  where  otherwise  the  public
    interest would require their removal. She suggested  that  L's  special
    needs, and Judge Matthews' not excluding direct contact for the future,
    might provide a reason for  not  following  those  authorities  in  the
    present case.

CONCLUSIONS

23. If L's best interests had required the appellant to be  allowed  direct
    contact with him now, then it would have been open to Judge Matthews to
    say so, and to make an order to  that  effect.   He  is  a  child  with
    serious problems, who is likely to need all the  help  he  can  get  in
    future; but at present his needs are best met by his grandparents,  and
    above all by stability: he has seen the appellant for no more than half
    an hour in his life. In my view L's  best  interests,  so  far  as  the
    appellant is concerned, lie in keeping in touch with him  in  some  way
    which will allow his father to come back into his life in future if  he
    needs more than the indirect contact he is now getting, and with  which
    his grandparents have promised to help. I do  not  think  they  provide
    compelling reasons why the appellant should now be allowed to  stay  in
    this country.

24. So far as the public interest is concerned, the  appellant  arrived  in
    this country by way of Turkey and claimed asylum in 2004.  He  did  not
    appear for an interview which had been arranged, but instead  made  his
    way in the back of a lorry to Germany, where he made another claim, but
    was eventually identified as an asylum-seeker from  this  country,  and
    sent back here in 2007, when  he  claimed  again.  His  appeal  against
    refusal was finally dismissed on 20 September  2008.  The  Home  Office
    however took no action against him before he made a fresh claim  on  18
    December  2009,  with  further  representations  following  before  the
    decision now under appeal was made on 10 August 2011. The appellant has
    wisely not relied in these proceedings on the history of events in Iran
    which was rejected in his first appeal.

25. The appellant is a man of 33, who first came here in 2004, but has  not
    been here continuously since then, having  absconded  to  Germany  soon
    after. Since 2007 he has been here as a refused asylum-seeker,  staying
    on despite his lack of success on appeal the following year,  and  only
    remaining on the strength of a second application and appeal since  the
    end of 2009. Despite Judge Matthews' acceptance of his genuine wish  to
    pursue direct contact with L, and her not excluding it for the  future,
    I have no doubt on the issues before me that  the  balance  comes  down
    firmly on the side of his removal.

Appeal dismissed

                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



