
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09234/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 February 2016                           |On 9 March 2016               |
|Prepared 10 February 2016                     |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    [m J]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Neale, Counsel instructed by Migrant Law Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant a national of  Iran,  date  of  birth  [  -  ],  appealed
    against the Respondent's decision of 17 October 2014  to  make  removal
    directions.  His appeal against that decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge E Davidge (the judge), who, on 7  July  2015,  dismissed
    his appeal under the Refugee Convention and Articles 2 and  3  ECHR  as
    well as under the Humanitarian Protection provisions derived  from  the
    Qualification Directive set out in the Immigration Rules.

2.   The parties were agreed that adverse points raised by the  judge  which
    related to  credibility  and  to  the  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    knowledge of Christianity are based  upon  a  misunderstanding  by  the
    judge that the Appellant had been baptised in Greece in 2012 whereas it
    was clear he was baptised in London in 2014.  Similarly there  appeared
    to be some misunderstanding that whilst the  Appellant  had  undertaken
    some of an Alpha course in Greece for he had otherwise  attended  Alpha
    courses in the United Kingdom at a later date.  Those misunderstandings
    affected:- first, the credibility findings made by the judge  but  also
    bore on the judge's assessment of the knowledge that the Appellant  had
    of Christianity and aspects of  its  faith  which  she  had  understood
    should have occurred over a far longer period than as in fact had  been
    the case.

3.   Therefore it was agreed by the parties  that  on  a  relatively  narrow
    issue, but one which  went  to  the  core  of  the  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's claim to be at risk as a Christian on return to Iran,  that
    the error  was  fundamental  and  undermined  the  adverse  credibility
    findings made by the judge.  It was common ground between  the  parties
    that this flaw in the decision meant that in effect it is not  possible
    to cherry pick amongst the findings the judge made  to  preserve  some.
    Rather the appropriate and better course  was  for  the  matter  to  be
    remade in its entirety and that no findings of fact or findings derived
    from those facts should stand.  I was satisfied for my  own  part  that
    the  misunderstanding,  which  was  extremely  unfortunate,   adversely
    affected the judge's assessment of the evidence.   I  make  no  comment
    whatsoever upon what the outcome of a rehearing may be.

4.   The judge made an anonymity  direction  and  in  the  circumstances  it
    seemed to me appropriate  and  necessary  that  that  direction  should
    continue and it will be a  matter  for  the  judge  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to decide what if any further order should be made.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.  The matter  is  returned  to
the First-tier Tribunal,  in  accordance  with  the  presidential  statement
paragraph 7.2, for it to be made again.

DIRECTIONS

Any further bundles relied upon, pertinent to the issues, to be  served  not
later than ten working days before the further hearing  and  served  on  the
IAC as well as the opposing party.

ISSUES

Risk under the Refugee Convention on the  grounds  of  religious  faith,  in
relation to imputed political opinion and in relation to Articles  2  and  3
ECHR.

The Appellant's  representatives  to  notify  the  Tribunal  in  advance  if
Article 8  ECHR  issues  have  been  raised  and  to  provide  any  relevant
documentation relied upon in support of such a claim  ten  working  days  in
advance of the further hearing date.

DIRECTIONS

(1)      Time estimate 2 hours

(2)  Farsi interpreter required. Appellant's representatives to  notify  the
    Tribunal if any other interpreter  is  required  and/or  if  the  Farsi
    interpreter continues to be required.

 (3) List in First-tier Tribunal (IAC) in Newport  before  any  judge  other
    than Judge Davidge and Judge Davey.


Signed                                  Date 27 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

