
AA 09566 2013
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent:          |
|On 20 June 2013                               |On 30 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between


                                BC (A MINOR)
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, of counsel, instructed by Crowley & Co

For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on  7th  October  1997.  He
      arrived in this country on 28 October, 2012 and applied for asylum  on
      31 October, 2012. This application was refused on 2 October, 2013. The
      appellant appealed and the appeal came before a First-tier Judge on 10
      January, 2014. The appellant was represented then as he is now  by  Mr
      Howells. The appellant was accompanied by his brother-in-law.

   2. The appellant had been living with his brother-in-law for the previous
      12 months. The appellant also has a sister in the United Kingdom on  a
      spouse visa.

   3. The judge did not find the  appellant  credible  in  relation  to  his
      asylum claim. He was not at risk on return to Albania. The judge  also
      did not accept that the appellant  continued  to  have  little  or  no
      contact with his family in Albania. While  it  was  claimed  that  the
      family home did not have  a  telephone,  the  appellant's  sister  had
      spoken to their mother after the birth  of  her  baby  and  there  was
      nothing to suggest that the family had  moved  from  their  home.  The
      judge  makes  this  point  in  both  paragraph  18  and  21   of   the
      determination. Similarly the appellant's  brother-in-law  had  visited
      Albania whilst the appellant had been in the  United  Kingdom  and  he
      appeared not to have encountered problems. In paragraph 22  the  judge
      stated:

           "Even if there  is  no  telephone  at  home,  I  find  that  the
           appellant's parents would make every  effort  to  contact  their
           only son in the UK on a regular basis. I find that the appellant
           is in regular contact with his parents in Albania."

   4. I have not summarised the full details of the asylum claim since  they
      are not relevant as the appeal is not pursued on asylum  grounds.  The
      sole ground taken in this case is  in  relation  to  the  respondent's
      duties  under  paragraph  352ZC  of  the  immigration   rules.   Under
      subparagraph (c) it is a requirement to be met in order for a grant of
      limited leave to remain to be made in  relation  to  an  unaccompanied
      asylum  seeking  child  that:  "there  are   no   adequate   reception
      arrangements in the country to which they would be returned  if  leave
      to remain was not granted".

   5. In paragraph 28 of the determination the judge said this:

           There is no evidence before me that the respondent has conducted
           an assessment as to reception facilities  in  Albania  for  this
           appellant. He is still 16 years old and it is incumbent upon the
           respondent  to  ensure  that  there   are   adequate   reception
           facilities for the appellant before he can be removed."

   6. The judge found that the appellant had been sent to the  UK  with  the
      telephone number for his brother-in-law with a story to claim asylum.

   7. In paragraph 32, in considering the appellant's claim under Article 8,
      the judge found that the appellant's parents were able and willing  to
      care for him in Albania. In paragraph 33 the judge said:

           "I have had regard to the best interests of the appellant  as  a
           child being removed to Albania. I find that the  appellant  will
           be returning to his parents in Albania. The  best  interests  of
           the appellant are to be with his parents."

   8. The judge dismissed the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection  and
      human rights grounds but in paragraph 39 added this:

           "The respondent is to ensure that there are  adequate  reception
           facilities for the removal of the appellant."

   9. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Macleman granted permission as  the  appeal  under  the
      immigration rules did not appear to be either  allowed  or  dismissed.
      The conclusions of the judge might require some tidying up.

  10. Mr Howells relied on his grounds of appeal and  submitted  the  appeal
      should be allowed under the immigration rules and paragraph 39 of  the
      determination should be amended to reflect that.

  11. He referred to DS (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State [2011]  EWCA  Civ
      305. This made it clear the burden of proof was on the  respondent  to
      make the necessary enquiries. There was a  policy  not  to  remove  an
      unaccompanied child unless the Secretary of State was  satisfied  that
      safe and adequate reception arrangements are in place in  the  country
      to  which  the  appellant  is  to  be  removed.  The  policy  was  now
      crystallised in the rules.

  12. Ms Everett pointed out that the respondent had considered the issue in
      paragraph 74 of the refusal letter:

           "...You have stated that your  brother  in  law  is  in  regular
           contact with his wife, your sister, in Albania and that you have
           also spoken to  your  father  since  being  in  the  UK.  It  is
           considered  that  adequate  reception  arrangements   could   be
           arranged with your sister to collect you, and as your brother in
           law has made the journey back to Albania it is  considered  that
           he could accompany you to  ensure  that  you  meet  your  family
           members safely..."

  13. The same confidence about the reception arrangements in  reflected  in
      paragraph 71.

  14. Ms Everett acknowledged that the respondent  had  not  challenged  the
      judge's  conclusion  by  way  of  an  appeal.    Further,   and   more
      embarrassingly, in the response that had been filed, the Secretary  of
      State had argued that the judge had directed himself correctly.

  15. I should emphasise that this is not a decision that every judge  might
      have reached. However, the finding in paragraph 28  is  crystal  clear
      and the conclusion in paragraph 39 is equally clear. Surprising though
      it might seem, the judge took the view the respondent had not properly
      assessed the reception conditions.

  16. As the respondent has not appealed the decision and, on  the  contrary
      submitted that the judge  had directed himself correctly, I have  come
      to the conclusion that the "tidying up" referred to by Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Macleman requires the addition of  the  words:  "The  appeal  is
      allowed under paragraph 352ZC(c)."

  17. The determination contains a material error of  law  for  the  reasons
      given by Judge Macleman.

  18. The appeal is re-made accordingly:

  19. The appeal is dismissed on asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human
      rights grounds.

  20. The  respondent  is  to  ensure  that  there  are  adequate  reception
      facilities for the removal of the appellant.  The  appeal  is  allowed
      under paragraph 352ZC(c).




Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


                               24 June 2014



