
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09222/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2016                   |On 15 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [B Y]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hoshi (Miles Hutchinson and Lithgow)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal to allow the  appeal  of  [BY],  a  citizen  of
    Malaysia, born 19 July 1990, against the decision of  5  June  2015  to
    refuse to grant him leave to remain  and  to  make  removal  directions
    against him.

 2. [BY] arrived in the United Kingdom with his father, younger brother and
    sister in August 2008. Their asylum applications, based  on  claims  of
    suffering discrimination and harassment for  reasons  of  the  father's
    Chinese ethnicity and outspoken political opinions, were refused by the
    Secretary of State. On appeal, their  claims  to  refugee  status  were
    rejected by Judge Cope, because of the implausibility of  the  father's
    account that he had been  subjected  to  harassment  by  the  Malaysian
    government  in  this  country.  However,  there  was  a  flaw  in   the
    immigration  decisions  made  against  them,  because   whereas   their
    expulsion was supposedly justified  by  their  being  illegal  entrants
    against whom removal directions might be made under section 10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, in fact all  had  been  visitors  with
    current leave at the time of their asylum claims.

 3. The appeal was subsequently heard in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  where  the
    notices of decision were found not to be in accordance  with  the  law,
    though without departing from the findings on the merits of the  asylum
    claims. This left the  matters  outstanding  before  the  Home  Office.
    Surprisingly, the Secretary of State's reaction to the outcome  of  the
    appeal proceedings was to grant refugee status to the  father,  and  to
    [BY]'s brother and sister, on 6 August 2010; on 16 November 2011  their
    mother was granted discretionary leave to remain. On 25  November  2011
    [BY] was granted discretionary leave to  remain  to  avoid  what  would
    otherwise be a disproportionate breach of his rights  under  Article  8
    ECHR. I understand that on 10 September 2015 his  father,  brother  and
    sister were granted indefinite leave to remain.

 4. [BY]'s application for further leave to remain was refused because  the
    grant of leave to the rest of his family  had  been  predicated  on  an
    incorrect notice being issued to them: the fact was that  their  asylum
    claims had been refused and on appeal adverse credibility findings  had
    been made. [BY] had no partner or dependent children, and did not  live
    with  his  parents.  There  were  no  significant  obstacles   to   his
    reintegration in Malaysia.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal noted that [BY] had become firmly settled here,
    obtaining a first class honours  degree  from  Bristol  University  and
    having worked with a web design company in Southampton, whose employers
    regarded him highly and  considered  that  it  would  be  difficult  to
    replace him. It allowed his appeal, giving very  succinct  reasons:  to
    wit, that whilst the findings on the merits of the asylum claim made by
    Judge  Cope  formed  the  starting  point  for  its  later  assessment,
    subsequent events included the decision of the Secretary  of  State  to
    grant the other family members refugee status. Given [BY]'s  claim  was
    identical to theirs, the only rational disposal of the  appeal  was  to
    recognise that he too should be granted refugee status. This  made  his
    return to Malaysia incompatible both with the  Refugee  Convention  and
    with Rule 276ADE, given that one could not reasonably expect  a  person
    to integrate in a country where  they  held  a  well  founded  fear  of
    persecution.

 6. Grounds of appeal argued that the First-tier Tribunal had been wrong to
    fail to explain its reasoning for  concluding  [BY]  faced  a  fear  of
    persecution, erred in determining his refugee status  with  respect  to
    past rather than present  circumstances,  and  contending  that,  given
    those flaws, that the consequent finding to allow the  appeal  on  Rule
    276ADE(vi) grounds was flawed too.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on 7 January 2016  because  the  judge
    had arguably failed to give adequate reasons as to why [BY] would be at
    risk of serious harm at the date of hearing.

 8. Before me Mr Hoshi made submissions  consistent  with  his  commendably
    timely and concise Rule 24 Response, submitting that the findings below
    were legally adequate  given  that,  if  two  international  protection
    claims were essentially the same, they should have the same outcome. As
    [BY]'s father was still a recognised refugee at  the  date  of  hearing
    there was nothing  inconsistent  with  the  Ravichandran  principle  in
    accordingly finding that his son was a refugee also.  Mr  Kotes  argued
    that on the authority of Ocampo [2006] EWCA Civ  1276  the  appropriate
    finding on the Appellant's  asylum  claim  was,  bearing  in  mind  the
    material overlap of evidence  between  his  account  and  that  of  his
    father, that his claim too should fail, in the light of the independent
    judicial findings that the father's claim had been unfounded.

Findings and reasons

 9. I do not consider that the  approach  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    legally sustainable.  There  appear  to  be  only  two  routes  to  the
    conclusion that an individual is owed refugee status because  of  their
    personal circumstances, one borne of asylum law, the  other  of  public
    law. The argument under the former is that the grant of refugee  status
    to one family member is dispositive of the grant of status to  another.
    The argument under the latter  heading  is  that  given  the  undoubted
    status of legal certainty and consistency as central  to  the  rule  of
    law, decision makers including judicial ones  should  strive  to  avoid
    inconsistent outcomes where cases are substantively identical.

10. However, it  is  difficult  to  see  that  either  of  these  arguments
    justifies a finding of entitlement  to  international  protection  that
    flies in the face of previous appellate findings as to a person's  need
    for it. Under Article 4 of the Qualification Directive  addressing  the
    assessment of facts  and  circumstances,  it  is  made  clear  that  an
    application for international  protection  is  to  be  assessed  on  an
    individual  basis  taking  into  account  the  position  and   personal
    circumstances of the applicant, including factors such  as  background,
    gender and age, assessing whether,  on  the  basis  of  their  personal
    circumstances, they face a real risk of  persecution.  Undoubtedly  the
    experience of their family members may be relevant to that  assessment.



11. The starting point for my assessment of the applications is  the  prior
    determination of the appeal by Immigration Judge Cope. The approach  to
    be taken to those findings is set out in Devaseelan (D  (Tamil)  [2002]
    UKIAT 00702): in short they are the authoritative  historic  resolution
    of the case, although subsequent facts may be taken into account. I  do
    not consider that the grant of refugee status by the Secretary of State
    without any further development (such as a viable  fresh  asylum  claim
    which  neutralises  the  effect  of  a  previous  unsuccessful  appeal)
    automatically trumps a reasoned judicial assessment on  appeal.  Indeed
    the settled position of the Tribunal is that a determination of  status
    by the Secretary of State will not carry the same weight as one made by
    a judge upon appeal, being an unreasoned administrative  decision:  see
    AC (witness with refugee status - effect) Somalia [2005] UKAIT 00124 at
    [14].

12. As to the public law route, it is of course established that  a  public
    authority may  be  essentially  estopped  by  a  consistent  course  of
    dealings with an  individual  from  altering  its  course  of  conduct.
    However that is an aspect of the law of legitimate expectation.  It  is
    very difficult to see that one could assert  a  legitimate  expectation
    that one should benefit from what can  only  be  considered  to  be  an
    administrative error by the Secretary of State. As Sedley J put it in R
    v Somerset CC ex parte Dixon [COD] 1997 323, QBD: "Public law is not at
    base about rights, even though abuses of power may and often do  invade
    private rights; it is about wrongs - that is to say misuses  of  public
    power."

13. It is very hard to argue that any public law wrong  has  been  done  to
    [BY] that now demands the grant of status. He has not  been  given  any
    unambiguous  and  unqualified  promise  or   assurance   (see   Mehmood
    (legitimate  expectation)  [2014]  UKUT  469  (IAC))  that   it   would
    contravene the public interest to contradict. Indeed, it can hardly  be
    said that to prevent him from benefiting from  historic  administrative
    failings would amount to conspicuous unfairness:  quite  the  contrary,
    for to permit him to benefit from a past administrative  failing  would
    fly in the face of the disapproval of Rashid [2005] EWCA Civ 744  found
    in MA and AA (Afghanistan) [2015] UKSC 40 at [72],  where  the  Supreme
    Court concluded that "The question whether the appellant qualifies  for
    asylum status is not a question of discretion. It is one which must  be
    decided on the evidence before the tribunal or court ..."

14. For these reasons I consider that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.
    It misdirected itself as to the focus of the enquiry before it, and its
    approach to the question of international  protection  inevitably  bore
    heavily (indeed decisively) on its determination of  the  private  life
    question under Immigration Rule 276ADE.

15. None of the foregoing necessarily means that  [BY]  might  not  have  a
    compelling case for departure for the Immigration Rules given the  fact
    that he arrived here as a young person on the cusp of adulthood and has
    done the best to make a life for himself here  in  circumstances  where
    other family members have been granted not only  residence  rights  but
    ultimately indefinite leave to remain. However that assessment  is  for
    the future.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law.  As there are no lawful relevant findings upon which to build, the
    matter is  suitable  for  re-hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    accordingly remit the appeal to that forum.


Signed:     Date: 8 February 2016

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes

