
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09663/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 11th May 2015                    |On 29th May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                 Min Min Yu
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Knorr, Counsel instructed by Southwark Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant is a national of the Peoples' Republic of China  date
         of birth 12th October 1989.  She  appeals  with  permission[1]  the
         decision of First-tier Tribunal (Judge Watt) to dismiss her  appeal
         against the decision to remove her from the United Kingdom pursuant
         to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999[2].

         Background and Basis of Claim

      2. The basis of the Appellant's asylum claim was that she had a  well-
         founded fear of persecution in China for reasons of  her  political
         opinion, religious belief and membership  of  a  particular  social
         group. She claimed to be from a village  in  China  where  she  and
         others had protested about the proposed destruction of the Buddhist
         temple.  This  had  brought  her  into  conflict  with  the   local
         authorities and she had been arrested and detained.  She managed to
         escape from detention upon payment of a bribe and left China.   She
         now fears return for that reason. Since her arrival in the  UK  the
         Appellant has had a baby; this gives rise to an additional limb  of
         her claim in that she asserts that she would face persecution as an
         unmarried mother.

      3. The  Respondent  accepted  that  single  parents  face  stigma  and
         societal discrimination but not that this amounted to  persecution.
         In respect of the rest of the claim the  refusal  letter  reads  as
         follows:

             "When considering your internally consistent account of events
             alongside the background information, and in  the  absence  of
             evidence to the contrary, your claim that you were involved in
             delivering a petition to the local  government  and  that  you
             became  involved  in  a  demonstration  outside  a  government
             building, has therefore been accepted"

         Having made that concession of  fact  the  Respondent  goes  on  to
         reject the rest of  the  Appellant's  account.  In  particular  the
         Respondent did not accept that there  was  sufficient  evidence  to
         demonstrate that the Appellant had been arrested  and  detained  as
         claimed following this demonstration [paragraph 68],  or  that  she
         had been questioned at school by the police  [68].  The  claim  was
         therefore rejected.

      4. When the matter came before  Judge  Watt,  he  had  regard  to  the
         refusal letter. He summarises its contents at paragraphs 2-9.   The
         Judge records the Appellant's oral evidence.   From  paragraphs  37
         to 38 the Judge sets out the reasons why he  does  not  accept  the
         Appellant's evidence to be credible. These appear  at  12  numbered
         sub-paragraphs.

         Matters in Issue

      5. The grounds of appeal are dated  1st  March  2015.  There  are  two
         principal challenges  to  the  approach  taken  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal. The first  is  that  there  was  a  complete  failure  to
         recognise that the Respondent had accepted material  parts  of  the
         claim, that being that the Appellant had taken part  in  a  protest
         against the destruction of  a  temple.  The  second  was  that  the
         determination fails to have regard to relevant  country  background
         material which supported the contention that  persons  involved  in
         such protests are reasonably likely to be  arrested  and  detained:
         this material included the Respondent's  own  Operational  Guidance
         Note, Country of Origin Information Report as  well  as  an  expert
         report.

      6. Ms Isherwood underlined that the concession in the  refusal  letter
         is in limited terms: it was not accepted  that  the  Appellant  had
         been detained. She submitted that the reasons given  for  rejecting
         the Appellant's credibility were, when considered in total,  sound.
         She highlighted, for instance,  that  the  finding  in  respect  of
         whether there was an arrest warrant against the Appellant, was open
         to the Judge on the evidence before her.   She submitted  that  the
         Judge was entitled to examine the evidence for contradictions.  The
         fact that he had not considered the country background material was
         not in this case relevant, since the findings would have  been  the
         same even if that material had been addressed more explicitly.

         Error of Law: Our Findings

      7. The determination contains  twelve  "reasons"  why  the  First-tier
         Tribunal was not satisfied that the Appellant's account  was  true.
         We heard submissions from both parties about the merits of some  of
         those individual reasons, however we do not consider  it  necessary
         to deal with these matters  in  detail.  That  is  because  we  are
         satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal's approach  was  flawed  for
         the two principal reasons set out in the grounds.

      8. There was a clear concession of fact in this case.  The  Respondent
         had accepted a material part of the Appellant's evidence. It  would
         appear from paragraphs 2-9 of the determination that the First-tier
         Tribunal did  not  appreciate  this.  These  paragraphs  contain  a
         summary of the refusal letter that nowhere mentions the concession.
           As paragraphs 37-38 the Judge proceeded to assess the credibility
         of the account overall, with  no  regard  to  the  specific  agreed
         facts.  Had the Judge had regard to the factual concession, he  may
         well not have reached  the  decision  he  did  in  respect  of  the
         remaining parts of the claim.

      9. We are further satisfied that there is a failure to take account of
         the expert  and  country  background  evidence.   This  was  highly
         relevant in this case, since it went to  the  plausibility  of  the
         Appellant's claim that she was arrested and detained. Ms  Isherwood
         was correct to say that it would not have  inexorably  led  to  the
         appeal being allowed, but it was evidence that  merited  attention.
         The only reference to the expert  report  was  at  paragraph  38(6)
         where the evidence of Dr Consiglio  is  cited  in  respect  of  the
         importance in China of identity cards. There is no other reference,
         and no indication that the material was  considered  in  the  round
         when assessing credibility.

     10. For those reasons, the decision must be set aside.

         Decisions

     11. The determination contains an error of law and it is set aside.

     12. We make no direction for anonymity: neither party requested one and
         on the facts we see no reason to make one.

     13. The parties were in agreement that due to the nature and extent  of
         the judicial fact finding required it would be appropriate to remit
         the matter to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Having  had  regard  to
         paragraph 7 (b) of the Practice Statements for the Immigration  and
         Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal we agree.






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               11th May 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge RA Cox on the 13th
March 2015
[2] Dated 31st October 2014

