
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aA/09978/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 3 July 2015                       |On 31 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                                     NN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Solanki, Counsel, instructed by Waran and Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014. Pursuant to rule 14 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make an
    order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to
    lead members of the public to identify the appellant.  Breach  of  this
    order can be punished as a contempt of court. I make the order  because
    the appellant's wife is a recognised refugee who might be at risk  just
    by her or the appellant being identified.

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Parkes) dismissing the appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision
    taken on 18 December to refuse the appellants asylum and  human  rights
    claims and to remove the appellant from the UK.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who left that country  in  1999
    and arrived in the UK. He was an LTTE member from 1985 until  the  late
    1990s. He claimed asylum in the UK but his claim was refused on 22  May
    2001 and his subsequent appeal  was  dismissed  by  Mr  GF  Denson,  an
    adjudicator, in a determination dated 4  March  2003.  The  appellant's
    case was that he was injured in 1995 and no longer  fit  to  fight  but
    then served in an administrative  role  until  he  became  increasingly
    dissatisfied with the LTTE and came to the UK. He is now wanted by  the
    Sri Lankan government and there is a warrant for his  arrest  dated  10
    October 2013.  The adjudicator previously found that the appellant  was
    not on any wanted list and could relocate within Sri Lanka  if  he  did
    not want to return to Jaffna.

 3. The appellant remained in the UK and lodged further submissions  on  18
    October 2010 and 17 March 2014. He relied upon the new  arrest  warrant
    and his sur place activities in the UK.  The  respondent  then  made  a
    fresh decision on 4 November 2014.

 4. The respondent accepted the respondent's identity and  nationality  but
    concluded that the arrest warrant was not genuine and the appellant was
    not wanted in Sri Lanka. There is no armed conflict in  Sri  Lanka  and
    the appellant does not have a partner or child in the UK. His claim was
    again refused.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at  Sheldon  Court,  Birmingham  on  9  January  2015.  He  was
    represented by Mr M Murphy, Counsel. The First-tier Tribunal found that
    the sur place activities were limited and  did  not  suggest  that  the
    appellant would be regarded as a threat to the  unitary  state  of  Sri
    Lanka. The appellant had produced a document which the  judge  regarded
    as a letter rather than an  arrest  warrant,  indicating  that  if  the
    appellant did not take up the invitation to  attend  a  police  station
    then the police would be compelled to resort to legal action. It was 15
    months since the letter was issued and no  action  had  been  taken  by
    police. There was no arrest warrant. The appellant had failed  to  show
    that the letter was reliable and the judge attached no  weight  to  the
    letter. The judge did not accept that the appellant was wanted  by  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka or that he was of any interest to them.

 6. The judge noted that the appellant was married to a Sri Lankan national
    who entered the UK in 2010, had made an asylum claim and had lodged  an
    appeal against the refusal of her asylum claim.  They  had  married  in
    2011 and had no children. The appellant was in employment but could not
    succeed under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules.  Neither  the
    appellant nor his wife had settled status  in  the  UK  and  could  not
    succeed under Appendix  FM.  There  was  nothing  unusual  about  their
    circumstances.  The  appellant's  family  life  was   only   a   recent
    development with someone who could lawfully accompany him to Sri Lanka.
    The medical evidence came nowhere near engaging Article 3. Removal  was
    proportionate.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law.  The  appellant's
    wife had claimed asylum and could not accompany him to Sri  Lanka.  The
    appellant was a former LTTE member and had engaged in credible diaspora
    activities. Lack of involvement in LTTE activities would  not  preclude
    adverse attention from the Sri Lankan authorities. The judge  had  also
    irrationally conflated two distinct issues - support for the  LTTE  and
    support for the  Tamil  people  in  Sri  Lanka  by  the  diaspora  more
    generally. The judge had failed to make clear findings  in  respect  of
    the police letter.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    on 23 February 2015. That was on the basis that it  was  arguable  that
    the judge had not fully and reliably analysed the appellant's  position
    on return bearing in mind that the  appellant  had  been  found  to  be
    credible in respect of his diaspora activities. The  remaining  grounds
    were less persuasive but  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  on  all
    grounds.

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

10. Ms Solanki submitted that there was an obvious material error  in  that
    the wife could not accompany the appellant back to Sri Lanka. The judge
    had failed to have regard to the evidence of diaspora  activities.  The
    judge had failed to clearly set out to  what  extent  he  accepted  the
    diaspora activities. The judge  appeared  to  be  suggesting  that  the
    appellant should produce evidence  of  the  photographs  taken  by  the
    security forces during the war and unfairly  criticised  the  appellant
    for  not  producing  evidence  that  he  had   been   photographed   at
    demonstrations in the UK. The judge failed to assess the likelihood  of
    the appellant being photographed and the subsequent risk  to  him.  The
    judge incorrectly regarded LTTE activities and diaspora  activities  as
    the same thing, leading to confusion and errors. There was evidence  of
    contact with formed LTTE members.

11. Ms Solanki went on to submit that the lack of reference  to  sur  place
    activities was not  good  reason  to  reject  the  2013  document.  The
    document suggested that the appellant's anti-government activities were
    known and that could include sur place activities. The  question  under
    the country guidance was how the authorities  would  perceive  him  and
    this was not addressed by the judge. There was no  real  assessment  of
    whether the authorities would know about the diaspora  activities.  The
    appeal should be remitted to the First-tier for a fresh hearing.

12. Mr Kandola submitted that if the appellant's wife had  been  recognised
    as a refugee as  at  the  date  of  the  First-tier  hearing  then  the
    requirements of Appendix FM would have been  met  but  she  was  not  a
    refugee at that time. She was granted refugee status on 10 March  2015.
    The judge was not required to pre-empt the wife's  appeal.  Mr  Kandola
    conceded that if I found that there was a material error in relation to
    Article 8 then the decision should be remade  and  the  appeal  allowed
    under Appendix FM.

13. In relation to the asylum claim,  the  judge  properly  considered  the
    documents in the round and there was no misdirection on the law. It was
    permissible to find the police letter unreliable because it was  issued
    so long after the appellant had left  Sri  Lanka.  The  judge  properly
    considered the sur place activities.

14. I find that the appellant's wife has been a refugee since she left  Sri
    Lanka. The judge failed to have  regard  to  Article  33  of  the  1951
    Refugee Convention which prohibits expulsion or return  of  a  refugee,
    section 78 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  which
    prohibits removal whilst an appeal under section 82(1) is  pending  and
    paragraph 329 of the Immigration  Rules  which  states  that  until  an
    asylum application has been determined or a certificate issued then  no
    action will be taken to require the departure of the asylum  seeker  or
    his dependents from the UK. The judge erred in law when  he  stated  at
    paragraph 33 of the  decision  that  family  life  was  only  a  recent
    development with someone who can lawfully accompany him to  Sri  Lanka.
    The appellant's wife could not safely go to Sri Lanka and it would have
    been unlawful to require her to do so. The judge's decision in relation
    to Article 8 is fundamentally flawed.

15. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal under Article 8 private and family life involved the  making  of
    an error of law and its decision  cannot  stand.  I  indicated  to  the
    parties that the appeal would be allowed to  that  extent  and  that  I
    would remake the decision and allow the appeal under paragraph EX.1.(b)
    of Appendix FM. That is on the basis that the appellant has  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with a  partner  who  is  in  the  UK  with
    refugee leave and there are insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    with  that  partner  continuing  outside  the  UK.  Ms   Solanki   took
    instructions and confirmed that  the  appellant  no  longer  wished  to
    pursue his appeal under the Refugee Convention or Articles 2 and  3  of
    the 1950 Convention.

Decision

16. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    remake the decision as follows;

      i) I dismiss the appeal of the appellant under the Refugee Convention.

     ii) I dismiss the appeal of the appellant under Articles 2 and 3 of the
         1950 Convention.

    iii) I allow the appeal under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.



Signed   David Archer  Date 29 July 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
