
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09008/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 15 February 2016                       |On 9 March 2016                  |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                    [S K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr E MacKay, McGlashan MacKay Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1) The appellant was born on [ - ] and is  a  national  of  Sri  Lanka.   He
   appeals against a decision by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Wallace
   dismissing his appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

2) The grounds of the application for permission to appeal were lengthy  but
   were summarised by the judge who  gave  permission  to  appeal.   It  was
   contended that the Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  make
   findings of fact in respect of material elements of the appellant's claim
   and failed to give adequate and comprehensible reasons for her  decision.
   It was further contended that the judge made findings that no  reasonable
   decision maker could have made.  The judge was said to have made an error
   of fact by stating that there was no evidence  on  file  to  suggest  the
   appellant was  perceived  by  the  Sri  Lankan  Government  as  having  a
   relationship with post-conflict Tamil separatism but in fact there was  a
   significant amount of such  evidence.   It  was  argued  that  the  judge
   further erred by finding that past persecution might be relevant  but  in
   itself was not an indicator of future persecution.  Permission to  appeal
   was granted on the basis  that  all  these  grounds  were  arguable.   In
   particular, it was arguable that  past  persecution  was  a  prima  facie
   indication that the appellant would be at risk of similar persecution  in
   future.  The judge's statement to the contrary was an arguable  error  of
   law.

3) Following the granting of permission to appeal the  respondent  submitted
   a rule 24 notice dated 8 December 2015 stating that the  application  was
   not opposed.

4) At the hearing before me the parties were agreed that the  appeal  should
   be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing before  a  different
   judge at which the decision would be remade.

Conclusions

5) The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error or errors on points of law.

6) I set aside the decision.

7) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  remade  at  a
   hearing before a judge other than Judge Wallace.

Anonymity

8) The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  for  anonymity.   Taking
   into account that proceedings are continuing  based  on  the  appellant's
   claim to have a fear of persecution by the authorities in  Sri  Lanka,  I
   consider that an anonymity  order  should  be  made,  at  least  for  the
   duration of the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.

9) Accordingly  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order  in  the
   following  terms.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  of  the  court  directs
   otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
   thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the  original  appellant.
   This order applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any  failure  to
   comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court  proceedings.




Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
