
  [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09158/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Harmondsworth                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2015                            |On 12 February 2015           |
|Prepared 12 January 2015                      |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY



                                   Between

                                     jbl

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. A Jafar, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Logo, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Uganda, born  on  4  April  1987,  appeals,
    with permission, against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    O'Garro who,  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  9  December  2014,
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of
    State made on 30 October 2014 to refuse to  grant  him  asylum  and  to
    issue removal directions under the provisions of Section 10 of Schedule
    2 of the Immigration Act 1971.

2.   The appellant entered Britain in February  2012  with  a  Tier  5  visa
    valid until February 2013.  He returned to Uganda at  the  end  of  his
    visa.  In March 2013 he obtained a further  Tier  5  visa  valid  until
    April 2014.  Again he returned to Uganda before the expiry of the visa.
     He applied for and received a further Tier 5 visa in April 2014  valid
    until 13 May 2015.  He entered Britain on 31 May 2014.  In October 2014
    he claimed  asylum  and  was  served  with  illegal  entry  papers  and
    detained.  He was placed in the detained fast track system.

3.   In paragraphs  8  onwards  Judge  O'Garro  summarised  the  appellant's
    history - as a child  he  had  come  into  contact  with  a  charitable
    organisation called Missionaries for the Poor who had asked  him,  when
    he reached the age of 18, to start a youth group for children from poor
    backgrounds.  That group was named Youth Associates  with  Missionaries
    of the Poor (YAMP).  The aims of the group were to fight poverty and to
    fight for the  human  rights  of  those  who  came  from  similar  poor
    backgrounds to his own.

4.   In the course of his work he began to counsel a  number  of  homosexual
    youths, helping them to obtain accommodation and medical treatment.  He
    spoke to them about homosexual relationships.  The "mob"  in  his  area
    found out what he was doing and attacked him on 5  November  2010.   He
    was hospitalised on that occasion for two days.

5.   In July 2011 he was attacked again when he was with a friend who was  a
    known homosexual.  The friend fell as they tried to run  away  and  was
    beaten by the mob. He died a week  later.   The  appellant  received  a
    letter from the local council about his activities with homosexuals  in
    Uganda including a summons to attend before them which he ignored.  The
    council suggested that he leave the area, which he did.

6.   In January 2011 he returned briefly to his home.  Two  members  of  the
    council arrived and told him he should leave his home within two  days.
    In June 2014, after he had returned to Britain,  his  family  home  was
    attacked and demolished.  On 20 September 2014 a newspaper article  was
    published stating that the appellant was engaging in homosexuality  and
    that he had left the country and that his whereabouts were unknown.

7.   Judge O'Garro set out her findings in  paragraphs  46  onwards  of  the
    determination, summarising his claim that if he were returned to Uganda
     he would be killed by a mob of men because  he  was  perceived  to  be
    homosexual and because he had supported homosexuals in his work in  the
    community where he lived. She found  that  the  appellant's  claim  was
    credible, stating that he had given a consistent and  credible  account
    of the persecution he had suffered in Uganda which was  the  reason  he
    had come to Britain.  She accepted that the appellant had worked in the
    community as a youth  worker  with  needy  and  vulnerable  people  and
    through helping a friend whom he had found out was homosexual and begun
    to extend his work to helping youths who were homosexual and who  asked
    for his help.  Taking into account the evidence of a supporting witness
    she accepted that the appellant supported homosexuals as  part  of  his
    work with vulnerable youths in Uganda and that this was the reason  why
    he had been attacked. She referred to background documentation relating
    to the treatment of homosexuals in Uganda  and  in  paragraph  57  said
    that:-

         "It is clear from the objective  evidence,  homosexuals  and  their
         supporters can be subject to mob violence in Uganda and bearing  in
         mind the low threshold in asylum cases I find that the  appellant's
         account is both internally and externally consistent as  it  is  in
         fact supported by the background evidence in material respects."

8.   She quoted at length from the COIS report at paragraphs 2.5.4  onwards.
    She considered the issue of internal relocation, referring to  evidence
    of the pursuit of suspected LGBTI persons.  However  in  paragraphs  67
    she stated:-

         "I find this evidence helpful although it relates  to  persons  who
         are practising homosexuals.  The appellant is not a homosexual  and
         as such, I see no reason why he cannot return to Uganda and move to
         another area, where he would not be known."

 9.   The judge went on to  state  that  she  had  reached  that  conclusion
    having taking into account the  fact  that  the  appellant's  name  and
    photograph had been  in national newspapers where it was  alleged  that
    he was homosexual, however she stated that  that  was  not  front  page
    news. She stated that the article had been "tucked away in  the  middle
    of the newspaper" and stated that therefore it could "quite easily"  be
    overlooked by readers.

10.  She noted that the appellant had said that he would still  continue  to
    help homosexuals  on  return  but  said  that  he  no  longer  had  the
    organisation which enabled him to engage with youths, some of whom were
    homosexual, which had brought him to the attention of the community  in
    the first place.  She stated that the appellant had not shown  that  he
    would be persecuted on return to Uganda. She  therefore  dismissed  the
    appeal.

11.   The grounds of appeal referred to the evidence accepted by the  judge.
     They referred to the fact that it had been accepted that the appellant
    had  already  been  persecuted  and  to  the  perception  that  he  was
    homosexual. It was claimed that there had not been  anxious scrutiny of
    the issue.

12.   In granting permission to appeal  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Froom stated:-

         "The appellant claimed that he feared persecution  as  a  perceived
         homosexual. The judge found the appellant had  given  a  consistent
         and credible account of past persecution [52].   She  accepted  the
         evidence of a witness that the appellant had given  advice  to  gay
         youths as  part  of  his  work  in  Uganda  [54].   She  noted  the
         background evidence showed that homosexuals  and  their  supporters
         could be subject to mob violence [57] and that this had happened to
         the appellant on two occasions [58].  She accepted the  appellant's
         home had been demolished by mob [60].   The  appellant  provides  a
         newspaper article in which he is identified as a homosexual and the
         judge found the newspaper was genuine [62]. However  she  dismissed
         the appeal because the appellant was not  a  practising  homosexual
         and he could live in another part of Uganda where he was not  known
         [67].  I grant permission to appeal because it is arguable that the
         judge failed to apply paragraph 339K and she  does  not  appear  to
         have  considered  that  the  appellant  continued  to   work   with
         homosexuals on return."

13.   At the hearing of the appeal  I  asked  Mr  Logo  if  the  appellant's
    detention had been considered under the general detention criteria.  He
    told me that it had and that a letter explaining why it was  considered
    he met those criteria had been sent to the appellant. The reasons given
    were that the appellant had used verbal deception on entry  to  Britain
    when he had not claimed asylum at the airport, that he had   delayed in
    claiming asylum and that he was at risk of absconding  because  he  did
    not have  enough close ties here to ensure that he would remain in  one
    place.  Mr Logo accepted that there was no  cross  appeal  or  Rule  24
    Notice and that therefore he could not agued that the Judge's  findings
    of fact were wrong.

14.    In reply Mr Jaffar pointed out that the appellant's  house  had  been
    destroyed after he had returned to Britain, he had not  overstayed  and
    that he had ties here - the members of his church who were  present  in
    court were part of his community. He asserted that the letter  sent  to
    the  appellant  relating  to   the   general   detention   policy   was
    insufficiently reasoned.

15.    Mr Jaffar referred to the findings of the  Judge  and  the  grant  of
    permission by Judge Froom which summarised those.   He  said  that  the
    Judge had failed to consider the evidence  of  the  appellant  that  he
    would continue to   assist homosexual  youths,  that  a  newspaper  had
    asserted that the appellant was homosexual and that the  provisions  of
    paragraph 339k made it clear that that  past  persecution  is  a  clear
    indication of future persecution. .

16.   Mr Logo argued that the decision of the Judge  was  fully  sustainable
    and that the reasons she had given for finding that the appellant could
    relocate were sufficient to show that he would not be  likely  to  face
    persecution in another part of the  country.  He  emphasised  that  the
    appellant is not homosexual and  that  he  is  no  longer  running  the
    support group which he had organised in the past.

Discussion

17.   Mr Jaffar  did  not  argued  that  these  proceedings,  following  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in R (on the application of)  Detention
    Action [2014] EWCA Civ 1634, are void ab initio and I consider that  he
    was correct not to do so.

18.    In considering the determination  I  note  that  the  Judge,  as  was
    summarised by Judge Froom when granting permission to  appeal,  made  a
    large number of positive findings regarding the claim of the  appellant
    and in effect accepted the entirety  of  the  appellant's  claim.   The
    reality is that, although the  appellant  is  not  homosexual,  it  was
    accepted that he had been perceived as such  and  indeed  that  he  had
    suffered  persecution  in  the  past.   Past  persecution  is  a  clear
    indicator of future persecution, particularly given that it is accepted
    that the appellant would repeat the  activity  -  that  of  caring  and
    counselling for young men who are homosexual - on return.   I  consider
    therefore that there are material error of law in the determination  of
    the judge in that she did  not  place  weight  on  those  factors  when
    assessing the risk on return or  indeed  the  possibility  of  internal
    relocation or the  fact  that  even  should  the  appellant  internally
    relocate there is nothing to indicate that in another part of Uganda he
    would not suffer the same treatment  as  that  which  he  had  suffered
    before, which she had accepted amounted to persecution.  Moreover,  she
    had not placed weight on the fact that it was not just  the  "mob"  who
    had attacked the appellant but also the local council had told  him  he
    should leave the area.

18.   I  therefore  consider  that  it  is  appropriate  to  set  aside  the
    determination of the judge. However, I consider that  the  findings  of
    fact of the judge relating to  the  appellant's  past  persecution  and
    indeed his credibility regarding what has happened to him in  the  past
    were well reasoned.  I therefore consider that  her  findings  of  fact
    should stand.  There remains therefore the issue, central to any asylum
    appeal, as to whether or not the appellant would suffer persecution  in
    the future given what has happened in  the  past  and  whether  or  not
    internal  relocation  would  be  open  to  him.   Although   there   is
    considerable  information  in  the  letter  of  refusal  regarding  the
    evidence of the persecution of homosexuals in Uganda,  bearing in  mind
    the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  R  (on  the  application  of)
    Detention Action  I consider that it would be appropriate  for  further
    time to be given for the appellant to obtain evidence on  those  issues
    and I therefore consider it appropriate to take this appeal out of  the
    fast track - I consider that the provisions of Rule 30  of  the  Asylum
    and Immigration  Tribunal  (Fast Track Procedure) Rules 2005 are met.

Decision.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  dismissing  this  appeal  is
therefore set aside. However her findings in relation  to  past  persecution
including her findings of the  general  credibility  of  the  appellant  are
preserved.
This appeal is removed from the fast track process.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
