
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09382/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2016                   |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     tp
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. M. Azmi of Counsel, instructed by Coventry Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cox  promulgated  on  18  February  2015  in  which  she
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.

 2. I have made an anonymity order, following that made in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "At paragraph 22 of the determination the judge lists some  of  the
         abuse the appellant  suffered,  finding  this  did  not  amount  to
         persecution but had he considered the age of the appellant and  his
         working experiences in Vietnam when  considering  persecution,  his
         finding might have been different.  He seems to have  given  little
         weight to the appellant's age when he worked  on  the  construction
         site, (paragraph 24), although he notes that the  minimum  age  for
         employment in Vietnam is 18.  The judge appears to  have  made  his
         decision based on the date of August 2016 instead of  the  date  of
         the hearing."

 4. In respect of the second ground referred to above, that the judge  made
    the decision based on the wrong date, Mr. Mills stated that he was  not
    relying on paragraph 3 of the Rule 24 response.  He conceded that there
    was an error of law in paragraph [30] of  the  decision  where  it  was
    clear that the judge had not decided the potential for risk  on  return
    at the date of the hearing, but had considered the risk  on  return  at
    the end of the period of discretionary leave.

 5. Paragraph [30] states:

         "The law in Vietnam sets the minimum age for employment at 18,  and
         younger employees and vocational trading is permitted, in order  to
         comply with the law, special considerations  and  requirements  are
         set out in the evidence in the Appellant's objective  bundle.   The
         government in Vietnam is undertaking work to address the  risks  to
         children but there are, I find, nevertheless, continuing risks  and
         the government  has  no  yet  been  successful  in  comprehensively
         addressing  risks   to   unaccompanied/orphaned   children.    This
         Appellant has however been granted discretionary leave to remain in
         the United Kingdom until the 4th of August 2016, at which stage  he
         will be 17 and a half years of age.  He will then be within  months
         of obtaining  his  majority,  having  enjoyed  more  than  2  years
         education in the United Kingdom, although he will remain  a  minor.
         I not find he is at risk  as  a  result  of  his  membership  of  a
         particular social group."

 6. I find that it is clear from this that the judge has not considered the
    risk on return at the date of the hearing,  but  at  the  date  of  the
    expiry of the Appellant's discretionary leave when he will be 17 and  a
    half years old.  I find that this is a material error of law.

 7. However, there remains the other ground referred to  in  the  grant  of
    permission, which refers to the judge's finding that the Appellant  had
    not experienced persecution  in  Vietnam.   This  is  relevant  to  any
    remaking of the decision regarding risk on return.  I heard submissions
    on this point from both representatives, following which I reserved  my
    decision.

Submissions

 8. Mr. Azmi relied on paragraph 5 of the grounds of appeal,  the  skeleton
    argument before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  objective  evidence
    provided to the First-tier Tribunal, the relevant parts  of  which  are
    set out in the "Key Passage Index" (pages 63 to 68).   In  relation  to
    future risk, he submitted that paragraph [30] contained a finding  that
    there were continuing risks for unaccompanied orphan children.

 9. Mr. Mills submitted that adequate reasons had been  given  for  finding
    that the Appellant had not  experienced  persecution  in  Vietnam,  and
    submitted that these findings should  be  upheld  (paragraphs  [22]  to
    [27]).  He submitted that the decision should be remade on the basis of
    the Appellant's risk on return as at the date  of  the  hearing  as  an
    individual who had not previously suffered persecution.  In relation to
    future risk, he submitted that the background evidence  was  not  clear
    cut enough to show that the Appellant would be at  risk  on  return  by
    virtue of being an unaccompanied minor.  He submitted  that  the  issue
    remained of whether the government did enough for an individual in  the
    Appellant's circumstances.  He provided no further evidence.

Error of law

10. I have found above that the decision contains an error of  law  in  the
    consideration of the Appellant's  risk  on  return,  as  the  risk  was
    considered  at  the  wrong  date.   However,  also  relevant   to   any
    consideration of risk on return is the extent to  which  the  Appellant
    has previously suffered persecution in Vietnam, paragraph 339K  of  the
    immigration rules.

11. The Respondent accepted the general credibility of the Appellant and at
    paragraph [17] the judge states that the  Appellant's  credibility  was
    not at issue.

12. Paragraph [22] states:

         "However, whilst I find that the Appellant has been shouted  at  by
         an employer and that he was provided with money only for  clothing,
         sworn at on occasion and worked very long hours, I do not find that
         that treatment is capable of amounting to persecution."

13. I find that the judge has not factored into her  consideration  of  the
    Appellant's treatment the fact that at the time he was  only  12  years
    old, orphaned and homeless.  I find that the judge has  not  considered
    the vulnerability of the Appellant at the time owing  to  his  age.   I
    find that the age of the Appellant is  critical  to  a  finding  as  to
    whether or not the treatment amounted to persecution.

14. In paragraph [24] the judge considered the Appellant's employment on  a
    construction site.  While acknowledging that the  Appellant  was  "much
    younger" than the other construction workers, the judge does  not  find
    that  this  work  and  the  nature  of  the  employment   amounted   to
    persecution.  However, although stating that  the  Appellant  was  much
    younger than the other workers, there is no consideration of  the  fact
    that the Appellant at the time was only 12 or 13 years old.

15. I find that the judge has failed  to  take  into  account  all  of  the
    evidence when coming to her finding that the Appellant's experiences in
    Vietnam did not amount to persecution.  I find that the failure of  the
    judge to take into account the Appellant's age is a material  error  of
    law.

Remaking

16. The Appellant did not give evidence at the hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  As acknowledged in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter,  the
    Appellant's credibility was not at issue.   The  Respondent  considered
    that the Appellant's general credibility  had  been  established  [23].
    The Respondent accepted that the Appellant's parents  died  in  floods,
    that he has no family in Vietnam, and that his  former  employer  would
    shout and swear at him [25].  When  summarising  what  she  accepts  at
    paragraph [25], the Respondent does not set out all of his account, but
    this is summarised at paragraph [3] of the reasons for refusal  letter.
    Given  that  the  Respondent  has  accepted  the  Appellant's   general
    credibility, and that she has not rejected any part of the  Appellant's
    claim, I find that the Respondent has  accepted  the  entirety  of  the
    Appellant's account and has accepted that the Appellant also worked  on
    a construction site for a year in Vietnam.

17. Given that there are no credibility issues and that the Respondent  has
    accepted the Appellant's account, the issue is  whether  the  treatment
    that the Appellant received as described by him, and as accepted by the
    Respondent, was capable of amounting to  persecution.   The  subsequent
    issue is whether or not the Appellant faces a risk on return to Vietnam
    either as  an  orphaned  minor  with  no  family  in  Vietnam  who  has
    previously suffered persecution, or simply by virtue of the  fact  that
    he would be returning to Vietnam as an orphaned minor with no family.

Past persecution

18. I find that the Appellant worked in a restaurant  for  seven  to  eight
    months, for between 13 and 15 hours a day, seven days a week.   I  find
    that he was 12 years old at the time.  I find that he was given  enough
    money only to buy clothes.  I find that he received verbal  abuse  from
    his employer and was made to do unreasonable things by him.

19. Given that the Appellant had been orphaned, that he was  homeless,  and
    that he had no family in Vietnam to whom he could turn, I find that  he
    was extremely vulnerable when he took the employment at the restaurant.
     I find that he was exploited by his employer.  I find that he was only
    paid a very small amount, and  that  he  was  not  able  to  leave  the
    restaurant premises on his own.  Equally as  significant  as  the  fact
    that the Appellant was sworn at by his employer is the fact that  as  a
    12-year-old boy with no family in Vietnam, he was put to  work  by  his
    employer for up to 15 hours a day, seven days a week, for  very  little
    pay, and was not able to leave the premises on his own.   I  find  that
    this is treatment capable of amounting to persecution  given  the  very
    young age of the Appellant, and his extreme vulnerability.

20. I find that the Appellant then worked on a construction site for a year
    where he did jobs such as carrying stones.  I find that he was a  minor
    at the time aged 12 or 13.  He worked seven days a week from around 7am
    to around 6pm.  He was only allowed a day off when he  was  sick.   The
    Appellant said in his witness statement that he got  very  tired  doing
    the job and he was scared of being yelled at.   He  said  that  he  was
    desperate to leave [paragraph 20].  I find that although  he  was  paid
    better for doing this job than he had been paid at the  restaurant,  he
    was still a minor who should have not been working  on  a  construction
    site given that the minimum age from  employment  was  18.   He  worked
    seven days a week and was only allowed time off when he  was  sick.   I
    find that given his age, and given the nature of the work and the hours
    of work, that this is treatment capable of amounting to persecution.

Risk on return

21. I find that the Appellant would be returning  to  Vietnam  as  a  minor
    orphan, with no family support, having previously suffered persecution.
     In considering the risk on return, I  have  carefully  considered  the
    evidence provided by the Appellant's representative, in particular that
    in the Key Passage Index.

22. Paragraph 4.2 of the Respondent's Operational Guidance  Note:  Vietnam,
    June 2013 states:

         "At present there is insufficient information to be satisfied  that
         there  are  adequate  alternative  reception,  support   and   care
         arrangements in place for minors with no family in Vietnam.   Those
         who  cannot  be  returned  should  be  considered  for   leave   as
         Unaccompanied Asylum Seeking Children".

23. The Respondent accepts that the Appellant is a minor.  She accepts that
    his parents were killed in floods when he was about 12 years old.   She
    accepts that he does not have any family  in  Vietnam.   Therefore  the
    Respondent's own Operational Guidance Note indicates  that,  given  his
    circumstances, the Appellant cannot be returned.

24. I have also considered the evidence from the US  Department  of  State,
    Trafficking in Persons Report 2014: Vietnam, which states:

         "Children are subjected to forced street hawking,  forced  begging,
         or forced labor in restaurants in major urban centers  of  Vietnam.
         NGOs report  that  the  approximately  22,000  street  children  in
         Vietnam, as well as children with disabilities, are at an increased
         risk of trafficking" (page 45).

25. The US Department of  State,  2013  Country  Reports  on  Human  Rights
    Practices: Vietnam states:

         "Independent NGOs estimated that 23,000- 25,000 children  lived  on
         the streets and were sometimes abused or harassed by police"  (page
         47).

    Later the same report states:

         "MOLISA is responsible for enforcing child labor laws and policies.
           Government  officials  may  fine  and,  in  cases   of   criminal
         violations, prosecute  employers  who  violate  child  labor  laws.
         Generally,  the  government  committed  insufficient  resources  to
         enforce  effectively  laws  that  provide  for  children's  safety,
         especially for children working in mines and as domestic  servants.
         MOLISA  maintained  that  more  than  25,000  children  worked   in
         hazardous conditions countrywide; international observers  believed
         the actual figure was higher."

26. The Country of Origin Information Report, Vietnam, August  2013  quoted
    from the UN Committee on the Rights of  the  Child,  Sixtieth  session,
    where it was noted:

         "The Committee is concerned about the lack of reliable  information
         on children deprived of their family environment, whether they  are
         in street situations,  orphans,  abandoned  children  or  displaced
         children, including information on the identification  of  children
         in such situations, on preventative measures to limit the number of
         these children, and on  efforts  to  improve  their  situation  and
         reintegrate the children with their families" (paragraph 23.16).

27. I find the Appellant has suffered persecution in the past  when  at  12
    years old he was forced to work in a restaurant  for  little  pay,  for
    long hours, and without being able to leave the premises alone.  I find
    he then worked on a construction site when he was 12 and 13 years  old.
    I find that it is reasonably  likely,  given  the  evidence  as  quoted
    above, that the Appellant would suffer persecution of this  kind  again
    on return to Vietnam, taking into account the evidence above, including
    the Respondent's own Operational Guidance Note which states that  there
    is insufficient information to be satisfied that there are  alternative
    support and care arrangements for minors with no family in Vietnam.

28. I find that the Appellant has demonstrated that there is  a  real  risk
    that he will suffer persecution on return to Vietnam, and so his  claim
    succeeds on asylum grounds.  As I have  allowed  his  claim  on  asylum
    grounds,  I  do  not  need  to  consider  his  claim  to   humanitarian
    protection.

Notice of decision

    The decision involves the making of an error on a point of  law  and  I
    set it aside.

    I remake  the  decision  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 27 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
