


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
AA/10488/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 3 September 2015                      |On 22 September 2015      |
|Prepared on 4 September 2015             |                          |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                  W. U. N.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Vaughan, Solicitor of NBS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom as a Tier  4  (General)
           Student on 8 June 2011 with leave to remain until  4  May  2013.
           She claimed asylum on  4  October  2012.  That  application  was
           refused on 18 November 2014, and since she  did  not  appear  to
           meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules as a student  her
           leave was curtailed so that she had none, and in  consequence  a
           removal decision was made in relation to her by reference to s47
           of the 2006 Act.
        2. The Appellant appealed  to  the  Tribunal  against  the  removal
           decision and her appeal was heard on 16 January 2015, and it was
           dismissed on human rights grounds, but allowed  on  both  asylum
           and humanitarian protection grounds by decision of Judge Robson,
           promulgated on 10 February 2015.
        3. The Respondent's application to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
           permission to appeal  pointed  out  the  error  of  law  in  the
           decision to allow the appeal on  both  asylum  and  humanitarian
           protection grounds, and in addition argued that since the  Judge
           had specifically rejected the Appellant's account of why she was
           at risk of harm, and who she was at risk of harm from, there was
           in any event no proper basis upon which the  appeal  could  have
           been allowed on either of those grounds.
        4. That application was granted by Designated Judge Appleyard on 25
           February 2015.
        5. The Appellant has filed no Rule 24 Notice.
        6. Thus the matter comes before me.


      Error of Law?
        7. It is plain, and Mr Vaughan does not seek to suggest  otherwise,
           that the Judge made a material error of law in his  decision  to
           allow the appeal on  both  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
           grounds. He accepts that the issue for me is whether  only  one,
           or both, of those decisions are to be set aside and remade.
        8.  The  Appellant's  claim  was  that  after  she  graduated  from
           University in Pakistan she had married MR, but that  this  first
           marriage had failed so that she was divorced within a year. This
           first marriage was childless, and it  was  not  relied  upon  as
           giving rise to any risk of harm.
        9. The Appellant claimed to have entered a second marriage when she
           married ZH in Pakistan on 26 December 2010. She said that he was
           a first cousin, who was also a divorcee, with a son from his own
           first marriage, who lived with them after their marriage.
       10. The Appellant claimed to have been supported by ZH in pursuing a
           professional education in the UK as an accountant, so  that  she
           obtained entry clearance as a student with the financial support
           and encouragement of ZH, even though he was to remain living  in
           Pakistan.
       11. Having come to the UK on 8 June 2011 the Appellant claimed  that
           within days of arrival she had met S at  a  bus  stop,  and  had
           commenced an extra-marital affair with  him.  She  claimed  that
           this resulted in her conceiving an illegitimate child with S  on
           27 June 2011. Thus she claimed that the father of the  son  born
           on 20 March 2012 was S, even though she accepted  that  she  had
           declared the father to  be  ZH  when  registering  that  child's
           birth.
       12. Upon arrival in the UK the Appellant accepted that she had lived
           in the household of MWJ, also one of her  first  cousins  -  she
           said as a lodger. MWJ is described as a nephew  of  her  husband
           ZH. If MWJ is truly her first cousin, and if ZH  is  also  truly
           her first cousin, one would expect MWJ to be a first  cousin  of
           ZH - although it is possible I suppose that he is both.
       13. The Appellant claimed that her affair with S remained  a  secret
           from her cousin MWJ, and also  from  her  husband  and  extended
           family. She claimed that the affair continued after the birth of
           the first child, and that she once again quickly  fell  pregnant
           to S, with the result that she gave birth to a  daughter  on  12
           February 2013 who was also fathered by S. By  the  date  of  the
           hearing she claimed to be pregnant to S once again,  and  to  be
           bearing twins.
       14. The Appellant claimed that she had been able to persuade both ZH
           her husband, and her cousin MWJ, that ZH was the father  of  her
           son, on the basis that it was just possible  she  had  conceived
           this child immediately  prior  to  travelling  to  the  UK.  She
           claimed however that after her son's birth her affair with S was
           discovered by MWJ, who in turn informed ZH. Thus her affair  was
           known to ZH by May  2012  with  the  result  that  ZH  began  to
           threaten to kill both the Appellant and her  two  children  upon
           return to Pakistan. Despite this the Appellant accepted that she
           continued to  live  with,  and  to  be  supported  by  MWJ.  Her
           explanation for  MWJ's  conduct  being  that  the  rest  of  the
           extended family did not know that he was doing so.
       15. The Appellant accepted that she had  not  attended  her  college
           since 7 February 2012.
       16. The Judge noted that neither S nor MWJ attended the hearing, and
           that neither of them had  given  any  written  evidence  on  her
           behalf. Having heard the Appellant give evidence he rejected  as
           untrue, and as a fabrication,  the  following  elements  of  her
           claim;
                    a) to have commenced an extra-marital affair within days
                       of arrival in the UK,
                    b) to have pursued an extra-marital affair with S,
                    c) that S was the father of any of her children,
                    d) that her relationship with the various members of her
                       extended family had broken down, and
                    e) that ZH had uttered any threats against  her  mother,
                       herself, or her children [56-62].
       17. The Respondent raised no challenge to these adverse  credibility
           findings, and nor has the Appellant sought  to  do  so.  On  the
           basis of these clear and well reasoned findings of  fact  (which
           were well open to the Judge on  the  evidence  before  him)  the
           Respondent argues that there was simply no basis upon which  the
           Judge could properly go on to find either that the Appellant had
           been  undertaking  extra-marital  affairs  with   any   as   yet
           unidentified man, or, that she  faced  any  risk  of  harm  upon
           return to Pakistan. That was not after all, her claim.
       18. There is considerable force in that argument, and it is very far
           from clear to me how the Judge persuaded himself in the light of
           his clear findings of fact that the Appellant must have indulged
           in extra-marital affairs in  order  to  conceive  her  children,
           and/or that she would be perceived upon return  to  Pakistan  of
           having done so, and/or that she would  be  at  risk  of  "honour
           killing" at the hands of unidentified individuals [67].
       19. Once the Judge had rejected on the applicable lower standard  of
           proof the core of the  Appellant's  account  as  untrue,  as  he
           clearly did, there was simply nothing left of her claim that she
           faced a real risk of harm upon return. The  Judge  rejected  the
           claim that any of her children were illegitimate.  She  had  not
           told the truth about having an extra marital affair with S,  who
           was not their father. Despite the birth of two children  in  the
           UK, and her obvious pregnancy by the date of hearing (apparently
           with twins) the Judge found that she had not fallen out with any
           member of her extended family in either the UK, or Pakistan. Her
           husband as her  first  cousin  was  plainly  a  member  of  that
           extended family group. She continued to live  with,  and  to  be
           supported by, a male member of that extended family group.
       20. In the light of these findings there is simply no room  for  any
           inference  in  her  favour  that  any  of   her   children   are
           illegitimate, or  would  be  perceived  to  be  illegitimate  by
           anyone. Any  such  inference  would  be  inconsistent  with  the
           finding that they were not, and that she had not fallen out with
           any member of her extended family, and thus perverse. There  was
           no basis upon which the Judge could properly draw  an  inference
           that the children would be perceived  by  third  parties  to  be
           illegitimate upon return to Pakistan. Finally, if  she  remained
           on good terms with all the members of her extended family, as he
           had found, then there was no basis upon  which  he  could  infer
           that she was at risk of an "honour killing" from one of them.
       21. Mr Vaughan recognised the difficulties he faced in defending the
           decision to allow the appeal on asylum grounds, in the light  of
           the adverse credibility findings. I offered him the  opportunity
           to consider whether there was any  basis  upon  which  he  could
           argue that they were flawed, and stood the appeal down to  allow
           him to do so. When the appeal was called  on  once  more  I  was
           informed that he did not seek to argue that any of  the  adverse
           credibility findings were flawed.
       22. In the circumstances I set  aside  both  the  decisions  on  the
           asylum and the humanitarian protection appeals and remake  those
           decisions in the light  of  the  preserved  adverse  credibility
           findings.


      The decisions remade
       23. Even on the applicable low standard of proof I am not  satisfied
           that there is any basis upon which the  Appellant  can  properly
           argue that either she, or any of her children, are at risk of an
           "honour killing" from any member of her extended family  in  the
           event of her return to Pakistan. The  Judge  specifically  found
           that she remained on good terms with all of her extended family.
       24. The Appellant says that she remains married to ZH, a  member  of
           her extended family, and that she is not  divorced  from  him  -
           those  aspects  of  her  claim  were  not  rejected.  The  Judge
           specifically reject the claim that ZH had  threatened  both  the
           Appellant, her children, and her mother. In  the  circumstances,
           since ZH is a member of her extended family, it  is  clear  that
           the Judge's finding was that she remained  on  good  terms  with
           him, and faced no risk of harm from him.
       25. In the circumstances the Appellant failed to  establish  on  the
           applicable low standard of proof that she faced any risk of harm
           from either ZH or any other member of her extended family.
       26. It follows that that the Appellant has failed  to  establish  on
           the applicable low standard of proof that  either  she,  or  her
           children, face any risk of murder at  the  hands  of  non  state
           agents, on the basis that she will upon return be  perceived  to
           have borne illegitimate children to S. There is simply no  basis
           upon which a finding could sensibly be made  that  such  a  risk
           existed in the light of the Judge's adverse  findings,  and  the
           finding that she remained in good terms with her husband and all
           of the other members of her extended family. The  same  must  go
           for the claim that she faced a risk of prosecution at the  hands
           of the state, as a perceived adulterer; there would be no-one to
           initiate such a prosecution, and no basis upon which to do so.
       27. It is plain from  the  Judge's  findings  that  it  is  entirely
           possible that the Appellant is married to a man who  has  either
           visited her in the UK, or who has been living with  her  in  the
           UK. There is no proper evidential basis for any assumption  that
           any of her children are illegitimate in the light of the adverse
           findings. Having rejected the claim to have had an extra-marital
           affair with S, and to have rejected the claim  that  S  was  the
           father of the children, the Judge appears to have  proceeded  in
           the closing paragraphs of his decision on the basis that it  was
           possible these children were the result of extra-marital affairs
           with one or more men whose identity she  has  yet  to  disclose.
           That was not her case, and there was no proper basis upon  which
           such an inference could be drawn.
       28. In  the  circumstances  I  reject  Mr  Vaughan's  argument  that
           notwithstanding the Judge's adverse credibility  findings  there
           is a sound evidential basis upon which I  could  find  that  the
           Appellant  was  at  risk  of  harm  upon  return  to   Pakistan.
           Accordingly I remake the decisions so as  to  dismiss  both  the
           asylum appeal and the  humanitarian  protection  appeal.  It  is
           plain that it is in the best interests of these infant  children
           to remain with their mother. She has not established  that  they
           are entitled to British citizenship, and the Respondent  has  no
           obligation to provide for them and to  educate  them.  Both  the
           Appellant and her children can be returned in safety as a family
           group to  the  care  and  support  of  her  extended  family  in
           Pakistan.



   DECISION


      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  10
      February 2015 contains an error of law in the decision  to  allow  the
      Appellant's appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds which
      require that decision to be set aside and remade. There is no error of
      law in the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal on human  rights
      grounds and that decision is confirmed.


      I remake the decision so as to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.



   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 4 September 2015


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.





   Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 4 September 2015



