
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10150/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 January 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     SS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Muquit, Counsel, instructed by A & P
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hussain promulgated  on  1  October  2015  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.

 2. I have made an anonymity direction, following that which  was  made  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the judge had erred in failing to consider the report of  Dr.  Lawrence
    in his finding that the Appellant was not credible.   It  was  arguable
    that the credibility findings were flawed.

 4. At the hearing I heard submissions from both representatives, following
    which I announced that I found the decision involved the making  of  an
    error of law.  I set the decision aside and remitted it to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for rehearing.  My full reasons are set out below.

Error of law

 5. The judge deals with the credibility of the Appellant in the paragraphs
    entitled "Discussion" [21] to [39].  The report of Professor Lingam  is
    considered in this context, but this is the only medical evidence which
    is considered in the discussion of the Appellant's  asylum  claim.   At
    paragraph [40] the judge turns  to  addressing  the  Appellant's  claim
    under Article 8.  Paragraph [42] states:

         "The appellant produced  a  medical  report  from  Dr  Lawrence,  a
         consultant psychiatrist about the Post Traumatic Stress Disorder he
         suffered whilst in detention in Sri Lanka.  As I have found that he
         was not detained as  claimed,  such  PTSD  as  he  has,  cannot  be
         attributed to that time. In any event,  Dr  Lawrence's  report  was
         prepared some 9 months prior to the  hearing.  In  evidence  before
         me, the appellant was  lucid  and  able  to  answer  questions  and
         withstand cross-examination.  I did not consider his  mental  heath
         problems  such  as  they  were,  made  his  removal  to  Sri  Lanka
         disproportionate."

 6. Dr. Lawrence's report is considered by the judge solely in relation  to
    the Appellant's Article 8 claim.  It is not referred to at  all  during
    the discussion of the Appellant's  asylum  claim,  as  accepted  by  Ms
    Fijiwala.  However, in his report Dr. Lawrence  specifically  addressed
    the Appellant's Post Traumatic Stress  Disorder  by  reference  to  the
    events which took place in Sri Lanka.   The  report  was  not  produced
    solely for the purposes of the Appellant's Article  8  claim,  but  was
    produced as evidence by the Appellant in relation to the  events  which
    occurred in Sri Lanka, which formed the basis of the asylum claim.

 7. Dr. Lawrence's report is found in the Appellant's supplementary  bundle
    prepared for the First-tier Tribunal hearing (pages  15  to  37).   Dr.
    Lawrence, a consultant in general adult psychiatry,  addresses  in  his
    report the history of what has happened  to  the  Appellant.   He  then
    assesses his mental state and comes to his conclusion on page  26.   On
    page 28 he considers whether the trauma that  the  Appellant  describes
    comes from another possible cause.

 8. I was referred to the case of Mibanga (Ethiopia)  [2005]  UKAIT  00164.
    Ms Fijiwala submitted that this was a case where the medical report had
    been considered out of order, and  therefore  it  was  not  a  material
    error.  However, I find that the report of Dr. Lawrence  has  not  been
    considered at all within the asylum context.

 9. I find that all of the evidence provided by  the  Appellant  should  be
    considered in assessing his credibility, and a piece  of  evidence  put
    forward by the Appellant has not been taken into account  at  all.   Ms
    Fijiwala submitted that the same finding would have been made regarding
    asylum as had been made in relation to Article  8  in  paragraph  [42],
    i.e. that the Appellant was not detained as claimed.  However, had  the
    report of Dr. Lawrence been considered in  the  round  with  the  other
    evidence regarding credibility, I find that this would not  necessarily
    be the case.  The  report  is  considered  discretely  in  relation  to
    Article 8 when the finding as to credibility has already been made.

10. I find that the judge erred in failing  to  take  account  of  all  the
    relevant evidence when making his credibility findings.  I find that he
    reached a negative view of the Appellant's credibility  without  taking
    account of all of the evidence provided.  I find that the report of Dr.
    Lawrence was evidence which was  relevant  to  the  Appellant's  asylum
    claim.

11. In relation to the treatment of Professor Lingam's report  (grounds  of
    appeal, paragraph [3] onwards), at paragraph [28] the judge states that
    Professor Lingam "had gone beyond his remit as identified on page 4  of
    his report as well as his expertise because he made detailed  reference
    to "mind scars" at the end of his report".  However, what the  decision
    does not state is that Professor Lingam specifically states that he has
    not investigated the possibility of mind scars (paragraph 4, page  36).
    Further,  in  the  conclusion  on  page  36  he  states:  "I  have  not
    investigated the mental health issues."  He states that he is concerned
    about the Appellant's mental health, and notes  that  he  is  confused,
    which may be an issue from mind scars.  He states that he may be having
    PTSD.  However, this is to be read against the backdrop of the  earlier
    statement that he has not investigated the possibility of  mind  scars,
    and that the Appellant may need a full psychiatric assessment.  Indeed,
    the full psychiatric assessment was then carried out by  Dr.  Lawrence,
    which report was not considered by the judge in relation to asylum.

12. I find that the decision involved the making of a material error of law
    in the failure to consider the report of Dr Lawrence  in  consideration
    of the Appellant's asylum claim and the assessment of his  credibility.
    I find that it was not correct to state that Professor Lingam  was  not
    objective  and  had  gone  beyond  his  remit,  as  it  is  clear  from
    Professor's Lingam's report that he did not investigate the Appellant's
    mental health.

Notice of Decision

The decision involves the making of an error of law.   I  set  the  decision
    aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 5 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
