
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)      Appeal Number: AA/10178/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 2 July 2015                       |On 10 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                                     P E
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



    Representation:
For the Appellant:    Mr A Burrett of Counsel instructed by Wick & Co,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:   Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran. His appeal against the decision  of
    the respondent was heard by Judge Morrison, a judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, at Hatton Cross on 18 February 2015. He dismissed the  appeal
    for reasons he has given in his determination, which was promulgated on
    27 February 2015. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal and permission  was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal, Judge Macdonald for reasons he gave in  his  decision  of  25
    March 2015. The determinative part of  Judge  Macdonald's  decision  is
    "There may be little merit in most of the grounds  of  application  but
    the fact that Dr Kakhki saw the original documents arguably goes to the
    heart of the appellant's case that he  did  convert  from  Islam  which
    contention the judge rejected.  Accordingly  permission  to  appeal  is
    granted and in line with Ferrer (limited appeal grounds;  Alvi)  [2012]
    UKUT 00304 (IAC), permission is granted on all grounds.

 2. The core of the appellant's claim is that  he  was  born  in  a  Muslim
    family but none of his family was very religious. He felt persuaded  by
    a Christian neighbour, with encouragement from his  mother,  to  attend
    bible-reading classes in her home. His mother as well as his father had
    been supportive  of  the  appellant  attending  such  classes  and  had
    themselves attended the classes. This went on for about six months  and
    then the neighbour took them to her friends' house with a swimming pool
    with the intention of baptising them. As they were at this  house,  the
    Basij came and took his father away. The  appellant,  his  brother  and
    mother were not taken away. Only the  father  had  been  but  had  been
    released the next day and was told that if his family members were seen
    participating in Christian activities again, they would be  killed.  It
    was after that the family did not go to  Church  anymore.  A  few  days
    later he was told by his parents to pack some clothes and go  with  his
    neighbour's son named N. The two went by train to  Urumiya  from  where
    they were taken to Turkey by an agent who  had  been  arranged  by  his
    family and who accompanied him to the UK before disappearing. After his
    arrival in the UK the appellant had been attending various churches but
    had encountered language difficulties. He asserted that he was  working
    towards baptism and that if he  were  returned  to  Iran  he  would  be
    persecuted as he wished to follow the Christian faith.

 3. The respondent accepted that the appellant is a  citizen  of  Iran  and
    also that he is Christian. The respondent did not accept that he was  a
    convert to Christianity but had been brought up in a Christian  family.
    The respondent took the view that as an ethnic Christian  returning  to
    Iran the appellant would not be persecuted. The appellant's appeal  was
    dismissed. At the hearing of the appeal, the First-tier Judge  Morrison
    heard oral evidence from Pastor S and the appellant. In paragraph 20 of
    his determination the Judge said, "There were no credibility issues  in
    respect of the evidence given by Pastor S". Judge Morrison went  on  to
    say in paragraph  22  of  his  determination  that  "Having  considered
    carefully all the evidence I have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant's account in  relation  to  being  brought  up  in  a  Muslim
    household, his conversion and his claim that the Basij raided the villa
    where his baptism was taking place is a fabrication". In paragraphs  24
    to 38 the Judge gave his reasons for coming to the conclusion.

 4. I heard oral submissions from Mr Burrett of Counsel and Mr E Tufan.  Mr
    Burrett in the presence of the  appellant.  Mr  Burrett  amplified  his
    grounds of appeal upon which permission to  appeal  had  been  granted,
    giving particular importance to the argument that  the  expert  had  in
    fact seen the original  documents  rather  than  photocopies  as  Judge
    Morrison had believed and this mistake had led him to give less  weight
    than was appropriate to the report and findings of the expert. He  also
    argued that Judge Morrison was wrong to take the view that decisions in
    country guidance cases such as SZ and JM ([2008] UKAIT  00082)  applied
    to the facts of the present case as according to him the principles set
    out in HJ (Iran) ([2008] UKAIT 00044) had overtaken these. However,  as
    Judge Morrison recorded in his determination, Mr Burrett did not expand
    on this argument. He asked that I find a material error of law  in  the
    determination of Judge Morrison and allow the appeal.

 5. Mr Tufan argued that Judge Morrison had not made any errors of law  and
    even if there were an error in the determination it was  not  material.
    The conclusions drawn by Judge Morrison, he said, were  well  reasoned,
    not irrational or perverse. He asked that the  decision  be  upheld.  I
    reserved my decision which I now give.

 6. I have given most careful consideration to the lengthy written  grounds
    of appeal upon which permission had been granted, paying due  attention
    to the terms upon which permission had been granted. I am afraid I find
    do not find myself in agreement with the decision of Judge Macdonald, a
    designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal as he  said  in  the  final
    paragraph of his decision, "there may be little merit in  most  of  the
    grounds of application but the fact that Dr  Kakhki  saw  the  original
    documents arguably goes to the heart of the appellant's  case  that  he
    did  convert  from  Islam,  which  contention  the  judge  specifically
    rejected."  Having  examined  carefully  the  reasons  that  led  Judge
    Morrison to his conclusions adverse to  the  claim  of  the  appellant,
    including the carrying out of an appraisal of the report of the  expert
    Dr Kakhki, I am of the firm view that the  arguments  advanced  in  the
    grounds on this matter carry no weight. The reasons given by the  Judge
    for not accepting the claim of the appellant despite  the  findings  of
    the well-respected  expert  Dr  Kakhki  are  perfectly  sound  and  are
    supported by the evidence that was presented  to  him.  Judge  Morrison
    could not and would not have come to a different conclusion if  he  had
    realised that the expert had been presented  with  the  genuine  rather
    than photocopies of the documents. This is evident  from  the  care  he
    took in analysing all the evidence as set out in his determination. The
    assertion in the grounds of appeal relating to the  standard  of  proof
    used by Judge Morrison is again without substance. As can  be  seen  in
    paragraph 38 the Judge states, "I remind myself that the onus is on the
    appellant to establish their case to the  lower  standard  required  in
    these cases ..." The contents  of  paragraph  21  clearly  defeats  the
    ground that the Judge did not take account  of  the  appellant's  young
    age.

7.    In the circumstances I dismiss this appeal  since  the  appellant  has
    failed to establish that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of Judge Morrison, First Tier Tribunal Judge


K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 7 September 2015

