
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10005/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 February 2014                           |On 24 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                               ZAINUDDIN ARIF

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Blum, Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors (87    Kilburn)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Afghanistan, was  born  on  1  March
    1995.  Having entered the United Kingdom by lorry, he claimed asylum on
    arrival on 24 February 2009.  The respondent refused his claim  a  year
    later, on 25 February  2010,  but  granted  discretionary  leave  until
    September 2012, because he was a minor.

 2. On 1 September 2012, before the  expiry  of  his  existing  leave,  the
    appellant applied for further leave  to  remain,  renewing  his  asylum
    application.

 3. The respondent refused this application as well on 25 October 2013, and
    the refusal letter is dated the same day.   The  respondent  also  made
    removal directions under Section 47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 4. The appellant appealed against the refusal of  further  leave  and  his
    appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Maciel,  sitting  at
    Columbus House, Newport, on 5 December 2013.

 5. In a determination dated 11  December  2013,  and  promulgated  shortly
    thereafter, Judge Maciel dismissed the appellant's appeal not  only  on
    the  basis  that  he  did  not  qualify  for  asylum  or   humanitarian
    protection, but also under Article 8.   His claim under Article  8  had
    been advanced on the basis of his  relationship  to  a  Miss  Salik,  a
    British citizen.  I use the word "relationship" neutrally, because  one
    of the submissions now advanced on behalf  of  the  appellant  is  that
    Judge Maciel misunderstood his case, which was that he was "engaged" to
    Miss Salik, considering instead that the case  had  been   put  on  the
    basis that his relationship with that lady "was akin to marriage".

 6. The appellant's appeal on asylum grounds (and on the  grounds  that  he
    would  otherwise be at risk on return to Afghanistan) was dismissed  on
    the basis of adverse credibility findings which the judge made.

 7. The appellant now appeals against Judge Maciel's decision, leave having
    been  granted on 10 January 2014 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Saffer.
    As noted by Judge Saffer when setting  out  his  reasons  for  granting
    permission to appeal, "no application is  made  regarding  the  asylum,
    humanitarian protection or Article 3 findings or decisions",  which  as
    noted above, were founded on the  adverse  credibility  findings  which
    Judge Maciel made.  This appeal is limited  to  the  dismissal  of  the
    appellant's Article 8 claim.  It is submitted in the ground that  Judge
    Maciel's findings in respect of Article 8 are  vitiated  by  errors  of
    fact which she made.

 8. The errors which the judge is said to have made have been  set  out  in
    the grounds of appeal and in the  course  of  his  cogent  but  concise
    arguments before me, Mr Blum explained further their significance.   As
    the submissions made on behalf of both  parties  at  the  hearing  were
    recorded contemporaneously by myself,  and  are  contained  within  the
    Record of Proceedings which I made, in  which  I  attempted  to  record
    contemporaneously everything which was said, I shall not  set  out  all
    the arguments which were made in full, but shall refer  below  only  to
    those parts of the submissions which I need to record for the  purposes
    of this determination.  I have, however, had regard to everything which
    was said on behalf of both parties, as well as  to  all  the  documents
    which are contained within the file, when considering  whether  or  not
    there was a material error of law in Judge Maciel's determination  such
    that her decision must be remade.

 9. For the purposes of this determination, it is necessary for me only  to
    set out the more significant errors which it is said on behalf  of  the
    appellant that Judge Maciel made.

10. Both the appellant and Miss  Salik  gave  evidence  that  they  had  an
    intimate relationship.  Although this did   not  appear  to  have  been
    challenged on behalf of the respondent, and although the  appellant  in
    re-examination and Miss Salik in  cross-examination  claimed  they  had
    undergone an Islamic marriage, the judge rejected  this  evidence.   At
    paragraph 56, she states that "apart from what the appellant stated  in
    re-examination  and what Miss Salik stated in cross-examination,  there
    is no evidence of an Islamic marriage".  Judge Maciel does  not  appear
    to have made any finding with regard to the evidence which she  records
    at paragraph 28 has having been given by  Mr  Niazi,  said  to  be  the
    appellant's mother's cousin, that "he stated  that  he  went  with  his
    friends to Miss Salik's home and met with her parents and there was  an
    agreement for them to be married. A nikka ceremony was done in front of
    her parents".  He is also recorded as having stated after referring  to
    the nikka ceremony having been  done in front of Miss  Salik's  parents
    that "they have not had their 'big wedding day'".

11. Mr Niazi's evidence regarding this aspect of the appellant's  case  did
    however appear to have been accepted at paragraph 54 where Judge Maciel
    found

         "that although they have  undergone  what  Mr  Niazi  terms  as  an
         'Afghani marriage', Miss Salik had in fact stated she had not  done
         her 'big wedding' [and had] confirmed that by this she  meant  that
         she had not left her father's house to join her husband's home".

12. Judge Maciel then goes on to conclude that "this would  mean  that  she
    would not have an intimate relationship with the appellant".  It is the
    appellant's case that by so  finding  the  judge  was  making  cultural
    assumptions which  she  was  simply  not  entitled  to  make.   It  was
    submitted on behalf of the appellant in particular that as a matter  of
    fact intercourse is not prohibited between a couple once there has been
     an Islamic marriage, or "nikka", and there was  no  basis  upon  which
    the judge could  properly find that this appellant and Miss Salik would
    not have had an intimate relationship as  they  claim.   This  cultural
    assumption was said to have infected the rest of her findings as to the
    nature of the relationship.

13. The appellant in his statement had maintained  that  he  had  met  Miss
    Salik at a party which took place in London, when he was living outside
    London.   Judge Maciel at paragraph 56 of her determination  notes  (as
    one of her reasons for rejecting the case put forward on behalf of  the
    appellant) that "there is no evidence before me as to how the appellant
    found his way to a party in London when he has been cared for by Social
    Services  outside  London".    She  also  states  as  follows  in  this
    paragraph:

         "The appellant would have been  14 years old at the  time  that  he
         met Miss Salik who would  have  been  15  years  old.   I  find  it
         unlikely that Miss Salik would  have  been  at  a  party  with  her
         parents during which she would have been in  a  position  to  speak
         freely with the appellant."

14. Mr Blum in argument submitted that  the  judge's  assumption  that  the
    appellant would not have found his way to a party in London when he was
    being cared for by social services outside London and his finding  that
    it was unlikely that this couple would have been able to talk  to  each
    other freely at a party displayed two errors.  The first is that  there
    is a procedural impropriety, in that in a determination where  a  great
    deal related to what was said or done  by  the  parties,  it  does  not
    appear that the appellant was ever  asked how he made his  way  to  the
    party.  If an adverse  inference  was  going  to  be  made  because  of
    something which was never put, natural justice would have required that
    this be put to the appellant and Miss Salik to enable them to  give  an
    explanation, both in relation to the manner in which he  says  he  made
    his way to the party and the circumstances in  which  he  was  able  to
    speak to her.  This was a fundamental breach of natural justice.

15. The  other  criticism  which  must  be  made  of  this  aspect  of  the
    determination is that the judge was making a cultural assumption that a
    15 year old Muslim girl would not have been permitted to talk to a  boy
    at a party.   Again,  this  is  a  cultural  assumption  which  is  not
    supported by any reference to any evidence which was given.  It was the
    appellant's case that it is both dangerous and  impermissible  to  form
    conclusions  based  on  cultural  assumptions  in  circumstances  where
    neither party has been asked to explain how they were able to speak  to
    each other.

16. As the judge's finding at paragraph  62  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established a family life with Miss Salik was founded on these cultural
    assumption and procedural improprieties, these errors were material.

17. Mr Blum very sensibly did not suggest that the judge  would  have  been
    bound to come to a different conclusion had he considered the  evidence
    properly and had the  proceedings been fair, but in  the  circumstances
    of this case, the appellant did not have a  fair  trial.   Accordingly,
    there should be a rehearing as to Article 8 only; it was accepted  that
    there was no basis upon which the rejection of the  appellant's  asylum
    claim could  be challenged.

18. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Wilding emphasised that there had  been
    inconsistencies throughout the evidence, and  that  there  were  issues
    which arose as to when the evidence relating to there  having  been  an
    Islamic marriage had been  given.  The judge was entitled to reach  the
    findings she did because there had been a lack of evidence before  her.
    While Mr Wilding did accept  that  there  were  what  he  described  as
    "unfortunate aspects" within the determination, it was nonetheless  the
    respondent's case effectively that any errors were not material.

19.  In answer to a question from the Tribunal, Mr  Wilding  accepted  that
    the best way forward, if an error of law was found, was to  remit  this
    appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. In the course of  his  reply,  Mr  Blum  emphasised  that  the  judge's
    conclusion that there was no family life was dependent on  his  finding
    as to whether or not the appellant had been  able to  meet  Miss  Salik
    and the circumstances in which they met.  That was the core basis  upon
    which the claimed relationship developed.  If the judge had gone  wrong
    legally in  his assessment of this, even if she had been   entitled  to
    rely on other evidence as well, unless one could  say  she  could  only
    have reached the decision she did if the  errors  had  not  been  made,
    these errors are material.  On the facts of this case, it could not  be
    said that she must have reached the same conclusions.

Discussion

21. In my judgement, Mr Blum's substantive points are well-founded, and the
    criticisms which he made with regard to the determination  cannot  just
    be disregarded as "unfortunate aspects of that  determination".   I  do
    not consider that Judge Maciel has given adequate reasons  for  finding
    that it was unlikely that Miss Salik would have been at  a  party  with
    her parents during which she would have been in  a  position  to  speak
    freely with the appellant.  It does not appear that she was ever  asked
    as to what she would or would not have been allowed to  do,  and  there
    must be at least the very real possibility that this finding was  based
    on an implicit assumption that young Muslim girls would not be  allowed
    to speak to a boy at a party.  Given that this young man  was  able  to
    travel from Afghanistan to the UK while still a boy, if it  was  to  be
    suggested that it was unlikely that he could  have made his  way  to  a
    party in London when he was under the supervision  of  social  services
    outside London, I agree with the submission made by Mr Blum  that  this
    should at least have been put to  him.

22. I also agree that the finding that because Miss Salik had  stated  that
    she had not done her "big wedding" and had confirmed by this  that  she
    meant that she had not left her father's house to  join  her  husband's
    home, this would mean that she would not have an intimate  relationship
    with the appellant (at paragraph  54)  is  inadequately  reasoned,  and
    would appear to be based on a cultural assumption which the  judge  has
    made, and, in light of his finding in the same paragraph that they  had
    "undergone what Mr Niazi terms as  an  'Afghani  marriage'"  and  which
    might well have been  a nikka was quite possibly wrong as well.

23. These errors were material because it cannot be said that even  if  the
    errors had not been made, the judge  would  have  been  bound  to  have
    reached the same decision with regard  to  the  appellant's  Article  8
    claim.  Her finding that the appellant has  not  established  a  family
    life with Miss Salik (at paragraph 62)  which  was  a  relevant  factor
    which had  to  be  taken  into  account  when  the  judge  conducted  a
    proportionality exercise, was based at least in part  on  the  findings
    which the judge was not entitled to make, or at any rate have not  been
    adequately reasoned.

24. It follows that the decision with regarded to Article 8 must be remade.



25. Having had regard to paragraph 7 of the President's Practice Statements
    to the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal, I consider
    that the effect of the errors contained  within  the  determination  as
    identified above was such that with regard to his Article 8 appeal, the
    appellant was effectively deprived of a fair hearing.  I also  consider
    further that the nature and extent of the judicial  fact-finding  which
    will now be necessary, in order for this aspect of the decision  to  be
    remade, is such that, having regard to the overriding objective, it  is
    appropriate to remit the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as  was
    accepted (in the event that I found against the respondent with  regard
    to there having been an error of law) on behalf of the respondent and I
    shall so order.  I accordingly make this decision below and shall  also
    give directions for trial.

Decision

The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Maciel is set aside,  insofar
as she dismissed the appellant's appeal under Article  8,  as  containing  a
material error of law.

I direct that the appellant's appeal, insofar as it relates to  his  Article
8 claim, be remitted for a rehearing by the First-tier Tribunal, sitting  at
Columbus House, Newport, to be put before any judge  other  than  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Maciel.



Signed:                                 Date: 14 March 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


