
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10581/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 4 August 2016                              |On 8 August 2016             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                          PARANTHARAN RADHAKRISHNAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H. Sarwar, counsel instructed by Greater London,
solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                                  DECISION

   1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Sri Lanka, arrived  in  the  United
      Kingdom in January 2010 and was admitted as a student  with  leave  to
      remain until 31 December 2012. He overstayed  that  leave  and  on  16
      March 2015 he claimed asylum. He claimed also that there would  be  an
      impermissible infringement of rights protected by  article  8  of  the
      ECHR if he were not granted leave to remain. In advancing  that  claim
      he relied  principally  upon  the  fact  that  in  March  2013,  while
      unlawfully present in the United Kingdom, he married Ms Jeromi Yasmiya
      David-Chandra, a British citizen who  had  been  born  in  the  United
      Kingdom to parents of Sri Lankan Origin.


   2. The appellant has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
      decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Aziz  who,  by  a  decision
      promulgated on 9 June 2016, dismissed his appeal  against  refusal  of
      his asylum and human rights claim. The full details of his  protection
      claim are, of course, well known  by  both  parties  and  for  present
      purposes, the following summary, which I draw from the summary set out
      in the grounds for seeking permission to appeal, will suffice.


   3. The appellant's family in Sri Lanka are all supporters of the LTTE. In
      2007 the appellant was arrested  by  police  because  he  was  not  in
      possession of his ID card. He was detained  for  a  few  hours  before
      being released. The appellant describes himself as  a  music  composer
      and a musician who played the drums in a band. He worked for a  number
      of Tamil radio stations. In 2008 or 2009 he was approached by a  Tamil
      youth by the name of Raj Kumar who asked him to compose a song for the
      LTTE. The appellant composed and provided 3 or 4 songs and   was  paid
      for each one.


   4. In June or July 2009 he was arrested by police who wished to  question
      him about a friend who had breached release  conditions  and  who  had
      then left Sri Lanka. He was also questioned about  the  songs  he  had
      written. He was detained overnight  and  was  released  the  next  day
      following the intervention of  his  father  who  paid  for  his  son's
      release and promised officers that his son would not leave Sri  Lanka.
      He was released on bail with monthly reporting conditions. However, he
      reported on just three occasions and then left Sri  Lanka  in  January
      2010. Subsequently, his parents have told  him  that  the  authorities
      have visted the family home asking after him, that being  in  February
      or March 2010 and then six month later, making further such visits  in
      2012 and 2013.


   5. The appellant also advanced a sur place claim. He has attended Maveera
      Day celebrations every November and other LTTE events  in  the  United
      Kingdom and has played the drums  at  these  events.  This  means,  he
      claims, that the Sri Lankan authorities,  who  monitor  these  events,
      will have recognised him to be a famous drummer  heavily  involved  in
      LTTE activities who has also provided songs for the LTTE.  This  means
      that he will attract adverse attention on return as  someone  who  has
      been active in the diaspora in anti-government activities.


   6. The judge dismissed the appeal because he did not accept  to  be  true
      the appellant's account of events at the very heart of his claim.  The
      judge found that the 2007 arrest was not significant and gave rise  to
      no continuing adverse interest. He did not accept to be true the claim
      that the appellant had composed songs for the LTTE.  The  2009  arrest
      took place because the authorities were interested  in  someone  else.
      Again, the judge did not accept that the appellant had been questioned
      about providing the LTTE with songs he had composed. He  was  released
      without charge and the judge explained why he did  not  accept  either
      that there would have been an post release conditions imposed as there
      was no reason for any continuing interest. It followed from this  that
      the account of the authorities visiting the family home  asking  after
      the appellant was also found to be an untruthful embellishment.


   7. As for the sur place claim, the judge accepted that the appellant  had
      found work as a musician performing at  Tamil  events  in  the  United
      Kingdom, but explained why he did not accept that he  was  the  famous
      drummer he claimed to  be  nor  that  he  performed  in  a  manner  so
      prominently at those events as to come to the  attention  of  the  Sri
      Lankan authorities. Therefore, applying the current country  guidance,
      the judge concluded:


           "Even taking his sur place  activities  as  a  musician  at  its
           highest, I would still not be persuaded that he has the type  of
           profile that would bring him to the interest of the authorities,
           especially in light of my  findings  as  to  his  lack  of  LTTE
           activity in Sri Lanka before he left the country.  I  find  that
           the appellant is essentially  a  musician  who  plays  at  Tamil
           events. He is not a political  figure,  let  alone  someone  who
           would  be  viewed  as  working  for  Tamil  separatism  and   to
           destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state."


   8. The grounds upon which permission to appeal was sought and granted set
      out a broad range of challenges to the decision of the judge. For  the
      respondent Mr Wilding submitted  that  those  challenges  amounted  to
      little more than expressions of disagreement with  clear  findings  of
      fact in respect of which legally sufficient reasons had been  provided
      by the judge. In his oral submissions, Mr Sarwar adopted those grounds
      and developed some of them further. I shall address each in turn.


   9. The first ground is that it was a material error of law for the  judge
      to have failed to set out in his decision the applicable  standard  of
      proof. That is wholly unarguable. There is no obligation for  that  to
      be stated. The question is  whether  the  judge  applied  the  correct
      standard of proof, which he plainly did.


  10. The second ground raises various complaints about the  approach  taken
      by the judge to expert evidence  relied  upon  by  the  appellant.  At
      paragraph 53 of his decision the judge mentions  that  he  had  raised
      with counsel for the appellant that the report of Dr Chris  Smith  was
      unsigned and full contact details were mission. It is now said that he
      was wrong to have regard to such a minor issue. But the judge went  on
      in the next paragraph that he would,  nevertheless,  take  the  report
      into account and so nothing at all turns upon that.


  11. Next, the grounds criticise the judge for accepting the  view  of  the
      respondent that the report had the characteristics of being a "cut and
      paste job" but the judge was plainly entitled to make the  observation
      that references to the subject of the report as being a female  person
      was indicative of a lack of care in producing it.

  12. While accepting that credibility was an issue to be  resolved  by  the
      judge and not the expert witness, Mr Sarwar submitted that  the  judge
      erred in law by leaving out a material consideration, that  being  the
      evidence of the expert witness at paragraph 22 of the report:


           "... However, the Appellant's overall account of his experiences
           in Sri Lanka is consistent with my understanding of  the  plight
           of young Tamil men both during and since the end of the war.  As
           such, I consider his account a plausible one."


      However, in my judgement the approach taken by the judge to the expert
      evidence cannot be faulted. Before setting out his findings of fact he
      made unambiguously clear, at paragraph 52, that he recognised that the
      expert reports "have been heavily relied upon". It is plain from  what
      the judge says about this evidence that he  has  examined  Dr  Smith's
      report carefully. He makes specific reference to paragraph 22  of  the
      report and so it cannot sensibly be suggested that he was  unaware  of
      the view expressed. Unlike Dr  Smith,  who  had  not  interviewed  the
      appellant, the judge had heard oral evidence from the appellant and so
      was in any event best placed to make findings  upon  his  credibility.
      The judge then set out a  careful  examination  of  all  the  evidence
      before drawing all of that together and making his  ultimate  findings
      of fact.


  13. Next, it is asserted that the judge made contradictory findings as  to
      whether or not he considered credibility damaged by delay in  claiming
      asylum. The appellant had saod that he became aware of the possibility
      of claiming asylum when he had spoken to a solicitor in 2010, but  had
      not claimed until March 2015 because he and his wife feared  he  would
      be sent back to Sri Lanka. At paragraph 60 of his decision  the  judge
      said:


           "I accept their evidence and find that the reason for the  delay
           was a fear that the appellant may  be  returned  to  Sri  Lanka.
           Whilst section 8 is therefore engaged, looking at  the  evidence
           in  the  round,  I  very  significantly   temper   any   adverse
           credibility finding due to  the  delay  in  the  making  of  the
           claim."


      Mr Sarwar did not seek to add anything to this, simply saying that  he
      relied upon the grounds. This challenge  is  not  altogether  easy  to
      follow. If  I  understand  the  point  being  made  correctly,  it  is
      suggested that implicit in what the judge has said is that he accepted
      here that the applicant's fear of facing a risk of harm on return  was
      genuine, and so a sufficient justification for his delay  in  claiming
      asylum, that being irreconcilable with the  ultimate  finding  of  the
      judge that no such risk existed. That argument leads  nowhere  at  all
      since the appellant was pursuing also an article 8 claim, in the  hope
      that he and his wife could remain together in the  United  Kingdom  so
      that delaying the possibility of a negative outcome to an interference
      in that state of affairs was plainly an equally motivating factor.  It
      is impossible to read into the words of the judge that  an  acceptance
      of the protection claim is what drove his  conclusion  in  respect  of
      delay.


  14. The next ground complains that it was not reasonably open to the judge
      to hold against the appellant that he was unaware of the full name  of
      the youth who had asked him to compose songs for the KTTE and  so  his
      finding that this did not occur is unsafe. That, however, is  not  the
      reason given by the judge for rejecting that part of  the  appellant's
      account. The judge said, at paragraph 64, that when pressed for detail
      about the claim, the appellant had been  vague  in  his  answers.  The
      reference to the asylum  interview  when  he  was  asked  for  further
      details if this mad is cited bub the judge as an example of this.  But
      that was not whuy he rejected the account. At paragraph 65  the  judge
      said:


           "More concerning is the fact that he was asked at question 57 of
           the interview to name the songs he had composed. He replied that
           he cannot remember. It is simply not credible that the appellant
           could have written and composed a number of songs for  the  LTTE
           and yet when he is asked he is unable to name any of  the  songs
           which he has written."


      It is unambiguously clear that the judge was  entitled  to  find  that
      this was wholly lacking in credibility and is  a  cogent  and  legally
      sufficient basis upon which  the  judge  was  entitled  to  make  that
      finding of fact.


  15. The grounds go on to complain that the judge gave  inadequate  and  so
      insufficient reasons for rejecting the appellant's  evidence  that  he
      had been released after his most recent arrest on conditions  of  bail
      so that on return he would,  on  that  account  alone  be  of  adverse
      interest because he had breached those  conditions.  That  is  another
      challenge that leads nowhere at all. The decision of the judge must be
      read as a whole. The conclusion of  the  judge,  building  upon  clear
      findings of fact already arrived at, that the appellant was  a  person
      of insufficient adverse interest such as to generate  ongoing  adverse
      interest as manifested in conditions such as  those  asserted,  was  a
      rational and wholly reasonable one for the judge to  arrive  at.  This
      challenge is no more than an expression of disagreement with a clearly
      reasoned finding that is simply unassailable.


  16. Precisely the same must be said concerning the final challenge,  which
      is to the findings in respect of the  sur  place  claim.  This  was  a
      carefully reasoned finding of pact that was plainly open to the  judge
      on the evidence and the fact that  the  grounds  express  disagreement
      with the assessment of the judge of  the  evidence  relating  to  this
      fails to identify any error of law.


  17. Finally, Mr Sarwar addressed those grounds for seeking  permission  to
      appeal in respect of the article 8 claim. He said that,  distilled  to
      its essence, the complaint is that the judge failed to have regard  to
      the  statutory  considerations  found  in  s117  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and left out of account,  or  possibly
      misunderstood, material evidence, that being the expert report  of  Dr
      Halari.


  18. As Mr Sarwar in fact recognised, the s117 point is not  his  strongest
      one. All that can be said in this context that assists  the  appellate
      is that he speaks English  (s117B(2)).  Other  than  that,  everything
      speaks against him. The maintenance of effective immigration  controls
      is in the public interest (s117B(1)). The appellant is not financially
      independent but dependant upon others (s117B(3). His private life  and
      his relationship with his wife have both been formed while  unlawfully
      present in the United Kingdom (other than that part  of  private  life
      established prior  to  December  2012  while  a  student)  (s117B(4)).
      Therefore, even if the judge had specifically considered each part  of
      s117, he could not have taken from it anything that, overall could  be
      seen as taking the appellant's case any further.


  19. What Mr Sarwar suggested was the appellant's strongest point  was  the
      second complaint in this regard, which is set out in  the  grounds  as
      follows:


      "... it is submitted that the FTJ's conclusion that the Appellant  and
      his wife would be removed together, not giving rise to separation  and
      thus Dr Halari's findings were giving (sic) limited weight amounted to
      an error of law."


      Pausing there, nowhere in his decision does the judge suggest that the
      appellant's wife, a  British  citizen,  should  be  removed  with  the
      appellant. His finding was simply that there  were  no  insurmountable
      obstacles preventing family life continuing in Sri Lanka if that  what
      the  applicant  and  his  wife  chose  to  do.  The   grounds   simply
      misrepresent what the judge is saying and so it is  necessary  to  set
      out in full what the judge did in fact say:


           "The appellant's wife was born in the United  Kingdom.  However,
           her parents were born in Sri Lanka and  she  is  of  Sri  Lankan
           heritage. During her evidence she stated that she speaks to  the
           appellant in Tamil and that she  has  been  visiting  Sri  Lanka
           since her childhood. She estimates that  she  has  been  to  the
           country 6-7 occasions.


           During cross-examination, the appellant was asked why  his  wife
           could not move to Sri Lanka with him. The appellant stated  that
           this was not possible  because  his  wife  is  studying  law  at
           university, she was born here and she has family here.  For  the
           avoidance of doubt I intervened in the  hearing  and  asked  the
           appellant to confirm the reasons why his wife could not move  to
           Sri Lanka. He gave the same three reasons. When Ms Davidchandran
           was asked the  same  question  she  essentially  gave  the  same
           reasons. I  am  afraid  that  such  matters  do  not  amount  to
           insurmountable obstacles. Whilst I can accept that there will be
           some level of hardship given that  the  (appellant's  wife)  has
           lived in the United Kingdom since birth (even though she is  Sri
           Lankan heritage and speaks Tamil),  the  reasons  cited  by  the
           witnesses  fall  well  short  of  amounting  to   insurmountable
           obstacles.


           I have taken into account the contents of  Dr  Halari's  report.
           However, I note that her report deals with the impact  upon  the
           appellant's wife if they were separated and he were returned  to
           Sri Lanka. There would be no separation between husband and wife
           if they both returned to Sri Lanka  together  and  therefore  Dr
           Halari's report is of little  relevance  when  considering  EX.1
           (b)."


  20. Thus it can be seen that  the  judge  said  that  there  would  be  no
      separation if they both returned to Sri Lanka together. Whether  there
      is or is not a separation will be a matter  for  them  to  decide  for
      themselves. There is no suggestion that  the  appellant's  wife  would
      find herself in Sri  Lanka  without  her  husband's  support  and,  of
      course, it was her own evidence that she has been making visits to Sri
      Lanka since childhood and would be able to visit the appellant  during
      holidays if she remained to  finish  her  law  degree  in  the  United
      Kingdom.


  21. In any event, the judge  carried  out  a  careful  examination  of  Dr
      Hallari's report and it is evident that he was fully sighted upon  the
      nature of that evidence, as he made  clear  at  paragraph  56  of  his
      decision. The judge has plainly taken full  account  of  the  opinions
      expressed by Dr Halari,  both  in  respect  of  the  impact  upon  the
      appellant's wife if she remains here and  so  is  separated  from  her
      husband and so will have to look for support  from  the  close  family
      members she relies upon  or  whether  they  return  together.  He  was
      plainly entitled to take a different view than that  expressed  by  Dr
      Halari at paragraph 71 of her report concerning  how  the  appellant's
      wife would find life with her husband in Sri Lanka  if  she  chose  to
      move there with him.


  22. The determination of the article 8  claim  was,  essentially,  a  fact
      based assessment for the judge to carry out and in  completing  it  he
      made no error of law. Once again, his decision is simply unassailable.




  23. For these reasons, despite Mr Sarwar presenting the challenge  in  the
      most compelling manner possible, I  am  entirely  satisfied  that  the
      decision of  Judge  Aziz  discloses  no  error  of  law,  material  or
      otherwise.


  24. Therefore the appeal to the upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Summary of decision:

  25. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a no material error  of  law
      error of law


  26.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed


  27. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz is to stand.


                               Signed        [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 5 August 2016

