
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10511/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 21 October 2015                   |On 27 October 2015                   |
|Prepared on 21 October 2015          |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    S. M.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel instructed by Halliday Reeves
Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  illegally,  and  on  20
         August 2013 the Appellant claimed asylum as a citizen of Iran. That
         application was refused on 18 November 2014, and in  consequence  a
         removal decision was made in relation to him.

      2. The Appellant appealed to the Tribunal against the removal decision
         and his appeal was heard on  4  February  2015,  and  dismissed  by
         decision of Judge MJH Wilson, promulgated on 17 February 2015.

      3.  The  Appellant's  application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal was refused by Judge Astle on 16 March 2015 on
         the basis it was no more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
         decision. Undaunted  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal, when it was granted on only one ground by Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Reeds in an undated decision. The sole ground was that it was
         arguable there had been "a failure to engage with the  more  recent
         material relevant to the issue of risk on return as a failed asylum
         seeker and/or illegal exit". Neither the terms of the grounds,  nor
         those of the grant, allow the identification of the material  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Reeds had in mind.

      4. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice of 23 July 2015 in which  she
         noted the Judge had rejected the Appellant's  claim  to  have  left
         Iran illegally, and there was no proper evidential  basis  for  any
         finding that he would be at risk upon return  as  a  failed  asylum
         seeker.

      5. Thus the matter comes before me.

    Error of Law?

      6. The Judge concluded [21]  that  the  Appellant  was  an  untruthful
         witness who had manufactured a  manifestly  false  account  of  his
         experiences in Iran. He also explicitly  rejected  the  Appellant's
         account of his journey from Iran to the UK.

      7. Against that rather unpromising background the Judge considered the
         Appellant's claim that he would face a risk of harm upon return  as
         one who would be perceived to be a failed asylum seeker  [22].  The
         Judge noted that he had no political profile, and that he would not
         be perceived as one who was opposed to, or was an activist against,
         the present regime. Nor was he one who had been  accused  of  anti-
         Islamist activities or conduct. The Judge referred  himself  to  SB
         (risk on return - illegal  exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  53,  and
         concluded that those facing enforced return did not in general face
         a real risk of persecution or ill treatment, and that was the  case
         even if they had left illegally, which the Appellant had not.

      8. Since the decision in SB the Upper Tribunal   have  considered  the
         position of those returning to Iran from the UK by way  of  country
         guidance decisions in  BA  (demonstrators  in  Britain  -  risk  on
         return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36, and SA (Iranian Arabs - no  general
         risk) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 41. Neither of those decisions  suggested
         that an individual of the Appellant's profile faced a real risk  of
         harm upon return to Iran simply because they might be perceived  to
         be a failed asylum seeker.

      9. Most recently the Upper Tribunal considered the position of Iranian
         citizens who could establish that they had been internet  bloggers,
         in the reported decision AB and others (internet activity  -  state
         of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 257. That decision was not given  the
         status  of  country  guidance,  although  the  Upper  Tribunal  had
         intended and expected that the appeals in question would serve that
         purpose, because in the event the material placed before the  Upper
         Tribunal had not disclosed a sufficient evidential basis for giving
         evidence upon the risk faced by those who could establish that they
         had been internet bloggers. The Upper  Tribunal's  focus  was  upon
         those who had engaged in internet activity,  but  it  was  observed
         that the mere fact that an individual had been  in  the  UK  for  a
         prolonged period of time did not lead  to  persecution  [467,  470-
         471]. Whilst it was observed that this might lead to scrutiny, I am
         satisfied that there was nothing in the findings  of  primary  fact
         made by the Judge to suggest that this claimant would be subject to
         such scrutiny, or that if  he  were,  anything  untoward  would  be
         discovered.

    Conclusion

     10. I am satisfied that the Appellant has failed to establish any error
         of law on the Judge's part in the course of his assessment  of  the
         evidence. The approach taken by the Judge to the  evidence  in  his
         decision does not disclose any error  of  law  that  requires  that
         decision to be set aside and remade.

    DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    17 February 2015 contains no error of law in the  decision  to  dismiss
    the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to be set aside and
    remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.

Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 21 October 2015



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.

Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 21 October 2015
