
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10150/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th October 2016                 |On 14th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   Mr S S
                       (anonymity direction continued)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Muquit, Counsel, instructed by A & P Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Anonymity having previously been ordered  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
there being no application to remove the order, I see no  reason  to  do  so
and the order remains in place.   Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  Court
directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  them  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

This appeal is brought by the Secretary of State against a decision of
Judge Mayall promulgated on 11 August 2016 in which he allowed the Sri
Lankan Appellant's appeal against a refusal of international protection.

Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on four grounds.

The first ground is that that there has been a material misdirection in law
in the context of the assessment of the Appellant's credibility with
reference to Section 8 of the Treatment of Claimants Act 2004.

Section 8 requires a Judge to take into account arguments put forward by
the Respondent concerning credibility as affected by issues listed therein
including the failure to take a reasonable opportunity to claim asylum in a
safe country before making a claim in the United Kingdom.  In the context
of this case, the Respondent points out that the Appellant, in his
screening interview at 4.4 asserted that he did not have such an
opportunity because he was prevented from doing so because he was under the
control of somebody with whom he was travelling. The Respondent does not
ask about it again in the substantive asylum interview.

 1. The Judge sets out the entirety of the  Respondent's  consideration  of
    Section 8 at page 7 of the determination [21] to  [23],  including  the
    explanation I have referred to.   The Respondent, in  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter, does not give any reasoning as to the rejection of  the
    Appellant's explanation.  At the hearing, the Respondent chose  not  to
    field a representative. In his oral evidence,  the  Appellant  repeated
    his explanation and expanded upon it expressly in  response  to  direct
    questioning from the Judge. It is quite clear that  the  Judge  had  it
    firmly at the forefront of his mind.

The Judge does not provide detailed reasoning specifically on Section 8 in
the assessment of the evidence between [51] and [58] but, reading the
decision as a whole, it is quite clear that he takes Section 8 into
account, even clarifying matters himself. The explanations offered by the
Appellant were not challenged by the Respondent. In that context it can be
of no surprise to the Respondent that in the absence of cross-examination
or further reasoning in the Reasons for Refusal Letter the Judge finds that
he accepts the Appellant's explanations so that the position did not
adversely impact the overall assessment of the Appellant's credibility.

In making the assessment of credibility, the Judge does not simply accept
everything that the Appellant says, instead he clearly sets out
difficulties with the Appellant's evidence, and plainly finds that the
issue of credibility does not go all one way, to the point that it can be
seen that the Judge reaches a balanced view. The points that have been made
today are points that could quite properly have been made by the Respondent
if she had fielded a Home Office Presenting Officer on the day, but she
chose not to do so, and plainly the Judge was not assisted by the absence
of the Respondent's representative.

 2. The second ground  asserts  difficulties  with  the  treatment  of  the
    medical evidence and, in particular, that the Judge has taken the wrong
    approach with regard to it.  The assertion is that the Judge  erred  in
    considering the medical evidence first, when assessing the  credibility
    of the historical factual account given by the Appellant.  I find  that
    this is the right  approach,  as  directed  by  Mbanga,  and  that  the
    submission that it runs contrary to Mbanga is  incoherent.  I  turn  to
    paragraph 24 of that case, where  Mr  Justice  Wilson  sets  out:  when
    medical evidence comes forward the crucial  point  is  that  the  Judge
    should  take  account  of  that  medical  evidence  before  making   an
    assessment of the factual context of the account of the Appellant,  and
    that it may well be that the context which is provided by  such  expert
    evidence could be a crucial aid to the decision as to  whether  or  not
    the Judge should accept the truth of the factual matrix put forward.  I
    find that at [51] that is exactly what Judge Mayall is  doing  in  this
    case.

 3. Mr Wilding has suggested that in concluding at  [51]  that  scars  were
    inflicted  as  a  means  of  torture  that  the   Judge   has   limited
    consideration to whether or not there was evidence that the scars,  and
    in particular two types of scars;  namely  from  metal  rods  and  from
    cigarette burns, were inflicted  through  proxy  or  by  the  Appellant
    inflicting the harm  on  himself.  There  might  be  other  causes,  he
    asserts.

 4. I am satisfied that the Judge has not restricted his  consideration  of
    the evidence.  [51] of the Judge's conclusions  must  be  read  in  the
    round, including reading back to [11] where  he  Judge  sets  out  that
    Professor Lingam, one of three experts, concluded that the scars  could
    not have been caused  by  medical  conditions,  surgical  procedure  or
    accident, findings which were  also  supported  by  the  second  expert
    report from  Dr  Martin.  Again,  in  the  assessment  of  the  medical
    evidence, it  is  quite  clear  that  the  Judge  was  fully  aware  of
    difficulties  and  inconsistencies  that  had  come  forward   by   the
    Appellant's own statements to the clinicians.

 5. Standing back and looking at [51] in the context of the  whole  of  the
    decision, I am satisfied that when the Judge says  that  there  was  no
    explanation other than the conclusion that the scars were inflicted  as
    a result of torture, it is a finding which is quite clearly  rooted  in
    the medical evidence which properly discounts alternative explanations.

 6. The third ground raises a point in respect of GJ. I find nothing in the
    point. Judge Mayall sets out fully, the reasons for refusals  right  at
    the beginning of the  decision,  occupying  several  pages  identifying
    clearly that the Respondent's dispute was that the Appellant had failed
    to establish that he had been detained and tortured in 2013 as  he  had
    claimed.  The Judge concludes that in light of the evidence of torture,
    and contrary to the Respondent's view, he had met the burden of showing
    that he had been detained in 2013, and  further  that  that  was  as  a
    result of being a suspected member of the LTTE.

 7. Reading that factual position in the context  of  GJ  and  the  country
    information, the Judge's conclusion that that post-conflict interest in
    the Appellant is sufficient to found a real risk, to the  low  standard
    of proof, of interest in him on return  now,  is  sustainable.   It  is
    quite clear reading GJ that it is only perceived interest or  perceived
    activity and involvement at a high level in the separatist cause  which
    would have prompted such an arrest, detention and torture.   Whilst  it
    has  been  posited  today  that  that  might  have  come   from   other
    circumstances including accident and fights between the  Appellant  and
    his associates, and possibly even from the LTTE, that is simply to  add
    new arguments.  The Respondent had  the  opportunity  of  making  those
    points and putting those matters to the Appellant at  the  hearing  and
    did not do so.

 8. In resolving the dispute  between  the  parties,  the  Judge  correctly
    reaches resolution premised on the matters raised in  the  reasons  for
    refusal.  Whilst it is self-evident that had the evidence, as  it  came
    out in the hearing, presented such alternatives as speculated before me
    today, the Judge would have had to deal with them, but there is nothing
    before me to show that any such arose.

 9. The fourth ground concerns Diaspora activities.  The point adds  little
    to the grounds, because the Appellant's case has not been one of actual
    involvement but of perceived involvement in terms  of  the  arrest  and
    detention in 2013, and perception is the key.  If the Appellant's  case
    had been that his risk arose  purely  on  the  basis  of  the  Diaspora
    activities, then the dispute  resolution  at  [57]  would  be  arguably
    inadequate but, in the context  of  the  case  as  it  was  argued  and
    presented by the  parties  to  the  Judge,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    reasoning which follows on at [58] is an adequate consideration of  the
    position under GJ.

Notice of Decision

10. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal stands.


Signed   E Davidge                           Date 11 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

