
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/10312/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 March 2016                              |On 1 June 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                Aymen YASSEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Aymen Yassen, was born on 1 October 1989 and is  a  male
    citizen of Iraq.  He was born and brought up in Mosul in northern  Iraq
    and is a Sunni Muslim.  He was in the United Kingdom on a student  visa
    in 2014 and claimed asylum whilst here but his claim  was  refused  and
    directions were made for his removal to Iraq.  The  appellant  appealed
    against that decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Bradshaw),
    which, in a decision promulgated on  5  February  2015,  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. I am satisfied that a copy of the notice of hearing of 15 March 2016 at
    Bradford was sent to the appellant by  first-class  post  at  his  last
    known address ([Sheffield]) on 11 February 2016.  There is  nothing  on
    the tribunal file to indicate that the  notice  of  hearing  failed  to
    reach the  appellant.   The  appellant  has  provided  no  satisfactory
    explanation for his absence and, in the  circumstances,  I  decided  to
    proceed with the hearing in his absence.

 3. In granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam  found  that  it
    was "arguable that the judge had  not  sufficiently  engaged  with  the
    background evidence submitted by the appellant to establish  risk  from
    Shia militia in Baghdad."  The appellant had produced  "a  quantity  of
    background evidence mainly  newspaper  articles  relating  to  violence
    against Sunnis from Shia militia generally and specifically in Baghad."
     The judge noted that the Tribunal had followed  the  country  guidance
    decision in HM and others (Article 15(c)) Iraq [2012] UKUT 00409.

 4. The grounds (apparently drafted by the appellant himself)  assert  that
    the situation for Sunnis in Baghdad is not "as they imagine" in HM  and
    others.  The appellant states that in February 2015 (that is  following
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing) his brother  and  his  wife  had  been
    killed in Baghdad.  The appellant had attempted to find evidence of his
    death but had not done so.

 5. At [18], Judge Bradshaw wrote:

         "He fears a return to Baghdad  because  of  the  general  situation
         there because he is Sunni that he relies on what he hears and reads
         in the media.  The evidence he relies  on  is  neither  expert  nor
         wholly independent and overall it is not such that there are cogent
         or compelling reasons to depart from HM and others despite the fact
         that it was decided before the events in Mosul and other  parts  of
         northern Iraq  took  place.   In  addition  the  two  incidents  he
         recounts are not convincing evidence of any risk to  the  appellant
         himself.  He has been unable to make contact with  his  cousin  but
         the reason is  unknown  and  his  university  supervisor,  although
         detained and questioned, was quickly released."

 6. In his grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the appellant refers to
    his cousin's supervisor having been "lost in Baghdad."

 7. I find that the appeal should be dismissed.  I am  satisfied  that  the
    judge has engaged with the background material put before  him  by  the
    appellant.  In any event, some of the events referred to in the grounds
    of appeal (in which the appellant claims now exposes the risk) occurred
    after the date of promulgation of the First-tier Tribunal decision;  if
    the  appellant  wishes  to  make  a  fresh  claim  for  asylum  to  the
    respondent, he is free to do so.  The occurrence of such  events  after
    the date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  cannot  render  that
    decision flawed in law.  Otherwise, the grounds  of  appeal  amount  to
    little more than a disagreement with findings which were  available  to
    the judge on the evidence, findings to which the  judge  has  correctly
    applied relevant country guidance jurisprudence.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 30 May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 30 May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
