
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10343/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport    |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 19 October 2015                  |On: 4 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                            TERENCE NYANGA MANIH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:    Mr N Diwnych, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

      1. This is an appeal against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge B Lloyd in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  a
         citizen of Cameroon, against the Secretary of State's  decision  to
         refuse asylum.

      2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 20 August  2014  and
         claimed asylum on 22 August 2014. His application  was  refused  by
         the Respondent on 14 November 2014.  The  Appellant  exercised  his
         right of appeal against this decision and this is the  appeal  that
         was heard before Judge Lloyd on 11 March 2015  and  dismissed.  The
         Appellant's application for permission to appeal against the First-
         tier Tribunal Judge's decision was refused  on  15  April  2015  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson and on  renewal  to  the
         Upper Tribunal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum on 12  June
         2015 in the following terms

             "The grounds, drafted by the appellant himself,  contend  that
             the Judge did not give sufficient  reasons  for  his  findings
             that the appellant would not  be  at  risk  in  Cameroon,  and
             failed to give  consideration  to  the  evidence  before  him,
             especially a letter from Southern Cameroons  National  Council
             (SCNC) Chairman. It was further submitted the Judge unlawfully
             took account of 'other people's past errors' with reference to
             an expert report.

             The Judge's findings in  relation  to  the  asylum  claim  are
             contained in paragraphs 48 to 57. However, with the  exception
             of the appellant's return to Cameroon in 2014, the Judge makes
             findings of fact but arguably fails to support those  findings
             with any reasoned analysis. It is not consequently  clear  why
             the Judge reached the conclusions he did."

      3. At the hearing before me Mr Diwnych appeared for the  Secretary  of
         State and Mr Vokes represented the Appellant.  No additional papers
         were submitted.

    Submissions

      4. For the Appellant Mr Vokes said that the appeal was based upon  the
         failure of the Judge to give adequate reasons for his decision.  At
         paragraph 11 of the decision  the  Judge  refers  to  the  original
         documents produced by the Appellant including a letter  from  SCNC.
         Mr Vokes said that his first concern is that there  is  no  finding
         either on this letter or upon the newspaper articles which are also
         referred to. If the letter comes from the SCNC chairman in Cameroon
         it is a very material. At paragraph 49 of the decision of the Judge
         refers "while he may have had some passing  association  with  SCNC
         ..." and at paragraph 51 the Judge refers "he  has  hung  on  to  a
         membership card which he somewhere or other  acquired  ...".  So  a
         positive finding is made that the Appellant had a  membership  card
         but this  conflicts  with  the  later  findings.  At  paragraph  53
         referring to the original  documents  the  Judge  says  "I  do  not
         believe that they credible or authentic. He may have  come  by  the
         party membership card easily and  routinely."  He  adds  "the  only
         things that are genuine I believe are his  Cameroonian  nationality
         card and his university student card". At paragraph  54  the  Judge
         refers to the two arrest warrants as having  "an  official  looking
         stamp". No reason is given as to why the  Judge  nevertheless  does
         not give any weight to these warrants. The fact that  there  is  no
         finding at all on the newspaper articles or the letter is a massive
         hole in the analysis. At paragraph 55 no reason is given as to  why
         "on this occasion" the Judge does  not  find  the  expert's  report
         authoritative. He suggests it is outside the core expertise of  the
         expert without giving any indication of what the core expertise  at
         the. Again at paragraphs 56 and 57 there is no  reasoning  for  the
         Judge's adverse credibility findings.

      5. For the Respondent Mr Diwnych said that it was up to the  Judge  to
         make what he could of the evidence but accepted that there  are  no
         absolute findings on the documents referred to by Mr Vokes.

      6. I said that it was clear the decision contained material errors  of
         law and could not stand and I reserved my  written  decision.  Both
         advocates agreed that the proper course was to remit to the  First-
         tier Tribunal for hearing de novo.

    Error of law

      7. The Appellant is a citizen of Cameroon who came to  United  Kingdom
         lawfully as a student. The Appellant claimed asylum on coming  back
         to the United Kingdom having  returned  to  Cameroon  for  a  short
         period during the currency of his student visa. His claim is  based
         upon a fear of persecution due to his political activities with the
         SCNC where he held the  post  of  public  relations  officer.   The
         Respondent refused the Appellant's claim  on  the  basis  that  his
         account was not credible and that the documents produced in support
         of his account, other than his Cameroonian identity card and his UK
         university identity card, were not genuine.

      8. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  Appellant  gave
         oral  evidence  and  submitted  a  substantial  appeal  bundle.  In
         dismissing his appeal the Judge found that the Appellant was not  a
         credible witness (paragraph 49). However in making this finding the
         Judge does not  give  any  discernable  reasons  for  doubting  his
         credibility. The Judge accepts that  the  Appellant  may  have  had
         "some passing association" with SCNC as a young man  but  does  not
         say what causes  him  to  reach  this  conclusion  diminishing  the
         Appellant's claimed active role. He says that the account "may have
         a grain of truth in it but no more than that" but does not identify
         what that grain might be or why he does not believe  the  substance
         of  the  Appellant's  account.  Again  the  Judge  finds  that  the
         Appellant's account is embellished but does not give reasons as  to
         why he believes it to be embellished. The Judge  does  not  believe
         the Appellant's account of "ongoing political activism" but not say
         why he does not believe this. The only reason given  at  any  point
         for not believing the Appellant to be a credible witness is  to  be
         found at paragraph 52 where the Judge says that he does not believe
         that the Appellant would have returned to  Cameroon  for  the  53rd
         anniversary celebrations of the SCNC is he really was  a  political
         activist of any profile. The Judge does not explain why he did  not
         accept the Appellant's account that it  was  not  until  after  his
         return to Cameroon that he found out  there  were  arrest  warrants
         outstanding against him.

      9. Mr Vokes concentrated on the Judge's failure to  make  findings  in
         respect of documents submitted  in  support  of  his  claim.  These
         submissions have merit. The Judge makes no findings in  respect  of
         the letter  ostensibly  from  the  chairman  of  the  SCNC  or  the
         newspaper articles. The Judge's adverse findings  relating  to  the
         party membership card and the arrest warrants have no  basis  other
         than the  general  adverse  credibility  findings  which,  for  the
         reasons already given, are not adequately explained or reasoned. In
         short the Judge has not adequately explained why he has  not  found
         the Appellant's account to be credible.

     10. In my judgment the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  not  given  adequate
         reasons for its findings on material  matters.  In  particular  the
         Tribunal  has  failed  to  give  adequate   reasons   for   adverse
         credibility  findings  and  it  has  failed  to  engage  with   the
         Appellant's explanations in these respects in any  meaningful  way.
         These are material errors of law.

     11. Due to the nature of the errors of law and in accordance  with  the
         President's direction it is  appropriate  for  this  matter  to  be
         remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing  de  novo  with  no
         findings preserved.

    Conclusion

     12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law for the reasons set out above.

     13. I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in
         accordance with the President's direction this matter  is  suitable
         for and should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:     Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
