
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10529/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 21 December 2015                  |On 26 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                          mr Kaywan Kamal Mohammed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Vidal, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Iraq  whose  date  of  birth  has  been
    assessed as 20 January 1992, although he claims that his date of  birth
    is 20 January 1993.   His  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision
    refusing him asylum on 18 February 2009  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S Taylor in a decision dated 23 January 2012.

2.   On 22 February 2012 the appellant was granted permission to appeal  the
    judge's decision arguing that the judge erred in relying on  HM  (Iraq)
    CG [2010] UKUT 31, which was quashed by the Court of  Appeal  in  terms
    that made it clear that the determination had ceased to be a valid  and
    authoritative country guidance determination.  It was further submitted
    that the judge failed to  have  regard  to  a  schedule  of  background
    material set out in a skeleton argument or  to  submissions  that  were
    relative to the appellant which would put him at greater risk than  the
    general population if returned to Iraq.

3.   On 20 March 2012 the respondent in her Rule 24 response submitted  that
    she did not oppose the appellant's application for permission to appeal
    and invited the Tribunal to determine the  appeal  with  a  fresh  oral
    (continuance) hearing to consider humanitarian  protection  only.   The
    respondent added that the appeal remained dismissed on asylum and human
    rights grounds.

4.   Following a hearing on 22 April 2014  an  Upper  Tribunal  panel  noted
    that it was agreed by all parties at  the  hearing  that  it  would  be
    appropriate to hear live evidence from Dr Fatah  who  could  be  cross-
    examined on the reports  he  has  recently  provided  relating  to  the
    current conditions in Iraq.  The hearing of the  appeal  was  therefore
    adjourned to a further date.

5.   In the meantime, on 30 October 2015, the Upper Tribunal  issued  a  new
    country guidance decision which replaced all existing country  guidance
    in Iraq.  The new country guidance decision is AA (Article 15(c))  (Rev
    2) [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) (30 October 2015).   The  Upper  Tribunal  had
    heard evidence from Dr Fatah and other experts.    The  Upper  Tribunal
    issued country  guidance  on  various  issues,  namely,  indiscriminate
    violence  in  Iraq:  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive;
    documentation and feasibility of return (excluding the autonomous Iraqi
    Kurdish region ("IKR");  position  on  documentation  where  return  is
    feasible; internal relocation within Iraq (other than the Iraqi Kurdish
    region) and the Iraqi Kurdish region.

6.   Ms Vidal submitted a bundle of documents on behalf  of  the  appellant.
    The bundle included a report by Dr Fatah dated 10 December  2015.   She
    also submitted revised skeleton submissions and the Home Office Country
    Information and Guidance on the Security Situation in  Iraq  issued  in
    November 2015.

7.   Mr Tufan submitted the Home Office Country Information and Guidance  on
    Internal Relocation (including documentation and feasibility of  return
    to Iraq also issued in November 2015).

8.   The appellant's asylum claim was put on the basis of imputed  political
    opinion due to his father's employment.  He submitted that  his  father
    was a member of a particular social group.   His  father  worked  as  a
    guard for the Ministry of Oil and the appellant thought  he  worked  in
    Kirkuk.  From January 2008 the  appellant's  father  began  to  receive
    threatening letters that if he did not give up his job that he would be
    harmed and the appellant would be killed.  The letters were written  in
    Arabic so the appellant did not understand them and his father told him
    that they were from a terrorist group.  His father received three  more
    similar letters between January and March 2008.  The  family  also  had
    graffiti written on the wall of their  house  during  this  time.   The
    graffiti was written in Arabic so the appellant did not  understand  it
    and  the  neighbours  told  him  that  it  was  threatening  him.   The
    appellant's father reported the matter to the police and he  gave  them
    the letters, but the  police  told  him  they  could  not  protect  the
    appellant.  The appellant's father reported the threats to the Ministry
    of Oil but they could not help.  Between April  and  May  2008  another
    letter was thrown into the house which threatened the appellant's life.
     During May to July  2008  more  graffiti  was  written  on  the  house
    threatening the appellant  and  his  father.   The  appellant's  father
    decided that the appellant should be sent to a safe  country  to  avoid
    being kidnapped.  His father did not arrange for the appellant to leave
    for seven months because he was an only child, but  eventually  did  so
    when the relatives told him.  The appellant's father did  not  relocate
    within Iraq because he could not give up his job.  The appellant feared
    that if returned to Iraq he would be harmed  by  the  people  who  were
    threatening him and his father.  He left Iraq on 16 or  17  July  2008.
    This evidence was rejected by the judge.

9.   The judge also found that the appellant's  national  identity  document
    was not  genuine  on  examination  of  the  report  from  the  National
    Documentation Fraud Unit (NDFU).

10.  At the hearing before me the appellant was present but was  not  called
    to give evidence.  The hearing proceeded by way of submissions only.

11.  Ms Vidal argued the case on the basis of the profile of  the  appellant
    which she submitted would put him at risk on the findings made  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in AA and the report by Dr Fatah.

12.  The appellant's profile is  that  he  is  a  Sunni  Muslim  of  Kurdish
    origin, he is a Soranic speaker and not an Arabic speaker  and  someone
    with no familial ties or friendship ties with Baghdad.

13.  Ms Vidal submitted that the appellant's family hails from  Kirkuk  city
    which is now within the contested areas.  She relied on paragraph 11 of
    the respondent's supplementary asylum decision dated 11  December  2014
    in which the respondent accepted on the  basis  of  objective  evidence
    that Kirkuk city should also be included in the contested areas.

14.  Ms Vidal submitted  that  the  respondent's  position  is  that  if  an
    appellant is from Kirkuk he will be returned to Kirkuk but if he is not
    from Kirkuk he will be returned to Baghdad.   This  submission  was  in
    reliance on paragraphs 150 and 151 of AA.  At paragraph 150  the  Upper
    Tribunal noted the respondent's assertion that  she  will  only  return
    Iraqi nationals to either Baghdad or to the IKR.  She will only  return
    a person to the IKR if that person is from the IKR and  such  a  person
    has been pre-cleared for return by the IKR authorities.

15.  At paragraph 151 the Upper Tribunal  noted  the  respondent's  position
    that, save for those returnees in the  category  identified  below,  it
    would in general be reasonable, and  not  unduly  harsh,  to  expect  a
    person to relocate to Baghdad city if there is an Article 15(c) risk in
    their home area.  The exception to this generality is identified by the
    respondent as being:

         "A person returned to Iraq who was unable to  replace  their  Civil
         Status ID Card or Nationality Certificate [would] be likely to face
         significant difficulties in accessing services and a livelihood and
         would face destitution which is  likely  to  reach  the  Article  3
         threshold.  [6]."

16.  Ms Vidal relied on  Dr  Fatah's  report  which  assessed  the  security
    situation in Baghdad.  Dr Fatah  at  5.1  rates  the  current  security
    situation in Baghdad as very  high.   At  paragraph  5.2  he  gave  the
    figures for the body count in Iraq and the  figure  for  2015  was  the
    third highest so far since 2003.  Relying  on  these  figures  and  the
    evidence Ms Vidal submitted that the security situation in  Baghdad  is
    such that it would put the appellant at risk.  He could be  subject  to
    ill-treatment within Article 15(c) and if  not,  Baghdad  is  a  highly
    dangerous place  because  of  his  particular  profile.   The  security
    situation such that it will not enable the appellant to be able to live
    there, and obtain employment there.  If he has  no  family  network  he
    will struggle.   As a Sunni from the north going to Baghdad, it will be
    highly dangerous for him.   Dr  Fatah  submitted  in  his  report  that
    corruption is endemic within the defence sector.   Ms  Vidal  submitted
    that the appellant does not have connections  that  will  help  him  to
    survive in Baghdad so Baghdad will present a real danger to him.

17.  She submitted that the appellant could not  safely  relocate  elsewhere
    because although the  south  is  relatively  secure,  according  to  Dr
    Fatah's report, the southern governorates are  predominantly  Shia  and
    this will present difficulties for the appellant.

18.  Ms Vidal submitted that the appellant could not relocate to the IKR  by
    placing reliance on paragraph 224 of 9.4  of  Dr  Fatah's  report.   Dr
    Fatah stated that as a Kurd, the appellant would not have  to  overcome
    the hurdle of providing a sponsor in order to enter IKR,  and  for  the
    same  reasons,  he  is  considered  unlikely  to  face  the   arbitrary
    procedures existing at entry points.  However, as a Kurd  from  Kirkuk,
    it may not be possible for the appellant to relocate to  the  IKR  with
    any permanency, if his civil register is in Kirkuk.

19.  Ms Vidal relied on the Human Rights Watch World Report  2015  on  Iraq.
    The report states that human rights conditions in Iraq deteriorated  in
    2014.  Suicide attacks, car bombs, assassinations became more  frequent
    and lethal, killing more than 12,000  people  and  injuring  more  than
    22,000 between January and December.  The report  further  stated  that
    both government forces and armed groups were  responsible  for  attacks
    that targeted or indiscriminately harmed civilians.

20.  A further report from Amnesty International on  Iraq  2014/2015  stated
    that the conflict has  caused  the  deaths  of  some  10,000  civilians
    between January and October, forcibly displaced almost 2 million people
    and created  a  humanitarian  crisis.   This  was  exacerbated  by  the
    continuing influx of thousands of refugees from Syria, mostly to Iraq's
    semiautonomous  Kurdistan  region.   The  report   also   stated   that
    government forces and Shia militias armed and backed by the  government
    committed  war  crimes  and  human  rights  violations,   predominantly
    targeting Sunni communities.  Ms Vidal submitted that  travel  warnings
    have been issued by the US and the UK against travel to Iraq because of
    fear of terrorism.

21.  Ms Vidal submitted that in the light of the appellant's  circumstances,
    he has demonstrated that there are substantial  grounds  for  believing
    that he would be at real risk of violence  if  returned  to  Iraq.   He
    cannot safely relocate outside Kirkuk  to  another  part  of  Iraq  for
    security and/or practical reasons.

22.  In submission Mr Tufan submitted  that  the  appellant  was  found  not
    credible by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   He  had  also  produced
    reported identification documents which were found to be forged and not
    genuine.  He accepted that the appellant's claim to be from Kirkuk  has
    not been challenged.  He further submitted that the appellant claims he
    cannot speak Arabic but there has been no proper finding on  this.   He
    asked me to assume that the appellant can speak Arabic because,  having
    been educated in the IKR, the appellant is likely to be able  to  speak
    Arabic.  I find that I am  not  able  to  make  this  assumption.   The
    appellant's claim that he could not speak Arabic was not challenged  by
    the respondent and consequently I have accepted the  appellant's  claim
    that he cannot speak Arabic.

23.  Mr Tufan submitted that the appellant can relocate to  Baghdad  and  it
    will be reasonable for him to relocate to the Kurdish zone from Baghdad
    because he has not been found to be a credible person.   The  Secretary
    of State found that the appellant is from Kirkuk.  He  found  that  the
    appellant cannot return to Kirkuk.  He also finds that almost  everyone
    can relocate to Baghdad Belts area.  The conclusion in AA at  paragraph
    153 is that only a  small  percentage  of  Iraqis  cannot  relocate  to
    Baghdad.

24.  Mr Tufan submitted  that  the  appellant  does  not  have  to  stay  in
    Baghdad.  He can relocate to the Iraqi Kurdish region in according with
    the findings at paragraph 171 of AA.  AA concludes that  those  who  do
    not originate from IKR are returned to Baghdad.  The appellant will  be
    returned to Baghdad.  There are flights from Baghdad to the IKR and  it
    would not be unreasonable to expect the appellant to  relocate  to  the
    IKR from Baghdad.

25.  With regard  to  securing  employment,  Mr  Tufan  submitted  that  the
    appellant said at  his  screening  interview  that  he  had  worked  in
    construction.  He would have the availability and assistance of  family
    and friends because his evidence was that his father worked in the  oil
    industry and was a policeman.  There was no credible evidence that  his
    family is lost.

26.  Mr  Tufan  relied  on  paragraph  3.1.3  of  the  Home  Office  country
    information and guidance which stated  that  relocation  to  the  Iraqi
    Kurdistan region (IKR) is possible in general for Iraqi Kurds from  IKR
    and those not from the IKR via Baghdad.

27.  Mr Tufan submitted that the appellant is in a similar position  to  the
    applicant in AA.  He is Kurdish and comes from Kirkuk  City,  which  is
    one of the contested areas of Iraq.  He would  face  an  Article  15(c)
    risk if he is returned there.  However the Tribunal held  at  paragraph
    206 that the Respondent has  confirmed  that  the  appellant  would  be
    returned to  Baghdad  city.   Mr  Tufan  submitted  that  the  lack  of
    documentation should not affect a finding on Article 15(c).

Conclusions

28.  I accept that the appellant's core claim has been rejected  as  lacking
    credibility by the judge.  I also accept that he has produced  identity
    documents which have been found to be false documents.

29.  I accept the profile attributed to the appellant by Ms Vidal.  He is  a
    Sunni Muslim of Kurdish origin.  I find that he is  a  Soranic  speaker
    and not an Arabic speaker. I accept, as submitted by  Mr.  Tufan,  that
    the appellant's circumstances are similar to the applicant in  AA.   As
    he is Kurdish and comes from Kirkuk, which  is  one  of  the  contested
    areas of Iraq, I find that he would face an Article 15(c)  risk  if  he
    returns there.

30.  Consequently, the appellant would be returned  to  Baghdad  City.   The
    issue as to whether the appellant has  the  required  documentation  to
    enable the respondent to return him to Baghdad City was not  argued  by
    Ms Vidal.  Consequently, I accept Mr Tufan's submission that  the  lack
    of documentation should not affect a finding on Article 15(c).

31.  The Upper Tribunal held in AA head note 14 that "as a  general  matter,
    it will not be unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  for  a  person  from  a
    contested area to relocate to Baghdad City (subject to certain parts of
    the "Baghdad Belts"i.e. the urban environs around Baghdad City) or  the
    Baghdad Belts".

32.  The Upper Tribunal at head note 15 identified factors that were  likely
    to be relevant when assessing whether it would  be  unreasonable/unduly
    harsh for an appellant to relocate to Baghdad.  One of the factors  was
    whether the appellant has a CSID or will be able  to  obtain  one.   No
    evidence was led on this issue and Ms Vidal made no submission on  this
    either.  I have already found that in the absence of a challenge by the
    respondent, the appellant is not an Arabic speaker.  Ms Vidal submitted
    that the appellant has no family members  or  friends  in  Baghdad  who
    would be able to accommodate him and  that  he  would  have  difficulty
    obtaining accommodation. This was not challenged by Mr. Tufan.  It  was
    held in AA that those who cannot speak Arabic are less likely  to  find
    employment in Baghdad.  On balance I find that it would be unreasonable
    and duly harsh for the appellant to relocate to Baghdad City  where  he
    would be returned to.

33.  I consider Mr. Tufan's submission that the appellant  can  relocate  to
    the IKR by catching a flight from Baghdad to Erbil or Sulaymaniyah.  In
    the light of Dr. Fatah's evidence, the Upper Tribunal held in  AA  that
    there is no Article 15(c) risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR;  and
    neither does a person's  ethnicity,  religion  or  sex,  whether  taken
    individually or cumulatively, enhance the level of risk so as to engage
    Article 15(c).  The KKR is virtually free of violence.

34.  In AA head note 20 the Upper Tribunal held

         "Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be  expected  to
         avoid any potential undue harshness in that city by  travelling  to
         the IKR, will be fact  sensitive;  and  is  likely  to  involve  an
         assessment of (a) the practicality of travel from  Baghdad  to  the
         IKR (such as to Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of  K's  securing
         employment in the IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance  from
         family and friends in the IKR"

35.  I take note of Dr. Fatah's assertion that  as  a  Kurd,  the  appellant
    would not have to overcome the hurdle of providing a sponsor  in  order
    to enter the IKR and is  unlikely  to  fact  the  arbitrary  procedures
    existing at entry points.  Dr. Fatah however expressed the  reservation
    that it may not be possible for the appellant to relocate  to  the  IKR
    with any permanency, if his civil register is in Kirkuk.  There was  no
    evidence  from  the  appellant  as  to  where  in  the  IKR  his  civil
    registration is.  I take note of the fact that the  evidence  on  which
    the appellant based his asylum claim was  rejected  by  the  First-tier
    Judge.  The judge went on to say that the appellant  was  not  able  to
    provide evidence on the current whereabouts of his father, although  he
    stated that he had been told that they had moved out of the area, which
    suggested that the appellant's father had found somewhere  to  relocate
    away from perceived danger.

36.  When the appellant left Kirkuk in 2008, his father still  worked  there
    according to his evidence.  In the further statement he submitted dated
    7 December 2011 he said he had no contact with his family  since  2008.
    Indeed I have no evidence that his family has remained in Kirkuk  given
    the security situation since the appellant's departure.  In the absence
    of familial ties and friendship ties in Baghdad or Kirkuk, I find  that
    it would not be safe for the appellant to be returned  to  Baghdad  and
    expect him to then relocate to Kirkuk.

37.  As a Sunni Muslim, I find that the appellant  cannot  relocate  to  the
    relatively safe areas in the south which are predominantly occupied  by
    the Shia.  He will be faced with sectarian violence.

Notice of Decision

38.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

