
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/10416/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On October 18, 2016             |On October 24, 2016             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                MR RASUL [A]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by Broudie,
                    Jackson & Canter
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Interpreter:     Mr Ashtiany


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran. He arrived in the United Kingdom
       on July 20, 2014 and claimed asylum the following day.

    2. The respondent refused his claim on November 7, 2014 under paragraph
       336 HC 395 and took a decision to remove him by  way  of  directions
       under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

    3. The appellant appealed that decision  under  section  82(1)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on December 1, 2014.

    4. The appeal came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Morris
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on February 25, 2015 and in a
       decision promulgated  on  March  18,  2015  the  Judge  refused  the
       appellant's appeal.

    5. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on April 1,  2015  submitting
       the Judge had erred by failing to give adequate or any  reasons  for
       his findings and for failing to properly consider risk on return  as
       a failed asylum seeker. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of
       the First-tier Tribunal Fisher on April 15, 2015 on  the  basis  the
       grounds were arguable.

    6. The matter came before me on May 6, 2016 and in a detailed  decision
       I found there was only an error in law in  the  way  the  Judge  had
       dealt with the article 15(c) issue. In all other respects  I  upheld
       the decision including the following findings made by the  Judge  in
       paragraphs [28] and [29]:


        a. The fact no one had taken action against him despite them  being
           aware he had rejected Islam.
        b. The fact he had visited a prayer room in  the  mosque-the  point
           being made that there was nothing untoward in going to a  mosque
           to use a toilet or to go in and look around but the fact he went
           to  a  prayer  room  was  something  the  Judge  found  to  lack
           credibility.
        c. The failure to mention the fight in his screening interview  and
           the fact he failed to mention the words "I shit on  your  leader
           Emam" until much later in his interview.
        d. The fact he returned to Iran having  already  left  the  country
           because of what had happened.
        e. The absence of any warning of the  risk  given  to  him  by  his
           employer or his family.
        f. The fact that even when he did  receive  a  warning  message  he
           nevertheless went to work.
        g. Inconsistent evidence about what he did when he arrived back  in
           Iran on May 6 and what happened thereafter.

    7. The matter came back before on August 25, 2016 and on that  occasion
       the appellant's representative indicated that there was a new  issue
       namely "Christian conversion". I gave directions for the  filing  of
       further evidence and the matter came back before  me  on  the  above
       date.

    8. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity  direction  and  I
       see no reason to make such an order today.


    9. The appellant and witness, Roy Teague, both adopted their statements
       and gave oral  evidence.  Each  witness  was  cross-examined  by  Ms
       Abiony. I have also had regard to the bundles of documents submitted
       by  the  appellant's  solicitors  along  with  the  content  of  the
       respondent's bundle and earlier decision of Judge of the  First-tier
       Tribunal Morris.


EVIDENCE


   10. The appellant, having adopted his  original  statement  and  a  more
       recent statement made on October 5, 2016, gave oral evidence.

   11. He stated that since around October 2014 he began attending a church
       in Rochdale called the Well Community Church.  His  original  reason
       for attending there was because there was a food bank there.


   12. Between October 2014 and October 2015 he was what he described as an
       irregular attender at church services and meetings in that  he  went
       maybe twice a month. However, since November  2015  he  has  been  a
       regular attender  and  has  attended  Sunday  services  and  midweek
       learning sessions. In January 2016 he  decided  that  he  wished  to
       convert to Christianity. It was in November 2015 that  a  friend  of
       his noticed he was depressed and asked him about religion.  He  told
       him that he did not believe in God and consequently did not  have  a
       religion. He was encouraged to attend at services and this  is  what
       he did. In January he was firmly of the  opinion  that  Christianity
       was something he believed in and he started an  Alpha  course  which
       lasted for six weeks and took place each Wednesday. The  course  was
       in English but translated by a Farsi interpreter.


   13. Since being  baptised  he  has  continued  to  attend  services  and
       meetings and to help out with the food bank. He has  introduced  one
       particular friend, Alex, to the church albeit  he  is  a  footballer
       with Bolton Wanderers and is committed to training and matches.


   14. The appellant also stated in his statement that he has  preached  on
       the streets of Rochdale and Manchester  on  around  seven  or  eight
       times and he has  a  personal  Instagram  account  in  the  name  of
       "ashkan.1971". Whilst the account is not in his  personal  name  the
       profile picture is his. He has a large number of followers including
       friends who live in Iran.


   15. He maintained that if returned to Iran he would be unable to express
       his feelings for  religion  because  as  a  convert  he  would  face
       persecution.


   16. Under cross-examination he stated:


        a. He began regularly attending church since January 2016.
        b. He wished to be baptised because he considered himself to  be  a
           true Christian and he felt Christianity was his true religion.
        c. Between October 2014 and November 2015 he attended church  maybe
           once or twice a month.
        d. The Alpha classes were led by a chap called Ian who is the  main
           church leader.
        e. He has had a Farsi bible since November 2015.


   17. In answer to questions posed by myself he stated  that  although  he
       had begun attending church in October 2014 he had not mentioned this
       to his solicitors or the Tribunal in February 2015  because  he  was
       not a convert. He told his solicitors shortly before the hearing  in
       August 2016.

   18. Mr Teague then gave evidence on behalf  of  the  appellant.  He  had
       provided an  email  giving  details  of  his  involvement  with  the
       appellant and he adopted that email as  part  of  his  evidence.  He
       stated he was one of the leaders in the church and he believed  that
       the appellant was a genuine Christian because of the  regularity  of
       his attendance  at  services  and  meetings,  his  personality,  his
       assessment of him at  meetings  and  the  fact  he  participated  in
       services. He firmly believed in his conversion and he would not have
       attended if he felt otherwise.


   19. Under cross-examination Mr Teague stated:


        a. The appellant had been a regular attender at  the  church  since
           October 2014 attending services on a Sunday and  meetings  on  a
           Wednesday. He continued to attend at food bank  and  contributed
           to a website.
        b. He first indicated he wanted to be baptised in early 2015.
        c. No formal baptism classes are run by the church but they  simply
           provide the applicant a bible and ask  them  to  read  it  on  a
           regular basis.
        d. He has baptised over thirty converts and so far,  he  has  never
           refused anyone. He has encouraged people to wait  a  bit  longer
           but he has never refused anyone.
        e. Some people attend at church  wanting  to  convert  but  do  not
           return.
        f. He was unsure exactly how many people the appellant had  brought
           to the church but he recalled one person from Bolton.


   20. When questioned further by myself he told me that the appellant  had
       also attended at his home address as had other converts. He believed
       that the appellant was part of a group that  exchanged  messages  on
       "Viber".

   21. In re-examination he stated that he was not actually involved in his
       baptism as it was done in conjunction with another  church  although
       he had met him and discussed what would happen. He was  involved  in
       the Alpha classes which between ten and thirty people attended.

SUBMISSIONS

   22. Ms Abony relied in the refusal letter in so far as risk  ion  return
       was concerned as well as the findings of  the  original  Judge.  She
       submitted that following the decision of SSH and HR  (illegal  exit:
       failed asylum seeker (CG) [2-16] UKUT 308 he would not be at risk on
       return as he had no profile unless he was  found  to  be  a  genuine
       convert.

   23. Ms Aboni made reference to the fact he  had  only  recently  brought
       this aspect of his claim to the attention of his solicitors and  had
       made no mention of his attendance at church in February 2015 or  May
       2016 when he attended at the Tribunal. In fact, the  first  time  he
       mentioned his conversion was in August 2016 when he attended  for  a
       CMR hearing. She submitted that his  attendance  at  church  was  an
       attempt to embellish a failing asylum claim and to obtain  leave  to
       remain. The timing of this claim casts doubt on the  genuineness  of
       the claim as was his wish to be baptised so quickly after commencing
       classes. She further submitted that the Instagram account was not in
       his name and he would not be identifiable from the account.


   24. Regardless of his purported claim there were inconsistencies between
       his evidence and that of Mr Teague namely:


        a. Mr Teague says the appellant regularly attended church  services
           and meetings since October 2014. The appellant now claimed  went
           there in October 2014  because  of  the  foodbank  and  attended
           services from November 2015.
        b. Mr  Teague  says  he  has  brought  other  new  members  whereas
           appellant says he only brought one new member.
        c. The appellant claimed he handed out  leaflets  and  preached  in
           Rochdale and Manchester but neither Mr Teague nor  Mrs  Thompson
           mentioned this in their letters of support and Mr Teague did not
           mention this in oral evidence.


   25. Ms Aboni submitted his claim to  be  a  genuine  convert  should  be
       rejected as he has merely gone through the process  to  bolster  his
       claim.

   26. Mr Nicholson invited me to find the appellant was a credible witness
       and a credible convert. It was  not  necessary  to  show  he  was  a
       genuine convert as converting from Islam to Christianity would place
       him at risk according to the respondent's own guidance. In any event
       two people say he is a genuine  convert  and  Mr  Teague  gave  oral
       evidence on the matter. The timeline shows he has  not  rushed  into
       this religion. He attended  services  irregularly  at  first  before
       deciding he wanted to be baptised and convert to  Christianity.  The
       fact the appellant has previously been found to be a  non-practising
       Muslim means that he was close to  converting  to  another  religion
       than others.


   27. Mr Nicholson submitted that  Mr  Teague  was  not  asked  about  the
       appellant preaching on the streets and  no  adverse  finding  should
       therefore be made. Both Mr Teague and the appellant  referred  to  a
       person from Bolton being brought to the church by the appellant. The
       Instagram account was relevant because the Iranian  authorities  are
       able to identify people from social media. The Tribunal said as much
       in AB & Others (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015]
       UKUT 257 (IAC) from paragraph 462 onwards.  If  returned  his  phone
       would reveal his Instagram account and he  would  be  at  risk  from
       questioning.


   28.  Alternatively,  if  this  submission  was  rejected,  Mr  Nicholson
       maintained that he would still be at risk as a failed asylum  seeker
       as he would be questioned on return and he would be at risk  because
       of where he had come from  of  persecution.  He  argued  the  latest
       Country Guidance case had to be read carefully and he  would  be  at
       risk upon return.


   29. Having heard submissions, I reserved my decision.

FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION

   30. I originally dealt with an error of law hearing in May this year and
       at that time I was purely concerned with whether the FTT  Judge  had
       made an error in law. At that hearing I  reserved  my  decision  and
       having considered the papers further I found the FTT Judge had  been
       entitled to make the findings he did on the  appellant's  claim  but
       the only area where there was an error  concerned  the  approach  to
       risk on return. I note from my record of proceedings that  I  raised
       with Miss Khan, who represented the appellant, how I should approach
       any further resumed hearing and she indicated that if  I  found  the
       FTT Judge's whole approach  was  flawed  then  the  case  should  be
       remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for fresh findings  but  if
       the error was confined to the FTT  Judge's  assessment  of  risk  on
       return then the case could be retained in the Upper Tribunal.

   31. Although the appellant was baptised at this stage (March 2016)  this
       was neither brought to the Tribunal's attention nor the respondent's
       attention. Between May 6 and August 25, 2016, when the case was next
       listed, the matter was not raised with either the  Tribunal  or  the
       respondent.

   32. I accept that at the hearing on  August  25,  2016  the  matter  was
       mentioned for the first time but no evidence of this was  served  on
       the Tribunal or respondent until after  October  5,  2016  when  the
       appellant signed his latest witness statement.


   33. It is against this background that I examine the  appellant's  claim
       to have converted to Christianity.


   34. I accept the appellant has been baptised and has made it clear  that
       he is now a follower of the  Christian  faith  but  contrary  to  Mr
       Nicholson's submission I am satisfied that in assessing risk I  have
       to consider whether he is  a  genuine  convert  or  whether  he  has
       "converted" simply to support an asylum claim.  The  reason  I  make
       that distinction is that if he is not a genuine convert then I would
       not have any reason to find that he would follow the Christian faith
       when returned to Iran.


   35. The evidence of his interest in Christianity is slightly  confusing.
       In his statement, dated October 5, 2016, at paragraphs [6]  and  [7]
       he stated that between October 2014 and November  2015  he  attended
       church but not for the purposes of worship but merely to attend  the
       foodbank. However, in his evidence to me at the hearing he  told  me
       that he began attending services from October 2014 on an  "irregular
       basis". When asked what he meant by "irregular" he stated  "once  or
       twice a month". The appellant's  own  evidence  is  inconsistent  as
       regards when he started attending church for religious reasons.


   36. He went onto state in his statement that between November  2015  and
       January 2016 he attended every couple of weeks but this  contradicts
       the oral evidence he gave at the hearing.


   37. The appellant's account is different from the evidence given  by  Mr
       Teague. He provided  an  email  stating  that  the  appellant  began
       attending church in October 2014 and he went onto say  in  his  oral
       evidence that the appellant attended Sunday services  and  Wednesday
       meetings. His recollection differed from the appellant's account.


   38. The appellant's evidence appears to be that after visiting  possibly
       four meetings/services  between  November  and  January  he  decided
       Christianity was the religion he wanted to follow and in January  he
       decided he wanted to be baptised. However, Mr Teague made  clear  in
       his oral evidence that it was  in  early  2015  that  the  appellant
       expressed a wish to be baptised. A further  inconsistency  in  their
       accounts.


   39. Mr Teague is a member of the church and I  have  no  doubt  that  he
       represents his church and is enthusiastic when it comes to welcoming
       new members. As he stated in his oral evidence he had never  refused
       to baptise anyone albeit some had been encouraged to wait.  However,
       if someone insisted on being baptised  then  that  would  happen.  I
       accept Mr Teague's evidence at face value and  find  him  to  be  an
       honest witness but  the  fact  remains  there  were  inconsistencies
       between his recollection and that of  the  appellant.  Mr  Nicholson
       made the point that he could not be expected to remember  everything
       and that may well be the case and it is possible the information  he
       gave about the appellant may have been lacking due to a genuine lack
       of recollection or knowledge. Nevertheless, I find the church  looks
       for converts and the fact no potential applicants have  been  turned
       away is testament to this fact.


   40. It  seems  therefore  that  the  appellant's  "conversion"  happened
       quickly based on the fact he only started attending  irregularly  in
       November 2015 and by January he wanted to be baptised with a baptism
       taking place two months later in March. No real evidence was adduced
       from the church as to what steps were  taken  by  the  appellant  to
       reach this position and the actual baptism service was  not  carried
       out by Mr Teague.


   41. The appellant went from not having a religion to being  a  religious
       convert in the space of a couple of months. He converted at  a  time
       when his initial appeal had been refused by the FTT Judge.


   42. I am satisfied that when he attended the First-tier hearing  he  was
       not attending services and there would  be  no  reason  for  him  to
       mention it. However, by the time he appeared before me in  May  2016
       he was a fully converted and baptised Christian,  on  his  evidence,
       and I therefore find it surprising that this was not brought to  the
       respondent's attention until the CMR hearing in August. However,  as
       I have no information from the solicitors about  the  disclosure  to
       them I do not attach any adverse weight to this disclosure.


   43. The current position is the appellant still attends  church  and  in
       the view of Mr Teague he is a Christian.


   44. I am much more sceptical than Mr Teague and Mr Nicholson  about  the
       appellant's  conversion.  The  conversion  was  rushed.  There   are
       inconsistencies in the appellant's own  account  of  when  he  began
       expressing an interest in the  religion.  He  also  stated  that  he
       preached in Rochdale and Manchester but this was  not  mentioned  by
       either Mr Teague or the church treasurer.


   45. The appellant produced evidence of an Instagram account. His name is
       not on the account and a check of that  account  reveals  his  first
       post was in July 2016. He has posted a number of pictures and whilst
       I accept his current profile shows his picture I  am  not  satisfied
       the Iranian authorities would identify him from this.  Although  the
       Tribunal in AB made it clear  that  the  Iranian  authorities  track
       social media the fact the account is not even in  his  name  removes
       the risk of being identified. Mr Nicholson suggested that  he  could
       be identified from his phone. His account could only be seen  if  he
       remained signed into the Instagram  application  and  if  he  feared
       persecution I do not find it credible he would  remain  signed  into
       the account if he were returned to Iran.


   46. Put simply I find the appellant has sought to give the impression he
       is a Christian convert but I am not satisfied he is genuine  in  his
       conversion and consequently I am not satisfied it is a  religion  he
       would follow, if returned, in Iran. It follows I reject his claim to
       be at risk by reason of religious conversion.


   47. I was invited by Mr Nicholson to assess general risk on return. Both
       he and Ms Aboni referred me to the latest country guidance  decision
       of SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker (CG)  [2-16]  UKUT
       308. Mr Nicholson invited me to go behind the findings and headlines
       submitting that he was being returned not through choice  and  there
       was  a  lack  of  evidence  on  risks  to  people   being   returned
       involuntary.


   48. The arguments advanced  by  Mr  Nicholson  were  considered  by  the
       Tribunal. He submitted the Tribunal accepted what Mr Drabble QC  had
       argued but the Tribunal rejected Dr Kakhki's claim that  there  were
       material differences  since  the  previous  country  guidance  case.
       Whilst accepting a person returning on a  laissez  passer  would  be
       questioned  they  rejected  his   submission   that   the   evidence
       established that a person returned on a laissez passer would be on a
       wanted list.


   49. Mr Nicholson had also argued that  the  fact  he  had  an  Instagram
       account would place him at risk but for the reasons given above I do
       not find any merit in that argument due the nature of the account he
       used. The Tribunal made clear at paragraph [11]:


    "In AB & Others (internet activity - state of  evidence)  Iran [2015]
    UKUT 257 (IAC) there is reference  at  paragraph  457  to  the  act  of
    returning someone creating  a  "pinch  point"  so  that  returnees  are
    brought into direct contact with the authorities in Iran who have  both
    the time and inclination to interrogate them. That however was  in  the
    context of people who had engaged  in  internet  activity,  and  it  is
    relevant to note also that at paragraph 470 the Tribunal  said  that  a
    person who is returning to Iran after a reasonably short period of time
    on an ordinary passport, having left illegally, would almost  certainly
    not attract any particular attention at all.  It  went  on  to  say  at
    paragraph 471 that where a person's leave to remain had lapsed and they
    might be travelling on a  special  passport  there  would  be  enhanced
    interest and the  more  active  they  had  been  the  more  likely  the
    authorities' interest could lead to persecution. That is essentially  a
    comment rather than evidence, and though it agrees with what is said by
    Dr Kakhki, it takes matters no further in our view as to  the  risk  of
    ill-treatment on return during a period of questioning.  In  particular
    as it cites no evidence to support the view expressed, and also it is a
    remark made in the context of evaluating risk on  account  of  blogging
    activities, and the reference to 'more active' would not be  applicable
    to a person with no relevant profile."


   50. The Tribunal concluded that it had not been shown that there  was  a
       real risk that a person who has no history other than being a failed
       asylum seeker who exited Iran illegally would face a  real  risk  of
       persecution. There were minimal examples of cases  which  even  were
       they to be taken at their highest could be said to be cases of  ill-
       treatment on that basis  and  cannot  be  said,  given  the  numbers
       returned, to give rise to a real risk.  So  little  information  was
       given that it was impossible to conclude that it  was  the  fact  of
       illegal exit or having made a  failed  asylum  claim,  taken  either
       alone or together, that triggered adverse interest on return to  say
       with any confidence what the full  circumstances  in  any  of  those
       cases were.


   51. The Tribunal stated at paragraph [33]:


        a. An Iranian male whom it is sought to return to  Iran,  who  does
           not possess a passport, will be returnable on a laissez passer,
           which he can  obtain  from  the  Iranian  Embassy  on  proof  of
           identity and nationality.
        b. An Iranian male in respect  of  whom  no  adverse  interest  has
           previously been manifested by the Iranian State does not face  a
           real risk of persecution/breach  of  his  Article  3  rights  on
           return to Iran on account of having left Iran  illegally  and/or
           being a failed asylum seeker. No such risk exists at the time of
           questioning on return to Iran  nor  after  the  facts  (i.e.  of
           illegal exit  and  being  a  failed  asylum  seeker)  have  been
           established.  In  particular,  there  is  not  a  real  risk  of
           prosecution leading to imprisonment.


   52. Based on the earlier findings of the FTT Judge  along  with  my  own
       findings on the Christianity claim I  find  this  appellant  has  no
       profile that would place him at risk of persecution.


DECISION

   53. I dismiss his application for asylum.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No order is made because I have dismissed his appeal.


Signed                                       Dated

 [pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
