
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10313/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 5th June 2014                              |On 6th June 2014             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    WALID MOHAMED RABI ADBULKARIM HALTASH
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Lister - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mr J Howard agent for Morden Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination
        of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rose, promulgated following a  hearing
        at Sheldon Court Birmingham in March 2014, in which the  appeal  on
        asylum and human rights grounds was allowed.


     2. Mr Haltash contended he  is  a  citizen  of  Syria  which  was  not
        accepted by the Secretary of State  relying  on  a  Sprakab  report
        assessing him to be a national of Egypt.


     3. The Judge analysed the evidence and in relation to the weight to be
        placed upon the language analysis referred specifically to the case
        of RB (Somalia) [2012] EWCA Civ 227 and the Scottish case of M.AB.N
        v The Advocate General for Scotland Representing the  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department [2013] ScotCS CSIH 68  which  are  of
        direct relevance to the weight that should be attached to a Sprakab
        report.


     4. The Judge accepted that Mr Haltash had provided an explanation  for
        why he spoke a variety of Arabic that  is  spoken  in  Egypt  [25],
        found it plausible that his speech and vocabulary  were  influenced
        by his close association with a person who he was working with  who
        was himself an Egyptian [26], noted the lack of  any  reference  in
        the report to  the  extent  with  which  the  dialect  or  dialects
        referred to as "Egyptian Arabic" are spoken within Syria [27], that
        there was no indication in the report that the  linguist  was  made
        aware of the explanation for the dialect used especially  in  light
        of the  fact  that  the  telephone  discussion  with  the  language
        analysis occurred before the  interview  when  questions  were  put
        regarding the dialect. There is no evidence  from  Sprakab  of  the
        likelihood  that  the  explanation  adequately  accounted  for  the
        dialect used [28].


     5. The Judge also considered it  of  some  relevance  that  while  the
        report gave  examples  of  phonological,  grammatical  and  lexical
        features of Mr Haltash's language congruent with "Egyptian  Arabic"
        there was no indication that the interview established  whether  or
        not he was aware of the corresponding  Syrian  Arabic  usage  which
        does not appear to have  been  addressed  during  the  conversation
        [32].  The linguist's conclusions based in part upon the  knowledge
        assessment in section 3 of the report is challenged by reference to
        the Scottish case in which it was found that "in what  purports  to
        be expert evidence of a linguistic analysis the author was stepping
        outside his proper field of expertise in expressing such views  and
        comments". There was no indication in the report to what extent the
        author was aware of the particular facts relating to Homs which  it
        was claimed  Mr  Haltash  was  unaware  of  [33].   Accordingly  in
        paragraph 36 of the determination the Judge found:


     36.  In the light of the matters to which I have referred, while I take
   full           account of the findings in RB (Somalia) , I do not  regard
   the Sprakab             report as  providing  strong  evidence  that  the
   appellants account of            the way in which  he  has  come  to  use
   "Egyptian Arabic" is                      implausible.


     6. The Judge proceeded to analyse  further  aspects  of  the  evidence
        resulting in a final conclusion that:


     44.  In light of the matters to which I have referred, in my  judgement
          neither the conclusions set out in  the  Sprakab  report  nor  the
          consideration of the questions about Syria that were asked at  his
          asylum interview provides any strong basis on which to reject  the
          Appellants claim to be a Syrian national.  The account that he has
              given of his residence in Syria, and the way in which he  came
   to             speak as he does, is credible.  No  specific  points  were
   raised                  regarding his account of the way in which he came
   to leave Syria.  I           find it is probable that he is from Syria as
   he claims, and is a Syrian            national.


     7. The immigration decision purports to remove the Appellant to  Egypt
        in relation to which it was submitted there  was  a  real  risk  of
        refoulement to Syria which the Judge accepted [45].   By  reference
        to the country guidance material, and in light of the fact that  it
        had not been shown that Mr Haltash was likely to be perceived as  a
        supporter of the Assad regime, the appeal was allowed.



Error of law


     8. The Secretary of State's  challenge  to  the  determination  is  in
        effect a weight challenge to the Judges conclusions relating to the
        linguistic report. Since permission was  given  in  this  case  the
        Supreme Court has handed down its judgement in SSHD  v  MN  and  KY
        [2014] UKSC 30 in which they find  that  for  the  most  part,  the
        general guidance given by the Upper Tribunal [in RB]was helpful and
        appropriate  but  on  two  aspects  the  guidance  appears   unduly
        prescriptive and potentially misleading. The first  is  as  to  the
        weight to be given to such evidence in future cases.  It  seems  to
        underplay the  importance  in  any  case  of  the  tribunal  itself
        examining such  a  report  critically  in  the  light  of  all  the
        evidence, and of the reasoning supporting its conclusion. The other
        concern is similar, relating to the guidance on  anonymity.  It  is
        important to emphasise  that  it  would  remain  the  duty  of  the
        tribunal in any future case to determine what justice requires,  in
        the light of the evidence and submissions made to them [44-50].


     9. In the cases before the Supreme Court it was found there were clear
        reasons for dismissing the appeals on their own facts. The comments
        in the reports upon which the Secretary of State originally  relied
        on knowledge of country and culture were inadequately supported  by
        any demonstrated expertise of the authors.  In  some  respects  the
        evidence went beyond the proper role of a witness. Expert witnesses
        should never act or appear to act as advocates. The  judge  in  the
        Upper Tribunal was  entitled  to  regard  the  guidance  in  RB  as
        persuasive on the procedural matters covered by it, but it  was  no
        substitute for a critical analysis of the particular reports relied
        on and of the reasoning of the first tribunal [52-60].


    10. In the determination Judge Rose appears to have done precisely what
        the Supreme Court stated he should have done,  namely  undertake  a
        critical analysis of the report and the conclusions arrived  at  by
        its author. It is clear the Judge considered such evidence with the
        degree of care required in  an  appeal  of  this  nature  and  gave
        adequate reasons for the findings made, as a result  of  which  the
        weight to be given to the report and the evidence generally  was  a
        matter for the Judge - see SS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
        155.


    11. I do not  find  that  the  grounds  or  submissions  establish  any
        arguable error in the approach taken by the Judge to the  evidence,
        the weight given to that evidence, or the  adequacy  of  reasoning.
        The question is not  whether  another  judge  will  make  the  same
        decision but whether the conclusion as to nationality is within the
        range of findings available to the Judge on the evidence.   I  find
        the Secretary of State has not substantiated her claim that  it  is
        not.  As the judge found Mr Haltash had discharged  the  burden  of
        proof upon him to prove that he is a Syrian national, has  accepted
        that there was a credible risk of refoulement from Egypt, and  that
        Mr Haltash would not be perceived  as  a  supporter  of  the  Assad
        regime, he is entitled to a grant of international protection as  a
        refugee.  Such a finding is in accordance with  the  relevant  case
        law.


    12. No legal error material to the decision to  allow  the  appeal  has
        been proved. The fault is not in the decision of the Judge but  the
        format of the evidence the Secretary of State sought to  rely  upon
        which will hopefully be addressed in future reports  following  the
        guidance provided by the Supreme Court.


Decision

    13. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    14. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 5th June 2014



