
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10200/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Phoenix House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12 May 2015                       |On 15 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR SYED KHAWAR JAMILRIZVI
                         (anonymity order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Khan of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is the Secretary of State and the respondent is  a  citizen
   of Pakistan born on 4 February 1981.  However, for convenience,  I  refer
   below to Mr Rizvi as the appellant and to the Secretary of State  as  the
   respondent, which are the designations they  had  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

2. The Secretary of State appeals with  permission  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
   against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Robson promulgated
   on 11 February 2015 2015, allowing the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
   decision of the Secretary of State made on 7 November 2014, in which  the
   Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum   and
   humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.

3. Thus the appeal came before me

    The appellant's case

4. The appellant's case is as follows.  The  appellant's  parents,  brothers
   and sisters live  in  Pakistan.  His  wife  and  children  also  live  in
   Pakistan. His family members are all  of  the  Ahmadi  faith.  There  are
   difficulties in practising his faith in Pakistan. There have been several
   incidents affecting the appellant due  to  his  Ahmadi  faith.  The  main
   incident happened on 15 June 2014. On 14 June 2014 three people came  and
   left their cassette player with the appellant to  repair.  He  fixed  the
   appliance into the car. The owner of the car, Raza spoke to the appellant
   pointing out that the name of the premises indicates that  the  appellant
   must be an Ahmadi and therefore how is it that he could continue to work.
   He asked about the appellant's faith and the man got angry and threw  the
   cassette player through a  glass  window  display  cabinet  and  verbally
   abused the appellant.

5. The appellant reported the matter to the police station but  he  did  not
   have  sufficient  details  about  the  perpetrators   of   the   offence.
   Nevertheless, he asked the police to visit his shop to  see  the  damage.
   The police initially agreed but failed to attend  and  he  later  learned
   that Raza had issued an application on 18 June. He was aware that in  FIR
   would follow in all likelihood. He obtained the FIR relating  to  himself
   from the police through a friend. The document he  received  was  not  an
   original but a copy.

6. On 25 June the police came to his shop when the appellant was  not  there
   and then they went to his house. He learnt that the police  were  seeking
   the appellant so he stayed at Silcott at his paternal aunt's house  until
   he left Pakistan. He however did return to  say  farewell  to  his  wife,
   children and parents.

    The respondent's reasons for refusal

7. The respondent in her Reasons for Refusal letter dated  5  December  2014
   stated in summary the following. The  appellant's  credibility  has  been
   compromised due to the  various  inconsistencies  in  his  evidence.  The
   appellant claims that he was wanted by the authorities in Pakistan but he
   was  able  to  pass  through  airport  security  and  leave  the  country
   unhindered. Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (treatment  of
   claimants et cetera) Act 2004 applies to the appellant's conduct.

8. "Whilst it was accepted that the appellant was a Pakistan  national  from
   Rabwah, he has failed to demonstrate a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood
   that he would be at real risk of persecution from  Pakistani  authorities
   on account of his religious beliefs and it was not accepted  that  he  is
   wanted by the authorities on a charge of blasphemy.

9. The appellant does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  in
   respect of appendix FM and paragraph 276 ADE. Although she states that he
   has a brother who is a British national the appellant  was  not  able  to
   detail where his brother lived and  simply  said  "somewhere  in  London"
   which  indicated  the  low  level  of  the  relationship.  There  are  no
   exceptional circumstances in the appellant's case and therefore  he  does
   not qualify for discretionary leave.

    The First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings

10.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Robson  gave  the  following  reasons  for
   allowing the appellant's appeal.

      i. Paragraph 53 "it would be helpful to bear in mind the  decision  of
         MN where it states that legislation in Pakistan restricts  the  way
         in which Ahmadi's are able to  openly  practice  their  faith.  The
         legislation  not  only  prohibits  preaching  and  other  forms  of
         proselytising but also  restricts  other  elements  of  manifesting
         one's religious beliefs,  such  as  holding  open  discourse  about
         religion   with   non-Ahmadi's,   although   not    amounting    to
         proselytising".

     ii. Subparagraph 5 "in light  of  the  above  the  first  question  the
         decision maker must make is (1) whether the claimant  genuinely  is
         an Ahmadi. As with all judicial fact-finding, the judge  will  need
         to reach conclusions on all the evidence as a whole giving  such  a
         weight to aspects of that evidence  as  appropriate  in  accordance
         with Article 4 of the Qualifications Directive. This is  likely  to
         include an enquiry whether the claimant  was  registered  with  the
         Ahmadi community in Pakistan and worship  and  engage  their  on  a
         regular basis. Most travel activity will also be relevant.

    iii. Subparagraph 6 "the next step (2)  involves  an  enquiry  into  the
         claimant's intentions or wishes as to his or her faith, if returned
         to Pakistan. This is relevant because  of  the  need  to  establish
         whether it is of particular importance to the religious identity of
         the Ahmadi concerned to engage at paragraph (2) (i) behaviour.  The
         burden is on the claimant to demonstrate that any intention or wish
         to practice and manifest aspects of the faith openly that  are  not
         permitted by the Pakistan Penal  Code  is  genuinely  held  and  of
         particular importance to  the  claimant  to  preserve  his  or  her
         religious identity.

     iv. Paragraph 56 "the appellant had previously applied for visit  visas
         (as noted by the respondent in the refusal letter) and those  visit
         visas included in both cases reference  to  the  intention  of  the
         appellant to attend an Ahmadi Convention.  Both  applications  were
         refused not because the respondent rejected that the appellant  was
         going to attend an Ahmadi Convention but in both cases on financial
         grounds"

      v. Paragraph "57 the appellant has demonstrated some  active  elements
         of his Ahmadi faith by on the one hand attending (Ahmadi)  meetings
         in India and on the other hand seeking to attend  meetings  in  the
         United Kingdom".

     vi. Paragraph 59 "the question that arose as to how the  appellant  had
         managed to open a business  in  a  predominantly  Ahmadi  community
         which caused the appellant then to  tell  the  man  of  his  Ahmadi
         faith." The appellant  further  said  in  his  oral  evidence  that
         although he accepted that the man was not from Rabwah area, he, the
         appellant was in a very major Ahmadi area and he felt safe.

    vii. Paragraph 60 "I consider it is not unreasonable given the  evidence
         about his practices in his country that he would choose not to tell
         a lie albeit that he was aware of the potential repercussions of so
         doing.

   viii. Paragraph 69 "in view of my findings above, I am satisfied and find
         that  the  appellant  is  a  practising  Ahmadi  and  his  fear  of
         persecution on return is a genuine one. It was  and  would  be  his
         intention to practice his  faith  on  return"  and  accordingly  he
         allowed the appellant's appeal  on  both  asylum  and  humanitarian
         protection grounds.

    The respondent's grounds of appeal

11. The respondent's grounds of appeal states  the  following.  The  judge's
   assessment of credibility is materially flawed. The refusal letter relied
   on section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  Etc)
   Act 2004 and the Judge committed an error in law in  failing  to  address
   either implicitly or explicitly, factors  relied  upon  as  damaging  the
   appellant's credibility under section 8.

12. The  Judge  failed  to  resolve  the  conflicts  in  the  evidence.  The
   appellant gave conflicting  accounts  of  his  immigration  history  (see
   paragraph 16, 18 and 52) however the Judge  fails,  however  briefly,  to
   make any reference to these conflicts. While  it  is  accepted  that  the
   Judge does not have to rehearse every  detail  but  there  is  a  further
   failure to address material conflicts in  the  evidence  as  set  out  in
   paragraph 43 and 32 of the reasons for refusal letter.

13. The Judge failed to take into account when  addressing  the  credibility
   of the FIR, the remarks made by the respondent in her refusal  letter  at
   paragraph 62 and also failed to look at the documentation  in  the  round
   and follow the guidance in Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439.

14. The Judge further erred in allowing the appeal  both  under  asylum  and
   humanitarian protection grounds although this is not a material error.

15. At the hearing I heard submissions from both parties as to whether
   there is an error of law in the determination.

    Findings as to whether there is an error of law

16. The Judge fell into  material  error  as  he  failed  to  determine  the
   inconsistencies and conflicts in  the  appellant's  evidence.  The  Judge
   failed to take into account the various discrepancies in the  appellant's
   evidence  in  assessing  the  appellant's  credibility.   The   appellant
   mentioned the incident which happened on  15  June  2014  which  was  the
   catalyst for him to leave Pakistan. He claims that his  business  was  in
   the predominantly Ahmadi area. The appellant's evidence was that a Muslim
   man who he has never met before, travelled from Chiniot and  noticed  the
   name of the appellant's shop and deduced from the name  of  the  business
   and the appellant's name that the appellant is an Ahmadi. The appellant's
   evidence is that this man then began to question  the  appellant  how  he
   managed to open a shop in predominantly Ahmadi community.  The  appellant
   said that he informed the man of his Ahmadi faith and detailed his Ahmadi
   faith. He also told this man the specifics of his belief and  showed  him
   an image of Mirza Ghulam. The man became angry  and  smashed  the  nearby
   display cabinet and left the appellant's shop instructing him to  "follow
   the true religion".

17. The respondent in the reasons for refusal letter stated that it was  not
   consistent with the background evidence that an Ahmadi living in Pakistan
   since birth, would choose not only to divulge his Ahmadi faith and say an
   Ahmadi prayer but also volunteer  the  specifics  of  his  belief  to  an
   unknown customer when he was aware of the repercussions of doing so.  The
   respondent at  paragraph  34  of  the  refusal  letter  stated  that  the
   appellant it is Asylum interview accepted that Ahmadi's cannot say  their
   prayers in public and the difficulties that the Ahmadi's face  even  when
   praying at the mosque and had stated that armed guards were in  order  to
   deter attacks, that the appellant would recite his prayers in public to a
   complete stranger.

18. There is nothing in the determination which demonstrates that the  Judge
   analysed this evidence and questioned  why  someone  living  in  Pakistan
   since birth would open up about his Ahmadi religion to a  total  stranger
   who came to his shop for repairs from  outside  the  area.  Instead,  the
   Judge at paragraph 60 found "I consider it  not  unreasonable  given  the
   evidence about his practices in his country that he should choose not  to
   tell a lie albeit that he was aware of the potential repercussions of  so
   doing". This finding is perverse given the evidence before the Judge.

19. There is also nothing in the challenged determination to  indicate  that
   the Judge considered Section  8  of  the  2004  Act  when  assessing  the
   appellant's credibility. He did not take into account that the  appellant
   gave a conflicting immigration history in the documents he used in  order
   to travel. The appellant stated he gave his official  Pakistani  passport
   which contained a fraudulent French visa to the  agent  who  took  it  to
   France. However at a substantive interview he claimed that the fraudulent
   Visa corresponds to Spain and the agent travelled  there.  He  then  once
   again change this evidence stating that the visa was in fact  French  and
   the agent did go to France. The Judge's failure to consider section 8  as
   it affected the appellant's credibility led him into material error.

20. The Judge at paragraph  62  accepted  the  FIR  is  a  genuine  document
   without giving credible reasons for so finding. This is also  a  material
   error.

21. At paragraph 66 the judge stated that the respondent placed much  weight
   on the fact that the appellant had gone into hiding on 12 August and  yet
   returned to say farewell to his family. The  Judge  stated  "such  action
   which I consider to be unwise would not necessarily mean to say  that  it
   did not happen and given that it was  likely  that  he  was  unlikely  to
   return in the foreseeable future, I find it is plausible that  he  should
   seek to see his family." The judge did not take into account  that  if  a
   person is in such fear of his life and wanted  by  the  authorities,  the
   fact that he may not see his family for a long time, would not return  to
   the area of danger where he was wanted by  the  authorities,  if  he  was
   genuinely in fear. The Judge has  fallen  into  material  error  for  his
   failure to properly consider the evidence.

22. I am ultimately  satisfied  that  there  is  a  material  error  in  the
   determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge,  in  that  he  did  not  give
   adequate reasons for finding the appellant's account to be  credible  and
   consistent, and there is nothing in the determination  to  show  that  he
   gave sufficient  consideration  to  points  adverse  to  the  appellant's
   credibility that were set out in the reasons for refusal decision.

23. Consequential to my finding that there is a material  error  of  law,  I
   set aside the determination of the Judge in  its  entirety  and  preserve
   none of the findings.

24. Both parties agreed that the appeal ought to be sent back to  the  First
   tier- Tribunal so that findings of fact can be made. I agreed  that  this
   was the proper course of action to take in this appeal in accordance with
   section 7. 2 (b) (i) the Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  of  25
   September 2012 as we were of the view that the appeal  requires  judicial
   fact-finding and should to be considered by the First-tier Tribunal.

25. The re-making of the decision on appeal will be undertaken by  a  First-
   tier Judge in the First-tier Tribunal  other  than  by  First-tier  Judge
   Robson on a date to be notified

    Decision

26. The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Robson is set aside,  and
   the appeal is sent back to the First-tier Tribunal for re-determination.



Signed by
      Date 5th day of June 2015

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Judge
Mrs S Chana

