
[pic]
st

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10747/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At  Field House                      |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3rd July 2015                     |On 28th August 2015                   |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  MRS R.B.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K.Shikder, Tower Hamlets Barristers Chamber.
For the Respondent:    Ms Julie Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 1. The proceedings before the First  tier  Tribunal  were  anonimised.  No
    application has been  made  to  change  this  and  so  this  should  be
    maintained. I am  influenced  by  the  fact  that  there  are  children
    affected by this decision.

 2. The appellant is a national of  Bangladesh.  She  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom with her five-year-old son on 26 October 2010  on  a  six-month
    family visit Visa. Her  husband  and  their  three  daughters  remained
    behind in Bangladesh.

 3. She subsequently made various in country applications for further leave
    to remain as a carer. These applications were unsuccessful.

 4. On 2 July 2014 she claimed asylum. The basis of the claim was that  her
    husband was violent towards her and she was afraid to return. The claim
    was refused on 25 January 2014.

 5. Her appeal was heard before Judge Bennett of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    He considered her appeal under various headings, including the  Refugee
    Convention and on human rights grounds. The appeal was dismissed.

 6. Permission has been granted to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    basis it was arguable the judge applied too high a  standard  of  proof
    and the decision may have been based upon a material mistake of fact in
    respect of injuries claimed.

Consideration

 7. Judge Bennett produced a comprehensive decision consisting of 55 pages.
    I asked Mr Shikder if he could direct me to anywhere  in  the  decision
    where the wrong standard of proof is mentioned. He could not.

 8. He referred me to the standard of proof  in  criminal  cases  as  being
    beyond a reasonable  doubt;  in  civil  cases  as  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities; and in asylum cases as more likely than not.  He  stated
    that the lesser standard should have been applied in the present  case.
    This is uncontentious. He submitted that  the  judge  had  applied  the
    wrong standard of proof. He could not however direct me to  a  specific
    incident of this and I found his submissions amounted to a disagreement
    of the judge's factual findings.

 9. He submitted that the situation for women in Bangladesh  was  poor  and
    that the appellant had gone to the police about her  husband  but  they
    would not help her. He sought to reopen the judge's findings in respect
    of relocation. However, the issue before me was  whether  there  was  a
    material error of law rather than a rehearing of the appeal. Mr Shikder
    said that there was evidence the appellant had a mark consistent with a
    cigarette burn and submitted that this  evidence  was  ignored  by  the
    judge.

10. Ms Isherwood submitted the judge  made  negative  credibility  findings
    open to him on the  evidence.  She  referred  to  how  the  appellant's
    account of her husband changed from when she made her applications  for
    further leave to remain and when she made her asylum claim.  The  judge
    commented on this at paragraph 23.  The  appellant  had  not  mentioned
    abuse originally and in the second application  sought  to  convey  the
    impression that their separation was amicable. Paragraph 4  noted  that
    the asylum claim was not made for nearly four years after the appellant
    had arrived. The medical evidence was properly considered. Ms Isherwood
    submitted it was open to the judge to consider section 8 of the  Asylum
    and Immigration (Treatment of claimants) Act 2004.

11. She submitted the judge took a balanced approach.  At  paragraph  4  he
    referred to the country guidance  decision  of  SA  (divorced  women  -
    illegitimate child) Bangladesh CG 2011 UKUT 00254 which held that women
    in Bangladesh where part of a particular social group  because  of  how
    they were treated. At paragraph 27 the judge referred to  this  country
    guidance case and the high level of domestic violence in Bangladesh.

12. Whilst not accepting the truth of  the  claim  the  judge  went  on  to
    consider in the alternative relocation. Ms Isherwood submitted that the
    judge properly considered the law and  the  facts  in  this  regard  in
    concluding this was a viable option.

Conclusions

13. I remind myself that this is not a rehearing of the  appeal  but  is  a
    consideration as to whether there is  a  material  error  of  law.  The
    application for permission to appeal was on the basis  that  the  judge
    had applied too high a standard of proof. In support of this contention
    reference was made to paragraph 23 where the judge stated  he  was  not
    satisfied he had been told  the  truth  about  the  appellant  and  her
    husband and the claimed violence. Mr Shikder had  suggested  the  judge
    had ignored evidence supportive of the appellant having been burnt by a
    cigarette.

14. The judge referred in  the  same  paragraph  to  the  medical  evidence
    submitted. Notably this was dated in 2014 and did not meet the Istanbul
    protocol. The judge clearly considered the medical  evidence,  pointing
    out that the doctor had not  expressed  an  opinion  as  to  how  marks
    occurred other than one which was consistent with a cigarette  burn.  I
    do not see any indication that the judge applied too high a standard of
    proof to this evidence in  reaching  his  conclusion.  The  application
    suggested there was a material error of fact at paragraph 23 (i) (3) of
    the decision in suggesting that the appellant had not at  any  time  in
    her asylum interview asserted that her husband had  burnt  her  with  a
    cigarette. Reference was made to the substantive  interview  where  the
    appellant's representative in attendance had pointed out a  translation
    issue in that the appellant had referred to `birri', being  a  type  of
    cigarette. In fact the judge does refer to this at footnote 8  on  page
    22. This is also referred to in a comment at paragraph 3.

15. It is important to consider a decision in the  round.  A  decision  may
    contain factual errors or use  inaccurate  phraseology.  The  issue  is
    whether these make a material difference. In  the  present  appeal  the
    decision  is  particularly  detailed.  The   judge   acknowledged   the
    vulnerable position of women in Bangladesh.  He  did  not  believe  the
    appellant's claims about her fear of her husband. Reasons for doing  so
    were given. The appellant came on a  visit  visa  and  made  subsequent
    attempts to stay. It was only several years later when these  had  been
    unsuccessful did she claim asylum. Her claimed  fear  was  inconsistent
    with the content of the earlier applications. The  judge  commented  on
    this and on the evidence presented. He assessed  the  medical  evidence
    submitted. Notwithstanding his disbelief of the claim  he  went  on  to
    consider the position if it were true and the viability of  relocation.
    A detailed assessment was given. As the respondent points if there were
    a material error in the assessment of credibility the claim would still
    fail on the relocation issue.

16. I find no material  error  of  law  in  the  decision.  The  judge  has
    carefully considered all  of  the  issues  arising,  has  analysed  the
    evidence and has given reasons for his conclusions. Leave  was  granted
    on the question whether the  judge  applied  the  correct  standard  of
    proof. I would refer to the first half of paragraph 18 where the  judge
    correctly sets out the applicable standard of proof.  At  paragraph  23
    the judge concludes that the appellant was not  credible  and  provides
    detailed reasons. Notably, at paragraph 23-(h)  the  judge  points  out
    that corroboration is not necessary in an asylum or human rights claim.
    However, he goes on to point out correctly  that  legitimate  questions
    can be asked were supportive evidence is not produced which should have
    been available. The judge referred to the appellant's claim that it was
    a solicitor in Bangladesh who helped her flee  from  her  husband.  The
    judge legitimately asks why her representatives did not  contact  those
    lawyers for confirmation. Ultimately I find the arguments  advanced  on
    behalf of the appellant amount to no more than an attempt to reopen the
    findings made.

17. I find the  judge  was  entitled  on  the  evidence  and  applying  the
    appropriate standard  of  proof  to  conclude  the  appellant  was  not
    credible. The judge decided to go on to consider in the alternative the
    issue of relocation. The judge gave valid reasons why relocation  would
    be a viable option at paragraph 28.  These included the unlikelihood of
    her husband discovering she had relocated. The  consideration  included
    an assessment of possible contact by him through her daughters.

18. In summary,  I  find  nothing  in  the  decision  in  relation  to  the
    assessment of credibility; the medical evidence;  or  the  question  of
    relocation which would suggest the judge  did  not  apply  the  correct
    standard  of  proof.  As  stated  at   the   outset   the   appellant's
    representative could not refer me to an instance where the  judge  mis-
    stated the burden of proof. In the absence of any misstatement there is
    nothing to indicate that the judge's conclusions were unreasonable  and
    could not have been sustained on the evidence.  Therefore,  I  find  no
    material error of law  established  and  the  decision  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal shall stand.

Decision.

19. It is not established that the decision  of  First-tier  Judge  Bennett
    dismissing the appellant's appeal contains a  material  error  of  law.
    Consequently, it shall stand

Anonymity is maintained.


Signed
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

26th August 2015

