
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10268/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 6th December 2016                 |On 6th January 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                     C N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Imamovic, Counsel instructed by French & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Zimbabwe  born  on  25th  December
    1974.  She first arrived in the UK on 14th August  2002  when  she  was
    given leave to enter as a visitor until 14th March 2003.  The Appellant
    did not leave, and she then made a series of unsuccessful  applications
    for leave to remain as a student and a refugee.  Finally  and  on  19th
    September 2012, she made further submissions which  was  treated  as  a
    fresh application for asylum.  That application  was  refused  for  the
    reasons given in  the  Respondent's  letter  of  8th  July  2015.   The
    Appellant appealed, and her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal J Pacey (the Judge) sitting  at  Birmingham  on  25th  January
    2016.  She decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons given  in  her
    Decision dated 31st January 2016.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal
    that decision, and on 2nd March 2016 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed  the  appeal  because  she  found  the  Appellant's
    evidence to be lacking in credibility, and  that  the  Appellant's  sur
    place activities in the UK did  not  put  her  at  risk  on  return  to
    Zimbabwe.   The  Judge  also  found  that  there  were  no   compelling
    circumstances enabling her to consider the Appellant's Article  8  ECHR
    rights outside the Immigration Rules.  In the Rule 24 response, it  was
    conceded by the Respondent that the Judge had committed material errors
    of law in respect of both decisions.  This concession was  repeated  at
    the hearing before me.

 4. I therefore find a material error of law in the decisions of the  Judge
    which I now set aside.  I am not required to give any  reasons  for  my
    judgment in accordance with Rule 40(3)(a)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision will be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal in  accordance  with
paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements.  None of the findings  of  fact
and as to credibility made by the First-tier Tribunal will be preserved.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
