
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10171/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 September 2016                          |On 14 October 2016            |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    P K N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss K McCarthy, Counsel, instructed by Barnes
                    Harrild & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart (the judge), promulgated on 18  July  2016,
    in which she dismissed his appeal on all grounds.  The Appellant has at
    all material times been a minor, his date of  birth  being  6  February
    1999.  His initial protection claim was based on his mother having  got
    into debt with criminal gangs in Vietnam.   She  was  unable  to  repay
    these debts  and  as  a  result  the  Appellant  and  his  mother  were
    threatened and eventually had to flee. The  Appellant  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in January 2015 and claimed asylum immediately.

 2. The  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  as  a  result  of  the
    Respondent's decision of 15 June 2015 in which the Appellant's case was
    rejected.  Due to his age  discretionary  leave  was  granted  until  6
    August 2016.




The judge's decision

 3. The relevant passages of the judge's decision begins at paragraph 23 in
    which she makes reference to the Appellant's minority and the fact that
    he was to be treated as a vulnerable witness. He  was,  as  she  notes,
    only fifteen years old at  the  time  that  he  left  Vietnam.  He  was
    seventeen years old as at the date of the hearing before the judge.

 4. Notwithstanding the  Appellant's  age  the  judge  finds  a  number  of
    elements of his  account  to  have  been  inherently  implausible.   In
    particular, at paragraph 24 she finds that it was simply not  plausible
    that  representatives  of  the  criminal  gangs  were  coming  to   the
    Appellant's house on a regular basis and yet they failed to  carry  out
    the threat of violence against the Appellant and/or  his  mother.   The
    judge finds that the  Black  Society,  as  it  was  called,  had  ample
    opportunity to act against the Appellant  and/or  his  mother  and  yet
    failed to do so.

 5. At paragraph 25 the judge refers to the  Appellant's  somewhat  belated
    evidence that he and his mother had in fact been  physically  attacked,
    not simply  verbally  threatened.   The  judge  finds  that  this  late
    disclosure was not credible.

 6. At paragraph 26 the judge finds that  it  was  not  credible  that  the
    Appellant's mother could have become so indebted to the criminal  gangs
    that it would have been cheaper to pay an agent to take  the  Appellant
    to the United Kingdom and  herself  to  China  rather  than  repay  the
    original loan.

 7. At paragraph 27 the judge does not accept the Appellant's evidence that
    his mother had left Vietnam. She concludes that  paragraph  by  stating
    that "I do not accept that the Appellant and his mother were threatened
    by the Black Society and that he had to flee because of those threats."



 8. In the next two paragraphs the judge goes on to find that even  if  the
    account were true the Appellant's case would  not  engage  the  Refugee
    Convention, as his status was not that of a particular social group.

 9. There was an expert report before the judge.  This is not  referred  to
    until paragraph  30  in  which  the  judge  acknowledges  the  author's
    expertise and sets out some of the issues dealt with within the  report
    including in particular the risk of trafficking within Vietnam.

10. At paragraph 31 the judge notes that the  bulk  of  the  expert  report
    dealt with the trafficking issue but that there was no comment  by  the
    expert upon the Appellant's evidence that he and his mother remained at
    home for about six months in 2016 notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the
    criminal gangs were apparently threatening them both as a result of non-
    payment of debt.

11. The remainder of the decision  concerns  tracing  obligations  and  the
    conclusion that the Appellant was not at risk under Articles 2 or 3  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights.




The grounds of appeal and permission to appeal

12. The grounds of appeal are effectively two-fold: first that in assessing
    the credibility of the Appellant (who was of course a minor) the  judge
    failed to have due regard to the expert report, in particular his  view
    that the Appellant's account was, in his  opinion,  plausible;  second,
    that the judge had  failed  to  have  due  regard  to  the  Appellant's
    minority when assessing credibility.   In  granting  permission  on  30
    August 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes regarded both the  grounds
    as being arguable.




The hearing before me

13. Miss McCarthy relied on the grounds of appeal.  She  acknowledged  that
    one, if not the primary, reason for rejecting the  Appellant's  account
    was the judge's view about the inaction by the  criminal  gangs  during
    the six month period in 2014.  Miss McCarthy directed me  to  paragraph
    6.1 of the expert report in which he regarded the  Appellant's  account
    as being plausible.  Although the expert had not specifically addressed
    this issue of the six months period, he was aware of  this  element  of
    the account and that his report  as  a  whole  went  not  only  to  the
    possible risk on return but also to the issue of whether the  Appellant
    had been telling the truth.  Miss McCarthy submitted that the judge had
    effectively  considered  the  expert  report   as   something   of   an
    afterthought  having  already  determined   credibility   against   the
    Appellant previously in her decision.

14. With reference to  paragraph  26,  Miss  McCarthy  submitted  that  the
    Appellant could not possibly have known how much money  his  mother  in
    fact owed given that he, the Appellant, was only fifteen at  the  time.
    This was an example of a judge having failed to adequately  assess  the
    effect of the Appellant's minority in respect of the credibility of his
    account.

15. Mr Walker in his customary fair  manner  did  accept  that  the  expert
    report appeared to  be  considered  as  an  add-on  following  previous
    adverse credibility findings.




Decision on error of law

16. I find that the judge has  materially  erred  in  law  with  particular
    reference to the expert report, but also in respect of the  Appellant's
    minority in general.

17. Expert evidence must always be considered in the round, and  of  course
    ultimately issues of credibility are a matter for the Tribunal and  the
    Tribunal alone.  However, in cases involving minors, extraneous sources
    of evidence such as country information and, as in  this  case,  expert
    evidence, can be of particular importance. Full regard must be  had  to
    this when assessing not only risk on return, but the credibility of  an
    account. This is all the more so when the basis of rejecting an account
    is predicated upon inherent implausibly.

18. In my view it is clear  from  the  findings  and  reasons  provided  in
    paragraphs 24 to 26 that the judge  has  indeed  rejected  the  account
    almost exclusively on the basis that she found  core  elements  of  the
    account to be inherently implausible.

19. At the stage of the assessment of credibility, no reference  whatsoever
    is made to the expert  report.   That  report  is  only  considered  at
    paragraphs 30 and 31 and even then there is no detailed analysis of it.
    It is significant to note that at the end of paragraph 27 the judge  is
    effectively rejecting the core elements of the Appellant's  account  on
    credibility grounds. The assessment of the expert  report  only  occurs
    afterwards and it is apparent to me (and in this respect I  agree  with
    the view of Mr McCarthy and Mr Walker) that the expert report has  been
    dealt with as something of an  afterthought  to  the  consideration  of
    credibility.

20. It is true that the author of the report has not specifically addressed
    the issue of the six month  gap  in  2014  to  which  the  judge  makes
    reference in paragraph 31.  It appears to me that the  expert  was  not
    specifically asked to look at this when preparing his report.  However,
    in any event, the expert was aware  of  the  various  elements  of  the
    Appellant's account, having set out a summary history at the  beginning
    of his report. At paragraph 6.1 of that report  the  expert  states  in
    clear terms that in  his  view  the  account  as  put  forward  by  the
    Appellant was plausible.  In a case such as the  present,  involving  a
    minor, this expert opinion was certainly capable of being given  weight
    and should have been  assessed  as  part  and  parcel  of  the  overall
    credibility assessment.  In my view this simply has not been done.

21. This constitutes a material error of law and the decision will have  to
    be set aside on this basis alone.

22. In addition, and despite reference to the Appellant's age in  paragraph
    23, I find that the judge has failed to  take  proper  account  of  his
    minority.  When reaching the finding in paragraph 26 in respect of  the
    amount of money that the mother may or may not have  owed,  given  that
    the Appellant was at most 15 at the relevant  time  it  would  be  very
    difficult in my view for a judge to sustainably conclude that he should
    or indeed would have known how much money his mother owed  to  criminal
    gangs.   There  are  a  number  of  assumptions  involved  in  such   a
    conclusion, none of  which  have  been  spelt  out  in  any  detail  at
    paragraph 26.  There is no explanation as  to  why  this  part  of  the
    account was deemed to be inherently implausible in the context  of  the
    Appellant being a minor  at  all  material  times.   In  my  view  this
    constitutes a further material error of law.




Disposal

23. This appeal must be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal as  the  errors
    of law go directly to the issue of credibility.

24. This is not a case in which even at its very highest there can be  said
    to be no realistic prospect of a risk on return. Aside from  the  issue
    of the criminal gangs as specifically mentioned by  this  Appellant  in
    his  claim,  there  is  a  further  potential  risk   of   trafficking.
    Trafficking is dealt with in  detail  in  the  expert  report  and  the
    country information.  Unfortunately the judge  failed  to  engage  with
    this in any meaningful way. On remittal this is clearly a  matter  that
    will have to be addressed and this is so whether or  not  it  is  found
    that the Appellant would fall within a particular social group or not.

25. The remitted hearing will be a complete  rehearing  with  no  preserved
    findings of fact.  I will issue directions below.




Directions to the Parties

      1) This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  complete
         rehearing on a date to be fixed by the relevant First-tier Tribunal
         hearing centre;

      2) Any further evidence relied on by either party is to be filed  with
         the First-tier Tribunal and served on the other side no later  than
         14 working days before the next hearing;

      3) The parties shall comply with any further directions issues by  the
         First-tier Tribunal;

      4) The Appellant is to be accompanied by an appropriate adult  at  the
         next hearing.




Directions to Administration

    (1)  This appeal is to be remitted to the Taylor House  hearing  centre
         on a date to be fixed by that centre. This must be done as  quickly
         as possible;

    (2)  There is a 3-hour time estimate for the remitted hearing;

    (3)  A Vietnamese interpreter is to be provided;

    (4)  The remitted hearing shall not be conducted by First-tier Tribunal
         Judge Bart-Stewart.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date: 12 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor




