
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10809/2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                         |Determination issued              |
|on 7 July 2015                           |On 8 July 2015                    |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     MN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H V McCusker, of McAuley McCarthy & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant claims that he is  a  citizen  of  Somalia  and  that  he
    entered the UK in 2009 on a false passport.  He  sought  asylum  a  few
    days later.  The respondent refused that claim for reasons explained in
    a letter dated 10 September 2009,  relying  in  part  on  a  report  by
    Sprakab dated 1 September 2009.

 2. Immigration Judge McGavin  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  to  the
    Asylum  &  Immigration  Tribunal  by  determination  promulgated  on  5
    February 2010.

 3. Under transitional provisions, the  appellant  obtained  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  on  grounds  critical  of  the  Sprakab
    report.  By determination dated 20 December  2010  the  Upper  Tribunal
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant appealed to the Court of  Session,
    which reversed the decision of the Upper Tribunal: [2013] CSIH 68.  The
    Secretary of State appealed to the Supreme Court, which  dismissed  the
    appeals by the Secretary of State, , and confirmed on 21 May 2014  that
    this case fell to be remitted to the Upper Tribunal:  MN and KY  [2014]
    UKSC 30; [2014] Imm AR 981.

 4. Representatives agreed on 7 July 2015 that the  Upper  Tribunal  should
    set aside the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal.   Mr  McCusker
    submitted,  somewhat  faintly,  that  a  further   hearing   might   be
    unnecessary and the appeal, as brought to the First-tier Tribunal might
    simply be allowed.  However, as Mrs O'Brien pointed out, this case  did
    not turn only on placing undue reliance on the  Sprakab  report.   Both
    representatives agreed that if an entirely fresh hearing were  to  take
    place, that should be in the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Mr McCusker indicated that in a fresh hearing the appellant would  rely
    on Article 8 grounds, as he now has a wife and child who  are  both  UK
    citizens.  Those circumstances have been made known to the Secretary of
    State but no further decision has been forthcoming.

 6. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal errs in law,  for  reasons
    explained by the Inner House and by  the  Supreme  Court.   It  is  set
    aside.  No findings are to stand.  Under  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
    2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent  of  judicial
    fact finding necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is
    appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    member(s) of the Tribunal chosen to reconsider  the  case  are  not  to
    include Judge McGavin.

 7. Within 14 days of the date this determination is issued  the  appellant
    is to file with the First-tier Tribunal and to copy to the respondent a
    concise note of the circumstances on which he now  relies  and  of  any
    proposed amendment to his grounds of appeal.

 8. Within 14 days of receipt of that note and  any  amended  grounds,  the
    respondent is to file with the Tribunal and copy  to  the  appellant  a
    note explaining her updated position and (if the  adverse  decision  is
    maintained) a note of her reasons for refusing  leave  whether  on  the
    basis of asylum, humanitarian  protection,  Article  8,  or  any  other
    grounds.

 9. The UT and FtT do  not  have  an  original  file  containing  materials
    previously relied upon.  Parties are to  provide  the  FtT  with  fresh
    indexed and paginated bundles of all materials on which  they  seek  to
    rely in further proceedings.



           7 July 2015
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman

