
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/10098/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 30 September 2016                   |On 06 October 2016             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                             AHMAD FASIH RAMANDI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Brown counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson and
Cantor
For the Respondent: Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Lambert promulgated on 22 April 2015 which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to  remove  the
   Appellant from the UK following the decision to  refuse  the  Appellant's
   claim for asylum
Background
4. The Appellant was born on 21 March 1984 and is a national of Iran.
5. On 8 July 2014 the Appellant applied for asylum.  The  Appellant  claimed
   to be at risk because he is a Sufi  Muslim  of  the  Dervish  Nematullahi
   Gonabadi Order and his father is one of the 'elites' of the sect.
6. On 6 November  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:
   a) His claim to be a Sufi Dervish was 'uncertain.'
   b) His involvement in Dervish campaigns was rejected as his  account  was
      internally inconsistent.
   c) It was not accepted that his house was raided on 1 May 2014 as it  was
      internally inconsistent.
   d) His claim to have left Iran legally is inconsistent with the  rest  of
      his claim.


The Judge's Decision
7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Lambert ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
   decision. The Judge :
   a) Took into account that the Appellant failed to claim asylum in Holland
      and did not intend to claim in the UK as he wished to claim in Canada.
   b) She accepted that he was a Dervish.
   c) Noted that Mr Brown accepted that not every Dervish was at risk.
   d) The Appellant has no profile that would lead to him being targeted  as
      she did not accept that he was involved in the campaign of March  2014
      and he did not have any problems  at  the  demonstration  nor  was  he
      arrested.
   e) Did not therefore accept the reasons given for him fleeing from Iran.
   f) Found that he exited Iran legally.
   g) Found that as far as being a failed asylum  seeker  was  concerned  SB
      (Iran) remained good law and the Appellant was not at risk on return.
8. Grounds of appeal were lodged challenging the direction given in  respect
   of HJ Iran; the credibility findings and the assessment of risk on return
   as an undocumented failed asylum seeker who had left Iran 'illegally.'
9. On 15 May 2015 Designated  Judge  Macdonald  gave  permission  to  appeal
   limited only to Ground 3 given that there was ongoing litigation  on  the
   risk on return as an undocumented failed asylum seeker.

10. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Brown  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that (a) The Judge made a  finding  at  paragraph  8  that  the
   Appellant had exited Iran with a passport that he then destroyed.

   (b) The Appellants circumstances at the point of return would have to  be
   examined.

   (c) He suggested that having exited  illegally  but  then  destroyed  his
   passport  could  give  rise  to  a  particular  concern  by  the  Iranian
   authorities. He would want to put this particular scenario to  an  expert
   as it is not covered by SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed  asylum  seeker)
   Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC)

11. On behalf of the Respondent Mr McVitie submitted that :

   a) SSH established that an Appellant was not at risk if  they  left  Iran
      unlawfully therefore they could not be at risk if they left lawfully.

   b) The Judge had found that because the Appellant was a Sufi he  was  not
      for that reason alone at risk.

   c) It could not be right for this Appellant who left lawfully to be at  a
      greater risk than a Kurd (in SSH) who had left illegally.

   d) The Appellant was simply a failed asylum seeker.

12. In reply Mr Brown on behalf of the Appellant submitted

   a) SSH did not address the facts of this case.

   b) He did not know what attitude the Iranian authorities  would  have  to
      someone who exited legally and then destroyed their passport.

Finding on Material Error

13. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

14. I am satisfied that the Judge's unchallenged finding in  this  case  was
   that simply being a Sufi did not place an applicant at  risk.  The  Judge
   went on to consider the Appellants claim that he participated in protests
   in March 2014 that drew him to the attention of the authorities and  gave
   a number of detailed reasons why she rejected this account. Therefore, as
   a result of this conclusion she found that the Appellant had  no  profile
   and was of no interest to the authorities.

15. The grounds at paragraph 8 onwards suggest that the Appellant left  Iran
   'illegally' but the Judge found at paragraph 9.8 that having rejected his
   reasons for fleeing Iran she did not accept that he had a reason to leave
   Iran illegally and that the Iranian authorities would view him as someone
   who exited using a valid passport.  The  only  'illegal'  aspect  of  his
   travel that she accepted was that he obtained an illegal entrance visa to
   Holland which as the Judge  finds  was  a  deception  against  the  Dutch
   Government but not against the Iranian Government.

16. The Judge made no explicit finding that the Appellant had destroyed  his
   passport having recorded it as part of his history at 7.5.  However  even
   if she accepted that he had done this the guidance given in  SSH  and  HR
   (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC) was
   (a)An Iranian male whom it is sought to return  to  Iran,  who  does  not
   possess a passport, will be returnable on a laissez passer, which he  can
   obtain from the Iranian Embassy on proof of identity and nationality.
   (b)      An Iranian male in respect  of  whom  no  adverse  interest  has
   previously been manifested by the Iranian State does not face a real risk
   of persecution/breach of his Article  3  rights  on  return  to  Iran  on
   account of having left  Iran  illegally  and/or  being  a  failed  asylum
   seeker.  No such risk exists at the time of questioning on return to Iran
   nor after the facts (i.e. of illegal  exit  and  being  a  failed  asylum
   seeker) have been established.  In particular, there is not a  real  risk
   of prosecution leading to imprisonment.

17. I am satisfied  that  having  rejected  those  reasons  claimed  by  the
   Appellant  that  he  claimed  made  him  a  person  of  interest  to  the
   authorities at the time of his  flight  and  potentially  on  return  the
   Appellant was, as Mr  McVitie  argued,  simply  a  failed  asylum  seeker
   without a passport. I find there was no  reason  articulated  before  the
   Judge or indeed before me why a person who  had  left  legally  like  the
   Appellant could be  in  a  worse  position  than  someone  who  had  left
   illegally. The Judge was therefore entitled to conclude that there was no
   risk on return.

CONCLUSION

18. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

19. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
5.10.2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

