
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10143/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 May 2016                             |On 1 June 2016                    |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                               Christian Okoye
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent





                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Christian Okoye, was born on 26 April 1976 and is a male
    citizen of Nigeria.  He entered the United Kingdom as a visitor in 2007
    and was encountered by an Immigration Officer in July 2011  and  served
    with a notice as an overstayer.  On 17  August  2011,  he  applied  for
    leave to remain under Article 8 ECHR.  The appellant was  not  removed.
    However, on 6 October 2014 he  claimed  asylum.   His  application  was
    refused and a decision made to remove him was taken  on  2  July  2015.
    The appellant appealed against that decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Robson) which, in a decision promulgated  on  22  January  2016,
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are, in essence, two grounds of  appeal.   First,  the  judge  is
    criticised for stating [50] that he intended to "take into account as a
    starting point Section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004".  The appellant argues  that,  following  SM
    (Section 8: Judge's process) Iran [2005] UKAIT, Section 8 should not be
    taken as a starting point in an assessment of  credibility.   Secondly,
    it is asserted the judge has not stated unequivocally that he  did  not
    believe the appellant was a homosexual.  At [62], the judge found  that
    there was "no evidence before me that the appellant  was  a  practising
    homosexual and I do not find it to be the case the appellant  would  be
    treated as gay by any potential persecutors in his country of  origin".
    The appellant argues  that  the  judge's  reasoning  and  findings  are
    unclear.

 3. I find that the appeal  should  be  dismissed.   I  have  reached  that
    conclusion for the following reasons.  First, it  is  apparent  from  a
    reading of the entire decision that the judge  has  not  concluded  his
    analysis of the appellant's credibility solely on the basis of  Section
    8.  The judge had to start somewhere in his analysis and there  was  no
    error in having started  his  analysis  with  a  consideration  of  the
    appellant's   (particularly   appalling)   immigration   history    (TP
    (Credibility) Zimbabwe [2004] UKIAT 00159).

 4. Secondly, it is absolutely apparent from any  reading  of  the  judge's
    analysis that the judge did not believe that the appellant was,  as  he
    claimed, a homosexual.  I acknowledge that it would have  been  helpful
    if the judge had stated more clearly and  in  terms  that  he  did  not
    believe the appellant was a homosexual but he has made findings to  the
    effect that every aspect of  the  appellant's  account,  including  his
    claim to have  been  tortured  and  to  be  a  homosexual,  was  wholly
    unreliable.  The judge refers to the four-stage  test  set  out  in  HJ
    (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31  and  the  first  question  ("when  an  applicant
    applies for asylum on the grounds of a well-founded fear of persecution
    because he is gay, the Tribunal must first ask  itself  whether  it  is
    satisfied on the evidence that he is gay or that he would be treated as
    gay by potential persecutors in  his  country  of  nationality").   The
    judge states at [63], "the first step is that which I  have  identified
    above and the appellant fails for that reason and  I  find  that  there
    would be no risk on return to this appellant were  he  to  go  back  to
    Nigeria".  I understand that sentence clearly to mean  that  the  judge
    does not accept that the appellant is gay or that he would  be  treated
    by potential persecutors in his country of origin  as  gay  (the  judge
    does categorically state that latter opinion at [62]).

 5. Given that the judge did not err in his application of Section 8 of the
    2014 Act for the reasons which I have given and in  the  light  of  the
    fact that the judge has clearly rejected  the  appellant's  credibility
    and does not accept that he is gay and given also that  the  judge  has
    found the appellant would not be  perceived  as  gay  in  Nigeria,  the
    grounds of appeal fail to persuade me that judge erred in law.  Indeed,
    other than the challenge in respect of Section 8, the grounds of appeal
    are predicated on the assumption that the appellant is, as he  claimed,
    gay.

Notice of Decision

 6. This appeal is dismissed.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 1 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 1 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
