
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10222/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 January 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                    Mr ZH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal  against  a  decision  of   the
    respondent taken on 11 November 2014 to refuse his claim for asylum.

Background Facts

 3. The claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh who  was  born  on  7  February
    1958.  He claimed  asylum  under  the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as
    amended). That application was refused because the respondent  did  not
    accept that the appellant's father was a member  of  Jamat-E-Islami  in
    Bangladesh, that his uncle or nephew had been murdered  in  Bangladesh,
    or that his son had been arrested and detained in Bangladesh. The judge
    concluded that the  appellant's  account  was  not  credible  and  that
    Section 8(2) of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
    etc.) Act 2004 applied and in consequence the respondent did not accept
    that the appellant had demonstrated a reasonable degree  of  likelihood
    that he would be  at  real  risk  of  persecution  on  account  of  his
    political beliefs. The respondent did  not  accept  his  account  about
    being threatened by a nephew of a friend and did not accept that he was
    at risk such that he qualified for  humanitarian  protection  or  under
    Articles 2 and 3 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   The
    respondent also did not accept that a decision to remove the  appellant
    would breach his Article 8 rights.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. In a determination  promulgated  on  14  September  2015  Judge  Rodger
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal  found  that
    the appellant was not  credible  and  that,  even  applying  the  lower
    standard of proof, it did not accept his account of any of the  alleged
    risks or threats that the  appellant  claimed  to  face  on  return  to
    Bangladesh.  The Tribunal was not satisfied that the appellant  or  his
    father was a political leader and that there was no convincing evidence
    that the appellant is at risk due to his alleged  political  activities
    or those of his father.  The Tribunal also found his account not to  be
    credible regarding the allegation that his friend's nephew poses a risk
    to  the  appellant.   The  judge's  findings  were  based  largely   on
    inconsistencies between various accounts given by the appellant.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   The
    grounds of appeal set out that the hearing on 21 August 2015 before the
    First-tier Tribunal proceeded in the absence of the appellant.   It  is
    asserted that the appellant was an inpatient in hospital at the time of
    the hearing.  The appellant notified the Tribunal prior to the  hearing
    that he was unwell and had been admitted to West Suffolk Hospital.   At
    that time, it had not been  possible  to  provide  a  letter  from  the
    hospital to confirm the appellant's admittance  and  symptoms.   It  is
    contended  that  the  absence   of   the   appellant   influenced   the
    determination by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   Enclosed  with  the
    application requesting permission  to  appeal  the  appellant  provided
    medical evidence that demonstrated that the appellant was an  inpatient
    in the  hospital  during  the  period  18  August  2015  until  he  was
    discharged on 24 August 2015.  That evidence was not before the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge on the day of the hearing.  On  16  November  2015,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Baker granted  the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal.  In granting permission to appeal Judge Baker indicated that it
    was arguable that there was a material error of  law  in  practice  and
    procedure in refusing  to  grant  the  adjournment  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the Adjournment Issue

 6. The First-tier Tribunal set out that at the commencement of the hearing
    the judge received a fax dated 21 August 2015 from R & A Associates  in
    which Mr Revell requested an adjournment  on  the  basis  that  he  had
    spoken with the West  Suffolk  Hospital  that  morning  and  that  they
    confirmed that the appellant was admitted to hospital on 18 August  and
    is still under their care.  He had been informed that he was  receiving
    care at the cardiac care unit at the hospital and was unable to provide
    any timescale of the treatment.  At paragraph 24 the Tribunal  set  out
    as follows:

         "I fully considered the application to adjourn.   Whilst  I  accept
         that there is indication within the papers that the  appellant  has
         previously suffered from a previous heart attack in 2009, there was
         no  medical  evidence  attached  to  the  adjournment  request   or
         confirmation from the hospital that the appellant was an  inpatient
         under their care or that he was unfit  to  attend  the  hearing  or
         provide instructions or  prepare  for  the  appeal.   The  previous
         adjournment notice made clear reference to the evidence that  would
         be required for an adjournment and therefore it could not  be  said
         that the appellant or his McKenzie friend  were  unaware  of  this.
         There was no-one in attendance for the appellant on the day of  the
         hearing and I also noted that the appellant had  failed  to  comply
         with the directions regarding the provision of evidence and bundles
         despite the fact that this matter had  been  adjourned  from  March
         2015.  There was no documentary evidence to persuade me that he was
         or had been unfit to  provide  instructions  or  prepare  for  this
         appeal and that there was no reasonable explanation for the failure
         to have gathered or prepared documents between March 2015  and  his
         alleged admission into hospital for cardiac treatment.

         I considered my discretion under Rules 4 and  28  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
         Rules 2014, and I also took into account the  requirements  of  the
         overriding objective in Rule 2 of the 2014 Rules.   In  considering
         such matters together with the matters set out  above,  I  was  not
         satisfied that it was in the interests of justice  to  adjourn  the
         hearing due to the lack of medical evidence and  failure  to  serve
         any further documents or statements in support of the appeal and  I
         was satisfied that a decision to proceed was  consistent  with  and
         gave  effect  to  the  overriding  objective.   The  appellant  had
         sufficient notice of the hearing and had not co-operated  with  the
         Tribunal in failing to submit  any  documents  in  support  of  his
         appeal and had failed to provide  documentary  proof  that  he  was
         unable to attend the adjourned oral hearing.  I was  not  satisfied
         that  this  was  anything  other  than  an  attempt  to  delay  the
         determination of his appeal.  I therefore  proceeded  to  hear  the
         appeal in the appellant's absence."





Appeal to this Tribunal

 7. The appellant did not attend the hearing before this Tribunal  and  was
    not represented.  The day before the hearing on 26 January  a  fax  was
    received that attached a letter from Papworth Hospital dated 25 January
    2015 indicating that  the  appellant  was  currently  an  inpatient  at
    Papworth Hospital.  Together  with  this  letter  was  a  statement  of
    fitness for work dated 25 January 2016 advising the appellant  that  he
    was not fit for work for a period of seven days from 25 January 2016 to
    1 February 2016.  It is to be assumed giving the appellant the  benefit
    of the doubt that the letter from Papworth Hospital was intended to  be
    25 January 2016.

 8. This appeal has been subject to  very  many  delays  commencing  on  27
    November 2014, when the matter was listed for a pre-hearing  review  on
    22  December  2014  and  a  full  hearing  on  24  February  2015.   An
    application for an adjournment was sent on 16 December 2014  indicating
    that further time would be needed for the pre-hearing review  and  full
    hearing to take place.   On  23  December  2014  that  application  for
    further time was refused the matter remained listed for a full  hearing
    on 24 February 2015.  On 24 February 2015 there was no attendance by or
    on behalf of the appellant and in a fax sent on 23  February  2015  the
    appellant's representatives informed the Tribunal  that  the  appellant
    was unwell and had been unwell for a number of weeks.   An  adjournment
    was requested. At the hearing on 24 February 2015 the  adjournment  was
    granted.  The judge set out in an order that a statement of fitness for
    work is not sufficient for the basis for an application to  postpone  a
    hearing  because  of  ill  health.   Such  an  application  should   be
    accompanied by evidence from a doctor addressing  specifically  fitness
    to attend an  appeal  hearing  and  fitness  to  give  instructions  in
    preparation for such a hearing and should  identify  how,  if  at  all,
    adjustments to a hearing can enable a party to participate  effectively
    notwithstanding ill health.  On 2 March 2015 the matter  was  re-listed
    for an oral hearing on 21 August 2015.  On 14 August 2015 a letter  was
    sent into the Tribunal stating that the appellant  still  suffers  from
    bouts of dizziness and made an application to allow Mr Revell  a  right
    of audience and right to conduct litigation on the  appellant's  behalf
    as his advocate.   A  further  request  for  a  short  adjournment  was
    requested in order to properly prepare for the appeal and to obtain any
    copy documents.  On 18 August a court order was issued which allowed Mr
    Revell to assist the appellant at the hearing as a McKenzie friend  but
    refusing the request for an adjournment.  A  further  letter  dated  14
    August 2015 was received by the Tribunal and came to the  attention  of
    the judge on 21 August 2015 - the date  of  the  hearing.   It  is  now
    nearly a year since this matter was first listed for  a  full  hearing.
    Against  that  background  it  is  understandable  why  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  considered  that  the  latest   application   for   an
    adjournment  was  nothing  other  than  an   attempt   to   delay   the
    determination of the appellant's appeal.

 9. However, it is clear  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  that
    credibility of the appellant was in issue.  When considering a  request
    for an adjournment the Tribunal must always yield to a party's right to
    a fair hearing.  As was set out in the case  of  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) at paragraph 8:

         "In determining applications for adjournments, judges will also  be
         guided by focusing on the overarching criterion established in  the
         overriding objective which is that of fairness."

10. In refusing the adjournment I do consider that the  judge  was  not  at
    fault as  she  did  not  have  the  required  evidence  to  support  an
    adjournment application - the appellant had already been made aware  of
    what was required in the previous order - and against  the  history  of
    delay and adjournments. However, on the facts of this case  given  that
    credibility was core to the appellant's  claim  and  that  this  is  an
    asylum claim the interests of fairness and the right to a fair  hearing
    were not fully considered by the judge.

11. I find that there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision  not  to  grant  an  adjournment  albeit  that  the
    evidence only arrived subsequently. I set aside that decision  pursuant
    to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007
    ('TCEA').

12. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be heard de-
    novo before a different judge pursuant to section 12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a)
    of the TCEA be listed at  the  next  available  opportunity  at  Taylor
    House.

13. In remitting this matter  I  draw  attention  to  the  following.   The
    appellant has already been directed that a  statement  of  fitness  for
    work is not a sufficient basis for an application to postpone a hearing
    because of ill health.  The appellant has failed  to  comply  with  the
    order of Judge Brown of 24 February 2015.  The appellant has failed  to
    comply with directions made on 22 December 2014 requiring the appellant
    to  provide  a  typed  statement  detailing   fully   all   facts   and
    circumstances that are to be  relied  upon,  provide  a  paginated  and
    indexed bundle of all the documents to be relied upon, a chronology  of
    events and a skeleton argument identifying  all  the  relevant  issues.
    There has been no reasonable excuse for failing to  comply  with  these
    directions.

14. It is clear from the First-tier Tribunal's decision  exactly  what  the
    credibility issues are and what the inconsistencies are that  concerned
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The appellant has had ample opportunity
    to provide a statement in support of his grounds of appeal but has  not
    done so. The grounds of appeal are minimal and do not engage  with  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and do not set out what  errors  of
    law are alleged to have arisen in that determination.   A  court  order
    was issued as long ago as 18 August 2015 allowing Mr Revell  to  assist
    the appellant at a hearing as a McKenzie friend.

15. It is not a matter for me to tie the hands of the First-tier  Tribunal.
    However, given the history of  adjournments  and  repeated  failure  to
    comply with directions in relation to this appeal I  highlight  to  the
    appellant  that  it  would  appear  very  unlikely  that  any   further
    adjournment requests will be granted.  The appellant should proceed  on
    this basis and ensure that all the evidence required is put before  the
    judge (and thereby comply with the directions issued over a  year  ago)
    so that a fully considered decision can be reached on his claim  should
    his health yet again prevent his attendance at a hearing of his appeal.
    He has the opportunity to be assisted by Mr Revell  at  a  hearing  The
    appellant has the opportunity to put in a statement that deals with the
    credibility issues and inconsistencies noted in the evidence  that  can
    be taken into consideration by a judge  when  considering  this  matter
    afresh. This would go a considerable  way  towards  ensuring  that  the
    appellant can participate effectively notwithstanding  ill  health  and
    that case be dealt with  fairly  notwithstanding  the  absence  of  the
    appellant should that arise.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law in failing to accede to the  adjournment  request  given  that  the
    appellant was  in  hospital  at  the  time  of  the  hearing  and  that
    credibility was in issue.   This  matter  is  remitted  for  a  de-novo
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal to be heard at Taylor  House  on
    the next available date.  The appellant's appeal  is  allowed  to  this
    extent.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 7 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

