
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/10444/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9th March 2016                        |  On 10th May 2016                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                          Patrick James Paus Banya
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Parkinson
For the Respondent:    Halliday Reeves


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Robson made following a hearing at Bradford on 3rd July 2015.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Sierra Leone who arrived in the  UK  as  a
    student in 2001.  He was convicted at the  Hull  Crown  Court  of  five
    counts of supplying a controlled drug on 24th July 2007  and  sentenced
    to a term of imprisonment of 42 months.

 3. A deportation order against him was  signed  on  11th  July  2008.   He
    subsequently applied for asylum, was refused and his appeal rights were
    exhausted from 27th August 2010.

 4. On 26th August 2011 he was  convicted  of  possessing  with  intent  to
    supply  crack  cocaine  and  heroin  and  sentenced   to   six   years'
    imprisonment.  He was notified on 3rd March 2014 that the Secretary  of
    State intended to exclude him from protection under the 1951 Convention
    pursuant to Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  On 19th November 2014 the Secretary of State considered  further
    representations and granted a right of appeal against refusal.

 5. The  judge  considered  all  of  the  oral  and  written  evidence  and
    concluded, at paragraph 95:

      a) the claimant was a child soldier as claimed;

      b) he did suffer abuse as claimed; and

      c) as a result of being a child soldier and the  consequences  of  the
         same he has suffered from posttraumatic stress disorder.

 6. He said that the claimant would  be  at  risk  of  ill-treatment  under
    Article 3 of the ECHR but, since the claim was not one  of  asylum  but
    one under the Human Rights Convention, he could disregard the exclusion
    imposed by Section 72.

 7. He then wrote:

         "In view of the above I do not propose to address the issue of  the
         appellant's  claimed   sexuality/bisexuality   save   as   follows.
         Although I have seen the objective  evidence  in  relation  to  the
         appellant's claimed sexual inclinations I note that he says he  has
         been able to conduct his activities discretely within the  UK  even
         though it appears  that  his  family  were  aware  of  his  claimed
         sexuality.  Whilst he said that he might well take a different view
         in Sierra Leone were  the  opportunity  to  arise,  that  is  of  a
         relationship, I do not accept that he would in fact do  other  than
         practise his sexuality discretely."

 8. He allowed the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had misapplied the standard of proof in stating that  it  was
    possible that, should people become aware that  he  had  been  a  child
    soldier, he would be at risk on return. Moreover he had  abdicated  the
    requirement for a decision maker to make express findings  on  material
    matters.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Bird on 28th August 2015.

11. Although the claimant defended the determination  in  relation  to  the
    burden of proof, he accepted that the determination was flawed for  the
    reasons argued by the Secretary of State, particularly since there  was
    no analysis in the determination as to why  he  would  be  at  risk  on
    return.

Notice of Decision

12. The judge erred in law.

13. First, there is a misapplication of the standard of proof.   The  judge
    said that:

         "It is possible, and I cannot put it  higher,  that  should  people
         become aware that he had been a child soldier, that would  put  him
         at risk on return".

    A possibility of risk is lower than  the  correct  threshold  which  is
    whether there is a reasonable degree of likelihood of risk.

14. Second, the judge failed to identify what the risk was to the claimant.
    He has been out of Sierra Leone for fifteen years and did  not  provide
    evidence of how persons there now would have been aware of his past.

15. Third, the judge was obliged to make  findings  on  the  issue  of  the
    claimant's sexuality since this was a ground of appeal before him.

16. Accordingly the decision is set aside and remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The next judge will be required to  deal  with  all  of  the
    grounds of appeal.

17. Paragraph 95 as set out above is preserved. There has been no challenge
    to the findings of fact in this determination.  Both parties asked that
    the matter be listed for a CMR in the first instance.

No anonymity direction is made.




[pic]

Signed                              Date 4 May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


