
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10078/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 11 April 2014                                |                           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR DANIEL Laryea
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Jones, instructed by Bhogal Partners,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Secretary of State is the appellant before the Upper Tribunal.  For
    the sake of convenience I shall  refer  herein  to  Mr  Laryea  as  the
    claimant.

 2. The claimant is a national of Ghana born on 18 June 1970.   He  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 7 November 1996 and  applied  for  asylum  two
    days later.  This claim was refused on 1 July  1997  and  a  subsequent
    appeal against that decision  was  dismissed  by  the  Tribunal  on  27
    January 1998.  On 21 April 2008 the claimant's current solicitors wrote
    to the Case Resolution Directorate of the Home Office enquiring  as  to
    whether the claimant satisfied  the  terms  of  the  legacy  programme.
    Further letters in the same regard were written to the Case  Resolution
    Directorate on 18 June and 22  October  2008,  and  then  again  on  18
    February 2009 and 21 April 2010.

 3. The Secretary of State responded on 24 June 2010  requesting  that  the
    claimant forward specified documentation to the Case  Preparation  Team
    at the Case Resolution Directorate.  This documentation  was  forwarded
    on 9 July 2010.  By way of a letter of 26 August 2010 an officer at the
    Case  Preparation  Team  requested  yet  further  documents  from   the
    claimant. Further letters were written by the claimant's solicitors  to
    the UK Border Agency on 7 September 2010, 13 September 2010, 8 November
    2010, 7 December 2010, 11 May 2011, 23 August 2011 and 5 December 2011,
    each  relating  to  a  proposed   consideration   of   the   claimant's
    circumstances by the Secretary of State under the legacy programme. The
    Secretary of State substantively replied in this regard to Ms  Malhotra
    MP in a letter of 20 June 2012.  This decision prompted the claimant to
    lodge an application for judicial review, which  was  subsequently  the
    subject of a compromise agreement.

 4. The claimant submitted detailed representations  to  the  Secretary  of
    State on 9 July 2012 and again on 15 January 2013.  There appears  then
    to have been a decision made by the Secretary  of  State  on  11  March
    2013.  This was the subject of an appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and, by way of a determination promulgated on 14 May  2013,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Somal allowed the claimant's appeal to the  extent  that
    he remitted the matter back to the  Secretary  of  State  and  directed
    that: "a fresh decision be made with consideration of her own policy on
    the legacy programme with adequate reasons."

 5. On 10 June 2013 the Secretary of State decided that the claimant was to
    be removed from the United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.   The  claimant  again  appealed  this
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal and  that  appeal  was  once  again
    allowed - this time by Judge Buckwell - "to the limited extent that  it
    is  remitted  to  the  Respondent  for  further  consideration  of  the
    circumstances of the Appellant in relation to the Legacy Programme..."

 6. Thereafter, a further decision was made to refuse the claimant leave to
    enter. It is this decision which it at the heart of the current appeal.
    The claimant once again appealed the Secretary of State's  decision  to
    the First-tier  Tribunal  and  this  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hunter on 9 December  2013.  Judge  Hunter  allowed  the
    appeal on Article 8 ECHR  grounds  in  a  determination  signed  on  10
    February 2014.

 7. The Secretary of State appeals this decision to the Upper  Tribunal  on
    the following grounds:

         "(1) The Immigration Judge has allowed the  appellant's  appeal  on
             Article 8 grounds, based on his private life.  It is submitted
             that the Immigration Judge has failed to give adequate reasons
             for his findings.  It is submitted that the Immigration  Judge
             has failed to give adequate consideration to the Secretary  of
             State's policies in maintaining effective immigration control.
              The appellant's previous appeal was dismissed  in  1998,  and
             the appellant absconded.  It is  submitted  that  any  private
             life ties that the appellant has established, have come  about
             in  the  full  knowledge  that  his  immigration  status   was
             precarious.  Further, any delay in assessing  the  appellant's
             further submissions have not resulted in him missing out on  a
             relevant   policy.    It   is    submitted,    in    assessing
             proportionality, the Immigration  Judge  has  failed  to  give
             adequate reasons for finding that the  appellant's  Article  8
             private life ties outweighed the need  to  maintain  effective
             immigration control.  It is  submitted  that  the  appellant's
             private life ties are such that they can be re-established  in
             Ghana where he spent his formative years.

         (2)  Having made the finding  that  the  appellant  does  not  have
             family life ties with  his  family  members  in  the  UK,  the
             Immigration Judge finds that the  appellant's  family  members
             would be affected by his removal  such  that  his  removal  is
             rendered  disproportionate.   It   is   submitted   that   the
             Immigration Judge has not relied on  any  evidence  indicating
             that the appellant's  parents  would  have  such  difficulties
             visiting  him   in   Ghana,   such   that   his   removal   is
             disproportionate.    The   Immigration   Judge    refers    to
             difficulties the appellant may  encounter  in  rebuilding  his
             life in Ghana [paragraph 105].  It is submitted, however  that
             the appellant still has ties to Ghana and  would  be  able  to
             overcome any difficulties with the assistance of  friends  and
             family.

         (3)  The Immigration Judge has failed to  identify  any  compelling
             circumstances in this case.  It  was  made  clear  in  Gulshan
             [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) that the Article  8  assessment  shall
             only be carried out when there  are  compelling  circumstances
             not recognised by these Rules.  In this case the Tribunal  did
             not identify such compelling circumstances  and  its  findings
             are therefore unsustainable.  Gulshan also makes clear that at
             this stage the appeal should only be allowed where  there  are
             exceptional  circumstances.   Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720   Admin
             endorsed the Secretary of State's guidance on the  meaning  of
             exceptional circumstances, namely  ones  where  refusal  would
             lead to an unjustifiably harsh  outcome.   In  this  case  the
             Tribunal has not followed this approach and thereby has  erred
             materially in law."

 8. Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Baird  granted  the  Secretary  of
    State permission to appeal by way of a decision dated 27 February 2014.
     In particular Judge Baird said as follows when doing so:

         "3.  Judge Hunter noted that the appellant had been in the  UK  for
             over 17 years but found that he has not  established  that  he
             has no ties to Ghana.  He found that he has no family life  in
             the UK that  would  engage  Article  8.   He  found  that  the
             appellant does not meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE
             of the Immigration Rules and that  the  private  life  he  has
             established in the UK was established while he had  been  here
             unlawfully.  He went on to allow the appeal under  Article  8,
             apparently relying on delay by the respondent in dealing  with
             his case and his relationship with his parents in the UK.

         4.   All the grounds are arguable."

 9. Thus the matter came before me.

10. At the hearing Mr Saunders maintained reliance on the  pleaded  grounds
    and further submitted that the First-tier judge had erred by failing to
    take into account the decade  of  overstaying  by  the  claimant,  from
    January  1998  onwards,  when  coming  to  his  conclusions.   It   was
    additionally asserted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred by failing
    to provide any, or any adequate, reasons as to why the  approach  taken
    in Gulshan was not adopted.

11.  In  response  Miss  Jones  reminded  the  Tribunal  that   Article   8
    considerations were always fact sensitive.  She further  observed  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had  seen  a  number  of  witnesses  give  oral
    evidence before it and that it had reached  conclusions  based  on  the
    evidence of those  witnesses.  It  was  also  asserted  that  (i)  such
    conclusions had been open to the tribunal, (ii) that the  tribunal  had
    specifically  taken  into  account  the  fact  that  the  claimant  had
    overstayed his leave in the United Kingdom (iii) that the tribunal  had
    properly relied on evidence from the claimant's parents  to  found  its
    conclusion that they could not visit Ghana.

12. As to the failure of  the  Tribunal  to  consider  whether  there  were
    compelling circumstances in accordance with the  decision  in  Gulshan,
    Miss Jones submitted that such  principles  were  inapplicable  to  the
    instant appeal because the claimant had  made  an  application  to  the
    Secretary  of  State,  or  the  Secretary  of  State  had  treated   an
    application  as  having  been  made,  prior  to  9  July  2012.   As  a
    consequence she  submitted  that,  when  looked  at  as  a  whole,  the
    determination contained an adequacy of reasoning sufficient  to  enable
    the Secretary of State to understand why the appeal had been allowed.

Error of Law

13. Turning then to consider the Secretary of State's grounds;  in  reality
    these stand or fall with my conclusion on  the  issue  of  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal  ought  to  have  approached  its  decision  making
    process in accordance with the principles enunciated in Gulshan.

14. Absent determination  of  the  aforementioned  issue,  I  am  otherwise
    entirely satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal took into  account  all
    material matters, did not take into account any irrelevancies and  that
    its determination contains an adequacy of reasoning.

15. On 9  July  2012,  HC  194  introduced  a  significant  number  of  new
    Immigration Rules ("new Rules") with  the  intention  of  bringing  the
    consideration of  Article  8  within  the  Rules  so  as  to  ensure  a
    consistent, fair and transparent approach to decision making process in
    that regard.  Amongst the Rules introduced on 9 July 2012 were Appendix
    FM - relating to family life -  and  paragraph  276ADE  -  relating  to
    private life.

16. The effect of the introduction of these Rules has been the  subject  of
    much litigation.  For the present  purposes  I  need  first  direct  my
    attention to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Gulshan [Mr  Justice
    Cranston and Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor],  in  which  the  Tribunal
    considered the application of both Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE  of
    the Rules.  Reading from paragraph (b) of the headnote to Gulshan it is
    plain that a decision maker  should  take  the  following  approach  to
    matters involving family and private life considerations:

         "(b)    after applying the requirements of the Rules, only if there
             may be arguably good grounds  for  granting  leave  to  remain
             outside them is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to  go  on
             to consider whether there  are  compelling  circumstances  not
             sufficiently recognised under them."

17. On 2 April 2014 the  Court  of  Appeal  handed  down  its  judgment  in
    Edgehill & Bhoyroo v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 402 (Laws, Jackson and  Black
    LJJ). In this case the court was faced with  appellants  who  had  made
    applications to the Secretary of State for leave to remain on Article 8
    grounds prior to the 9 July 2012. The Secretary of State  refused  each
    of the applications, and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  appeals
    brought against such decisions. Both appellants appealed to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and each had there appeal dismissed. In both cases  the  Upper
    Tribunal gave weight to the new Rules - paragraph 276ADE in each case -
    as an expression of the legislature's views  as  to  where  the  public
    interest lies.  Both  appellants  appealed  to  the  Court  of  Appeal,
    submitting that the Upper Tribunal had erred in treating the new  Rules
    as a relevant matter in the determination of the Article 8 ECHR ground,
    in circumstances where the applications leading to the decisions  under
    appeal had been made prior to the  introduction  of  these  Rules  i.e.
    prior to 9 July 2012.

18. Giving the judgment of the Court, Lord Justice Jackson  concluded  that
    the Upper Tribunal's approach had been taken in error. It is prudent to
    cite the following passages from the Court's judgment:
        1. Since the Immigration Rules are not formal  legislation,  either
           primary or secondary, this affects the approach to construction.
           In Mahad v Entry Clearance Officer [2009] UKSC 16; [2010] 1  WLR
           48 Lord Brown summarised the correct approach to construing  the
           Immigration Rules as follows at paragraph 10:
             "The Rules are not to be  construed  with  all  the  strictness
             applicable to the construction of  a  statute  or  a  statutory
             instrument but, instead, sensibly according to the natural  and
             ordinary meaning of the words used, recognising that  they  are
             statements of the Secretary of State's administrative policy."
        1. Aided by this guidance, I now return to the central issue in the
           two current appeals. Mr Bourne submits  that  applications  made
           under article 8 before 9th July 2012 did not fall under  any  of
           the Immigration Rules, either old or  new.  The  decision  maker
           simply had to apply article 8, taking into account the wealth of
           guidance provided by Strasbourg and the domestic courts.
        1. The next  stage  in  Mr  Bourne's  argument  is  that  appellate
           tribunals make article 8 decisions by reference to  the  current
           state of affairs, not by reference to the state of affairs  when
           the Secretary of State reached her  decision.  In  both  of  the
           present cases the current state of  affairs  included  new  rule
           276ADE,  providing  a  requirement  for  20  years'   continuous
           residence.
        1. I  admire  the  dexterity  of  this  argument.  Nevertheless  it
           produces the bizarre result  that  the  new  rules  impact  upon
           applications  made  before  9th  July  2012,  even  though   the
           transitional provisions expressly state that they do not do so.
        1. The  Immigration  Rules  need  to  be  understood  not  only  by
           specialist immigration counsel, but also by ordinary people  who
           read the rules and try to abide by them. I do not think that  Mr
           Bourne's interpretation of the transitional  provisions  accords
           with the interpretation which any ordinary  reader  would  place
           upon them. To adopt the language of Lord Brown  in  Mahad,  "the
           natural and ordinary meaning of the words, recognising that they
           are  statements  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  administrative
           policy," is that the Secretary of State will not place  reliance
           on the new rules when dealing with applications made before  9th
           July 2012.
        1. Accordingly, my answer to the question posed in this part of the
           judgment is no

19. For the sake of completion, I also set out  the  relevant  transitional
    provisions to HC 194. which include the following:

         "... If an application for entry  clearance,  leave  to  remain  or
         indefinite leave to remain has been made before 9 July 2012 and the
         application has not been decided, it will be decided in  accordance
         with the Rules in force on 8 July 2012."

20. The first point of dispute between the parties is whether the  claimant
    made a relevant application prior to 9 July 2012.

21. In  Edgehill  the  Secretary  of  State  submitted  [24]  that  neither
    appellant had made an application prior to  the  9  July  2012  because
    'application' must  mean  an  'application  under  Immigration  Rules'.
    Neither appellant had made such an application, but rather had  applied
    for leave to remain outside of the Rules on Article 8 ECHR grounds. The
    Court regarded this submission as  one  of  "some  subtlety"  [25]  and
    rejected it, although when doing so did not provide any guidance as  to
    what should be considered to be a relevant application for the purposes
    of the conclusion found in paragraph 32 of its decision.

22. I ask myself what, if any, applications did the claimant make prior  to
    the 9 July 2012. It is not in dispute that he made an  application  for
    asylum in 1996, but this has no nexus to the decision under  appeal  so
    cannot be relevant for the purposes of my considerations. The  claimant
    does not  purport  to  make  an  application  to  the  Case  Resolution
    Directorate in his letter of 21 April 2008, but rather  an  enquiry  is
    made as to whether he "satisfies the terms of the legacy". The same can
    be said of the terms of the letters of 18 June 2008, 22  October  2008,
    18 February 2009 and 21 April 2010.  The letters  from  the  claimant's
    solicitors of the 7 September 2010, 8 November 2010, 7  December  2010,
    11 May 2011 and 23 August 2011 request a  decision  on  the  claimant's
    case, observing when  doing  so  that  a  request  had  been  made  for
    consideration of the claimant's "position whether  he  satisfied  under
    the terms of the legacy." In the letter of  the  5  December  2011  the
    claimant's solicitors assert, inter  alia,  that  the  claimant's  case
    "clearly falls within the parameters of the legacy  program"  and  that
    there has been a failure to provide adequate reasons for the continuing
    refusal of the Secretary of State to grant  the  claimant  leave.   The
    letter of 21 May 2012 is in similar terms.

23. The response of the Secretary of State of  20  June  2012  is  of  some
    importance in that it asserts on its first page that:

        "Mr   Laryea   has   no   outstanding   applications   or   further
        representations"

24. Thereafter it provides notification to the claimant that if he:

        "[h]as further representations to  make  he  is  able  to  make  an
        appointment to submit these.  From  14  October  2009  all  further
        submissions must be made in person, by appointment...

        As it stands, Mr Laryea has no basis of stay in the UK  and  should
        make arrangements to leave the country as soon as possible.  If  Mr
        Laryea fails to leave the UK voluntarily, he  will  render  himself
        liable to enforcement  action.   If  enforcement  action  is  taken
        against Mr Laryea, he will be prohibited from returning to  the  UK
        for five years."

25. It was this decision that  was  the  subject  of  the  Judicial  Review
    application lodged on 19 September 2012.

26. The next correspondence from the claimant's representatives is dated  9
    July 2012 - the same date as  the  introduction  of  HC  194  into  the
    Immigration Rules - and is headed "Representations for Leave to  Remain
    in the UK pursuant to Article 8 of the ECHR based on the terms  of  the
    legacy".  On  the  first  page  of  the  letter,  under   the   heading
    "Immigration History", details of the claimant's asylum application and
    subsequent refusal are provided. It is then said:

        "Our client did not attempt to lodge an application  without  merit
        at the Home Office thereafter."

27. No further details of any claimed past  applications  are  subsequently
    referred to. Thereafter, under the  heading  "Current  Application",  a
    request is made for the claimant to be granted leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The detailed submissions  that  follow  include  those
    found under the heading "Article 8 ties in the UK".

28. On 19 July 2012 the Secretary of State wrote  indicating,  inter  alia,
    that her records  identified  that  the  claimant  had  no  outstanding
    applications with the UK Border Agency.

29. The grounds pleaded in support of the application for  Judicial  Review
    asserted, inter alia, that "[t]he Claimant's legacy case was considered
    without any complete reference to his personal circumstances [26] -  In
    particular, the Claimant has never had a decision and a right of appeal
    to the Tribunal on his human rights claims,  especially  Article  8  of
    ECHR." [27]. The grounds do not seek to identify when, or in what form,
    a human rights claim is said to have been  made  to  the  Secretary  of
    State by the claimant.

30. This application for Judicial Review was the subject  of  a  compromise
    agreement in the following terms:

         "UPON THE DEFENDANT having invited the claimant to make any further
         submissions and provide any further evidence that he  may  wish  to
         have considered by the Defendant, within 28 days  of  the  date  of
         signing this order; and

         UPON THE DEFENDANT having  agreed  to  consider  any  such  further
         submissions or evidence within three months of the date of  sealing
         of this order and, if the submissions are rejected,  to  issue  the
         claimant with a notice of immigration decision thereby  giving  him
         an in country right of appeal ...."

31. It is the claimant's case that  the  correspondence  he  had  with  the
    Secretary of State prior to the 9 July 2012 should  be  treated  as  an
    application or, alternatively, that the Secretary of State  treated  it
    as such, and, consequently, following the rationale  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in Edgehill, neither the Secretary of State  nor  the
    First-tier Tribunal were entitled to place reliance on  the  new  Rules
    when giving consideration to his case, including his case  in  relation
    to Article 8 ECHR. Accordingly, it is said, any failure of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to adopt the approach set out in Gulshan cannot amount to
    an error of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.

32. The Secretary of State's asserts the diametric opposite i.e.  that  the
    correspondence between the claimant and Secretary of State prior to the
    9 July 2012 did not constitute an application and neither did she treat
    it as such. It is said, therefore, that both she,  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal,  were  bound  to  have  reference  to  the  new  Rules   when
    determining  the  claimant's  case  and,  thus,  apply   the   approach
    identified in Gulshan: it erred in not doing so.

33. I accept the Secretary of State's submissions in this regard.  Although
    not determinative of the matter at issue, it is nevertheless  pertinent
    to observe that at no point in time prior to 9 July 2012 was  a  formal
    application made by the claimant to the Secretary of State  in  a  form
    specified  by  the  Immigration  Rules.  Neither   did   any   of   the
    correspondence prior to 9 July 2012 - at least any  that  I  have  been
    drawn to - raise specific reliance by the claimant on Article 8 of  the
    Human  Rights  Convention.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  been  clear
    throughout that she did not treat the Claimant's correspondence  as  an
    application; this is self-evident from the terms of the letter  of  the
    20 June and is also made clear in the letter of the 19 July 2012.

34. In my conclusion, engaging in  correspondence  with  the  Secretary  of
    State on the issue of whether the claimant falls within the  parameters
    of the legacy programme does not constitute an application of the  type
    anticipated by the Court of Appeal in paragraph 32 of its  decision  in
    Edgehill.

35. The legacy programme was instigated by the government in July  2006  to
    deal with unresolved cases where,  primarily,  an  unsuccessful  asylum
    applicant had neither been removed nor granted leave to remain. It  was
    not for a person  to  apply  to  be  considered  under  the  programme,
    although of course many persons did seek to persuade the  Secretary  of
    State that their cases ought to be so considered.

36. The programme did not purport to create any new  substantive  rights  -
    Geraldo [2013] EWHC 2763 [40] and the mere fact that an individual  was
    being  considered  under  the  legacy  programme  did  not  entail   an
    immigration decision having to be made by the Secretary of State once a
    consideration had been undertaken - Baser v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2012] EWHC 3620 (Admin) [15].

37. In all the circumstances of this case I do not accept that the claimant
    made an application prior to the 9 July 2012 of a type  that  precluded
    the Secretary of State from  undertaking  a  consideration  under,  and
    placing reliance upon, the new Rules when making  her  decision  of  24
    October 2013. It cannot be  the  case  therefore  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal were excluded from placing reliance on the new  Rules  in  its
    consideration of the claimant's Article 8 ground and, thus, it  follows
    that it ought to have adopted the approach identified in  Gulshan  when
    doing so.

38. Whilst the First-tier Tribunal correctly observed, in paragraph 104  of
    its determination, that Appendix FM and Paragraph  276ADE  of  the  new
    Rules represent the Secretary of State's view as to  where  the  public
    interest lies, and it thereafter attached considerable weight to  those
    views in its consideration of the  Article  8  ground,  it  does  cite,
    direct itself in accordance with, or apply the approach  identified  in
    Gulshan. Such a failure amounts to an error of law capable of affecting
    the outcome of the appeal.

39. Even if I am wrong in my conclusion that the First-tier Tribunal  erred
    in failing to adopt the  correct  approach  to  its  considerations  I,
    nevertheless, find its determination vitiated by its failure to provide
    an adequacy of reasons, sufficient to enable the Secretary of State  to
    understand why it found the circumstances of the claimant's case to  be
    compelling.

40. For all these reasons I find that the determination of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal contains an error of law capable of affecting the  outcome  of
    the appeal and I set it aside.

Re-making of decision

41. The only ground now pursued by the claimant  is  that  his  removal  in
    consequence of the immigration decision will lead to a  breach  of  his
    article 8 ECHR rights.  The  claimant's  refugee  claim  was  abandoned
    before the First-tier Tribunal, and it is not  asserted  he  meets  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, or that the Secretary of State's
    decision was made otherwise in accordance with the law  -  although  in
    any event these latter two grounds are not available for  the  claimant
    to deploy in this appeal,  as  a  consequence  of  the  application  of
    section 89 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

42. The Directions that were sent to the parties on 4 March  2014  included
    the following:

        "[2] The parties shall prepare for the forthcoming hearing  on  the
        basis that,  if  the  Upper  Tribunal  decides  to  set  aside  the
        determination of the First-tier  Tribunal,  any  further  evidence,
        including supplementary oral evidence, that the Upper Tribunal  may
        need to consider if it decides to re-make the decision, can  be  so
        considered at that hearing"

43. The parties  were  also  reminded  that  if  they  sought  to  rely  on
    additional evidence before the Upper Tribunal an application  would  be
    required  pursuant  rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.

44. No such application has been made by either  party  and  no  additional
    evidence has been provided to the  tribunal.  As  such  I  re-make  the
    decision on  the  available  evidence  before  me,  much  of  which  is
    summarised in paragraphs 7 to  29  and  40  to  64  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination; all of which I have taken into  account.  The
    First-tier Tribunal has already given consideration  to  that  evidence
    and its  findings  of  primary  fact  have  not  been  the  subject  of
    successful challenge by either  party.  I  adopt  those  findings  when
    giving consideration to the claimant's Article 8 claim.

45. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that the claimant does  not  share  a
    family life with  anyone  in  the  United  Kingdom  [101].  This  case,
    therefore, is one purely revolving around the claimant's private  life,
    albeit that private life has at its centre the claimant's  relationship
    with his immediate family members.

46. It is unchallenged that Article 8(1) of the Human Rights Convention  is
    engaged and, therefore, that  the  real  issue  before  me  is  one  of
    proportionality; the legitimate aim being pursued by the  Secretary  of
    State being that of the maintenance of immigration control.

47. Whilst the claimant arrived in the United Kingdom as long ago as  1996,
    he failed in his attempt to obtain refugee status here in  early  1998.
    His attempt to reinvigorate his Refugee Convention claim was  abandoned
    by Ms Jones before the First-tier Tribunal [86], and I say nothing more
    about it here.

48. The claimant has remained in the United Kingdom  unlawfully  since  the
    dismissal of his refugee claim, during which time he has built  up  his
    private life in full knowledge that he was not entitled to be here. The
    adverse  impact  of  this  unlawful  stay  on  my   considerations   is
    ameliorated to a large extent in relation to the period from April 2008
    onwards, during which time the Secretary of  State  largely  failed  to
    engage with the claimant regarding whether his case  was  going  to  be
    considered under the legacy programme. This is also the period in which
    the claimant rediscovered his  family  in  the  United  Kingdom  [107].
    Whilst I attach little weight to the precariousness of  the  claimant's
    immigration status in the post April 2008 period, because of the delays
    of the Secretary of State in engaging with  his  legacy  enquiries,  it
    nevertheless remains a fact that even during this period there could be
    no legitimate expectation on behalf  of  the  claimant  that  he  would
    eventually be entitled to remain.

49. Turning to the private life ties  the  claimant  has  with  his  family
    members in the United Kingdom. The claimant's father  and  mother  live
    apart in the United Kingdom and are aged 70 and  64  respectively.  The
    First-tier Tribunal found that both would have difficulty in travelling
    to visit the  claimant  in  Ghana  [108].  The  claimant's  mother  has
    diabetes, high blood pressure and breast  cancer.  The  claimant  makes
    regular visits to see his parents, provides them with  some  assistance
    [99] and provides his mother in particular  with  "important  emotional
    support" [108]. Despite this, neither of  the  claimant's  parents  are
    dependent him, but support themselves and  also  receive  support  from
    other family members [99].  It has not been found that  the  claimant's
    parents will suffer any particular detriment should the claimant return
    to live in Ghana. It is, however, accepted that it would  be  difficult
    for them to visit him there [108].

50. The claimant currently lives with his brother (Isaac), Isaac's wife and
    his two children (aged 12 and 8 years) and he done so  since  2012.  He
    provides assistance to Isaac's  children.  He  is  also  close  to  his
    sister, Angela, and her children (aged 17, 14, 6 and 3 years), whom  he
    provides emotional support to and has looked after in the  past  [100].
    However, both Isaac's  and  Angela's  family  can  manage  their  daily
    affairs without the claimant, and  neither  is  he  dependent  on  them
    [101].

51. It is plain that  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of  the  claimant's
    sibling's children to remain in the United Kingdom and that is  exactly
    what they would do if the claimant were to be returned  to  Ghana.  The
    First-tier Tribunal did not find, and there is no  persuasive  evidence
    before me, that either the children, or the claimant's siblings,  would
    suffer any long term emotional or physical difficulties if the claimant
    were to be removed. Each of the children would, of  course,  remain  in
    their own family unit in the United Kingdom;  no  doubt  receiving  the
    necessary comfort and support from their parents whilst  they  come  to
    terms with the upset of their uncle no longer being in their lives.

52. The claimant does not have any close relatives  in  Ghana  to  whom  he
    could turn to for support upon return, nor  does  he  have  a  property
    there. It would in these circumstances be "difficult for him to build a
    new life in Ghana" [105]. Nevertheless, he has lived there for 26 years
    of his life, although not for the past 17 years.  He  previously  lived
    alone there, and was also in employment prior to coming to  the  United
    Kingdom. He is a fit and healthy person. In all the circumstances I  do
    not accept  that  he  would  return  to  a  life  of  homelessness  and
    destitution in Ghana as claimed. There is no satisfactory reason  given
    as to why he could not find  employment,  or  undertake  some  economic
    activity in Ghana sufficient at least to meet his basic needs.  In  any
    event, there is no evidence before me that  his  United  Kingdom  based
    family would not  be  willing  and  able  to  continue  to  assist  him
    financially upon his return, even if only in the short term  whilst  he
    re-establishes himself, much as they state they have been doing in  the
    United Kingdom.

53. Outside of his family connections, the claimant has  other  friends  in
    the United  Kingdom  and  has  close  ties  to  the  church,  where  he
    undertakes voluntary charitable work. This is plainly  of  benefit  not
    only to the individuals he assists but also to society as  a  whole.  I
    have  taken  these  matters  fully  into  account  when  coming  to  my
    conclusions.

54. Having considered all of the evidence before me, and adopted the First-
    tier Tribunal's findings of primary fact, I can  detect  no  compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules so as to lead
    me to conclude that the claimant's removal would not  be  proportionate
    to the legitimate aim pursued.

Decision

The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  an  error  of  law
capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal and  it  is  accordingly  set
aside.

Upon remaking the decision I dismiss Mr Laryea's appeal on all grounds.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 22 April 2014
