

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10223/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Sent           |
|on 28th August 2014                           |14th October 2014            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 FAHIM ARAB
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Birkumshaw of the Coventry Law Centre.
For the Respondent: Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge P J Clarke, promulgated following a hearing at Birmingham  on
        10th April 2014, in  which  he  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
        against the refusal to vary his leave to enter  or  remain  in  the
        United Kingdom and a direction for his removal to Afghanistan.


     2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan  born  on  1st  February
        1993. His immigration history is set out in the  determination  and
        need not be repeated here.


     3.  The  Judge  considered  the  evidence  in  some  detail   in   the
        determination including noting that the Appellant had mental health
        problems and suffered from PTSD and that he had been the subject of
        two psychiatric reports which the Judge  specifically  mentions  in
        paragraph 79 of the determination.


     4. Having set out the relevant background information the Judge  makes
        his credibility findings from paragraph 82 of the determination  in
        which he concludes that the Appellant has not made a genuine effort
        to substantiate his claim due to  the  way  in  which  his  account
        changed  [82(i)],  that  the  Judge  was  not  satisfied  with  the
        explanation for the absence of material factors at the  Appellant's
        disposal [82(ii)], that  the  Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
        Appellant's statements were coherent and plausible and did not  run
        counter  to  the  available  specific   and   general   information
        [82(iii)], or that the general credibility  of  the  Appellant  had
        been established [82(v).  The Judge did accept that  the  Appellant
        made his asylum claim at the earliest opportunity [82(iv)].


     5. In paragraph  83  of  the  determination  the  Judge  prefaced  his
        findings by making five preliminary points indicating that both  in
        the Judge's approach to  his  consideration  of  the  evidence  and
        conduct the Appellant received a fair hearing.


     6. In paragraph 84 the Judge set out  the  reasons  for  doubting  the
        Appellant's credibility which includes findings  of  inconsistency,
        lack of supporting evidence, contradictory accounts,  and  attempts
        to embellish the claim.  As a result the Judge was not satisfied as
        to the credibility or plausibility of the account.


     7. The Judge then proceeded to assess any risk the Appellant may  face
        on return in light of his findings and concluded that  the  account
        was not credible, that the Appellant can return to his  home  area,
        that if that is not correct  he  can  relocate  internally  as  the
        background material and legal authorities indicate that it is  safe
        for the Appellant to relocate to Kabul and that even if  his  uncle
        who lives in Kabul is no longer alive he has been able to speak  to
        his wife.  It was not found that the Appellant has  established  he
        is entitled to be recognised as a refugee or a person entitled to a
        grant of humanitarian protection.


     8. In relation to the human rights element of the  appeal,  the  Judge
        found neither Article 2 nor 3 engaged on protection grounds  as  it
        was not established that the Appellant would face a  real  risk  of
        torture,  inhuman  or  degrading  ill-treatment  if   returned   to
        Afghanistan, or any threat to his life. The Judge, in paragraph 93,
        refers to the claim that his medical condition as  well  as  severe
        muscle wastage from an unknown childhood illness engaged Articles 3
        and 8.  In this respect the Judge  notes  that  the  later  medical
        report is well over a year old, that the Appellant has not been for
        any interviews or counselling  since  October  2013  and  therefore
        concluded that the reports could not still be fully be relied upon;
        although it was accepted the Appellant  has  suffered  PTSD  and  a
        generalised anxiety disorder [93]. The Judge noted the comment from
        the author of one report that the medical facilities in Afghanistan
        are not likely to be an adequate but  noted  that  the  Country  of
        Origin Information Service report  showed  there  was  some  mental
        health facilities in Afghanistan and it was not found that applying
        the relevant case law a breach of  Article  3  based  upon  medical
        circumstances [95] nor of Article 8  on  health  grounds  had  been
        proved.


     9. The judge considered the freestanding Article  8  ECHR  ground  and
        noted that it was not claimed family life was engaged. There was an
        alleged girlfriend but  no  mention  of  the  relationship  at  the
        hearing. The Judge also noted that the Appellant has  been  in  the
        United Kingdom for five years and the lack of  supporting  evidence
        regarding a private life claim. The Appellant was  unable  to  meet
        the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules as  a
        result of which the Judge was not satisfied the  right  to  private
        life under Article 8 was engaged on the facts.


    10. The grounds of  appeal  challenge  the  decision  by  reference  to
        paragraph 79 of the determination whether the Judge  sets  out  the
        evidence of Dr Delamage and observations of the Appellant's  former
        social worker, and challenges the weight attached to this report by
        the Judge.  Ground 1.2 specifically refers to the fact  the  report
        is over a year old, and to the experts view that  therapeutic  work
        could only commence after status was resolved. The  grounds  assert
        that the Judge did not explain in what why the reports could not be
        relied upon and in this context full reasoning  is  required.   The
        Judges finding in paragraph 94 regarding the availability of mental
        health facilities in Afghanistan is noted  although  criticised  in
        the absence of a finding that they will be suitable or adequate  to
        meet the Appellant's needs.


    11. The grounds also challenge the assessment of Articles 3  and  8  in
        paragraph 95 on the basis there is no  assessment  the  Appellant's
        mental  health  based  upon  the  evidence  before  the   Tribunal,
        including the propensity to self harm, which could be decisive  and
        also  as  to  any  assessment   of   humanitarian   protection   in
        Afghanistan.



Error of law


    12. Before the Upper Tribunal Mr  Birkumshaw  referred  to  the  Judges
        finding that the  Appellant  was  not  coherent  and  to  the  PTSD
        diagnosis.  It was submitted that it was relevant that  the  reason
        there was no therapy was that the Appellant's status had  not  been
        resolved although the report did not set  out  what  therapy  there
        could be. It was submitted the Judge erred as it is  a  combination
        of factors that is relevant and that if the Appellant  is  returned
        to Kabul he will still be a vulnerable person; as  it  was  claimed
        social-service are still involved in his life although it  was  not
        established that this evidence was before the Judge.  It  was  also
        submitted the  evidence  refers  to  unusual  behaviour  and  angry
        outbursts and that the determination contains gaps which the  Judge
        was required to resolve.


    13. It is my primary finding from a reading of  the  determination  and
        the papers within the file that the Judge clearly  considered  both
        the written and oral evidence  made  available  with  the  required
        degree of care, that of anxious scrutiny. If one takes paragraph 94
        of the determination in isolation it could be said that the  nature
        of the available mental health facilities in  Afghanistan  had  not
        been dealt with in a comprehensive manner although the Judge cannot
        be criticised doing so in  the  absence  of  a  full  diagnosis  or
        assessment of the required therapy.


    14. The conclusion of the medical reports  that  therapeutic  treatment
        could not begin until the  Appellant's  status  had  been  resolved
        appears to be based upon a conclusion that the  Appellant's  mental
        health probably worsened as a result  of  uncertainties  about  his
        future and that those uncertainties in his mind are  effectively  a
        block to meaningful therapeutic work. The medical expert  concluded
        that a resolution, one way or the other, of his future was required
        before his mental health problems could be formally addressed. That
        summaries clearly set out by the Judge in paragraph 79 (vii) of the
        determination and is not a factor that  enables  the  Appellant  to
        succeed in relation to any claim for international protection,  per
        se.  The Judge also noted in paragraph  79  (vi)  that  the  social
        worker stated the Appellant  had  reported  experiencing  very  bad
        nightmares and unpleasant daytime experiences of reliving traumatic
        events, that he had cut himself with a knife at one point  although
        did not regularly deliberately self harm.  It  is  said  there  was
        significant evidence  he  posed  a  risk  to  itself  in  terms  of
        impulsive  self  injurious  behaviour.   The  second  report  notes
        difficulties regarding his emotions and suicidal ideation and anger
        episodes which did not meet the diagnostic threshold.


    15. The material before the Judge therefore spoke of a number of issues
        that  the  Judge  considered  none   of   which   individually   or
        cumulatively satisfied the high threshold set out in the  case  law
        referred to by the Judge in paragraph 95 of the determination.


    16. The Judge noted the Appellant had PTSD but this does not provide  a
        basis on the facts, or medical evidence, to enable the Appellant to
        succeed or to show that the Judge's findings are irrational.


    17. I find that the judge did consider the material adequately, as  set
        out above, and has given  adequate  findings  for  the  conclusions
        reached. In  relation  to  Article  15  (c)  of  the  Qualification
        Directive, the Appellant has no specific profile that will create a
        risk to him on return and there is  no  evidence  of  the  required
        degree  of  indiscriminate  violence  in  Afghanistan  such  as  to
        indicate arguable legal error in the Judge's  conclusions  on  this
        point. The Judge found the core of the claim not  to  be  credible,
        that the Appellant has family including  a  mother  and  father  in
        Afghanistan who can assist him if required, and that there  was  no
        evidence that he would  be  alone  or  that  any  specific  factors
        created  an  arguable  risk  to  the   Appellant   when   all   the
        circumstances were properly considered.


    18. There is  no  arguable  error  with  regard  to  the  human  rights
        assessment. The Judge considered the factors  he  was  required  to
        consider and noted  that  the  Appellant  has  entered  the  United
        Kingdom as a minor, as this is clearly recorded in his  immigration
        history.


    19. As it has been found the Judge considered  the  evidence  with  the
        required degree of anxious scrutiny and has given adequate  reasons
        for the findings that have been made, the weight to be given to the
        evidence was a matter for the Judge - see SS v Secretary  of  State
        for the Home  Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  155.   No  failure  to
        consider the evidence or of a structural  nature  in  the  way  the
        evidence was assessed in the round in the  determination  has  been
        established. The Judge heard the oral evidence in addition  to  the
        written material and  no  legal  error  material  the  decision  to
        dismiss the appeal has been established in  his  conclusions  based
        upon that material.


Decision

    20. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    21. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 30th September 2014












