
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10866/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Hatton Cross                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 December 2016                            |On 13 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     G B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Eric Fripp, Counsel, instructed by Supreme
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Esan Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the resumed hearing  of  the  appeal  of  G  B  (hereafter  the
    Appellant, as he was before the First-tier Tribunal) following my error
    of law decision promulgated on 28 April 2016 in which I found that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had materially erred in law. This in turn led to me
    setting aside its decision (my error of law decision is annexed to this
    decision).

 2. In summary I found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in failing to
    deal with the issue of whether  the  Appellant  was  ever  exempt  from
    national service on account of his epilepsy.  In addition I  found  the
    First-tier Tribunal had  failed  to  engage  with  country  information
    provided by the Secretary of  State  (hereafter,  the  Respondent  once
    again), which sought to suggest that the situation on  return  was  not
    now as set out in the previous country guidance  case  of  MO  (illegal
    exit  -  risk  on  return)  Eritrea  CG  [2011]  UKUT  190  (IAC).    I
    specifically  preserved  findings  of  fact  to  the  effect  that  the
    Appellant is an  Eritrean  national,  that  he  was  not  a  practising
    Pentecostal Christian, and that he had never been arrested or  detained
    in Eritrea.

 3. In my directions to the parties I  set  out  the  live  issues,  namely
    whether the Appellant had been exempt from military service at the time
    of his departure from Eritrea in 2009,  whether  he  left  the  country
    illegally, and what the situation would be in respect of  the  risk  on
    return now.  All of this was to be decided in light of the then pending
    country guidance  decision  on  national  service  and  Eritrea.   That
    country guidance case has now come out in the  form  of  MST  (national
    service - risk categories) Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 443 (IAC) (MST).

The resumed hearing

 4. In respect of the papers now before me I have  a  Respondent's  bundle,
    the Appellant's original bundle before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  a
    supplementary bundle from the Appellant  dated  7  September  2016  and
    paginated 1 to 11.

 5. Mr Fripp submitted firstly that whilst  the  Appellant  may  have  been
    exempt on account of his epilepsy at some point in the past, given  the
    arbitrary nature of medical exemptions as set out in MST, the fact that
    the Appellant had ceased to suffer from symptoms  before  he  left  and
    that he had indeed left the  country  illegally  (as  submitted  by  Mr
    Fripp), he would for that reason be at risk on return to  Eritrea.   Mr
    Fripp pointed out that he did not need to exclude  other  possibilities
    and that it was reasonably likely that the Appellant had been motivated
    to leave the country illegally because he knew that he was going to  be
    called up for military service, given that the basis for  the  previous
    exemption had fallen away.

 6. I asked Mr  Fripp  about  an  alternative  scenario;  namely  that  the
    Appellant had been exempt  and  had  left  Eritrea  legally.  Mr  Fripp
    responded by submitting that in light of the evidence contained in  the
    supplementary bundle the Appellant does not now have  epilepsy  (or  at
    least does not suffer from  any  debilitating  symptoms)  and  thus  on
    return would not be subject to  an  exemption.  Indeed,  the  Appellant
    would be seen as someone who had left the country to get out  of  doing
    the military service and would be viewed with sufficient  hostility  as
    to give  rise  to  a  risk  of  persecution  or  Article  3  treatment.
    Alternatively, the Appellant would simply be  called  up  for  national
    service with the consequence that he  would  be  subject  to  treatment
    contrary to Articles 3 and/or 4.

 7. Mr Tufan accepted that the  Appellant's  nationality  was  not  now  in
    dispute. However he submitted that it was the Appellant's own  evidence
    that he had been exempted  from  national  service  by  virtue  of  his
    medical condition.  In respect of the medical evidence contained in the
    Appellant's supplementary bundle, this emanated  from  a  GP  and  only
    covered a period of some eleven months. There was no specialist medical
    report before me.  Mr Tufan submitted that it cannot  be  assumed  that
    the Appellant left illegally given that other elements of  his  account
    had been deemed incredible by the First-tier Tribunal.   On  return  Mr
    Tufan submitted that the Appellant would  not  be  mistreated  for  any
    evasion in the past.  He did however accept that if the Appellant  were
    no longer exempted from national service he would be taken to undertake
    service, and this would engage Articles 3 and/or 4.

 8. In reply Mr Fripp submitted that there was no evidence of any life-long
    exemption on medical grounds, the Appellant  had  stated  in  interview
    that he did not have any papers stating that he  had  an  exemption  at
    all, and that MST shows  that  there  is  no  proper  system  in  place
    regarding medical exemptions.  He  pointed  out  that  the  credibility
    findings were not all one way; whilst some aspects of  the  Appellant's
    account had been  rejected,  others  had  been  accepted  such  as  his
    nationality and some other circumstances  pertaining  to  his  time  in
    Eritrea.  It was the Appellant's evidence that he had been  "cured"  of
    his epilepsy prior to leaving.

 9. I reserved my decision in this case.

My decision

10. In light  of  the  evidence  as  a  whole  and  having  regard  to  the
    representative's submissions, I have concluded that this appeal  should
    be allowed on the basis that the Appellant is a refugee and/or a person
    whose return would expose him  to  treatment  contrary  to  Articles  3
    and/or 4.  My reasons for this are as follows.

11. First, whilst the  picture  in  respect  of  exemptions  from  national
    service on medical grounds in Eritrea is unclear and indeed  procedures
    are said to be arbitrary (see MST at paragraphs 291-296), I nonetheless
    find that the Appellant was suffering from epilepsy whilst  in  Eritrea
    at least up to a point, and based on his own evidence, he had  obtained
    some form of an exemption on that basis (see questions 174  to  178  of
    the asylum interview).

12. Having said that, there is no evidence before me and nothing in MST  to
    suggest that individuals are  ever  given  a  lifelong  exemption  from
    national service.  It may be that there are cases in which a person has
    a significant and enduring  mental  and/or  physical  disability  which
    would render any such service simply impossible  for  the  duration  of
    their lives. In my view this would  be  a  rare  occurrence  given  the
    attitude of the Eritrean government to the obligation  of  service.  In
    this appeal, the Appellant was suffering  from  epilepsy,  a  condition
    that does not necessarily last a lifetime and whose symptoms can cease.
     It is reasonably likely therefore that the exemption obtained  by  the
    Appellant was of a temporary nature.  I note his evidence that  he  had
    never been given any papers relating to an exemption and thus  I  would
    accept that he could have had no specific knowledge as to the nature or
    the conditions upon which the exemption had  been  granted  by  whoever
    made the relevant decision in the first place.

13. Second, the Appellant's evidence is that he was "cured" of his epilepsy
    by reason of the power of prayer. This occurred, he says, whilst  still
    in Eritrea.  Now of course I  bear  in  mind  that  the  issue  of  the
    Appellant's religion was disbelieved by the First-tier Judge  and  that
    finding has been preserved. Therefore I  treat  the  evidence  on  this
    point with significant caution.  I am, however, prepared to accept that
    prior to the point of departure in 2009 the  Appellant  had  ceased  to
    experience the symptoms of epilepsy to the extent that in his view  the
    liability to be taken for national service was looming.  I am  prepared
    to accept Mr Fripp's submission that this provided  a  motive  for  the
    Appellant to leave the country  prior  to  being  taken  into  national
    service.  I of course bear in mind  that  aspects  of  the  Appellant's
    account have been deemed incredible. However as Mr Fripp fairly pointed
    out, there was not a wholesale disbelief of the Appellant's account:  a
    major issue in the appeal had been that of nationality,  and  that  was
    accepted by the First-tier Tribunal judge.  In addition, certain  other
    matters perhaps of less significance had been accepted in  this  regard
    and the Appellant's  case  is  legitimately  distinguishable  from  the
    situation in GM [2008] EWCA Civ 833, in which the individual's  account
    had been almost entirely rejected.

14. Third, in light of the foregoing I find it is  reasonably  likely  that
    the Appellant left Eritrea illegally in 2009 on the  grounds  that  the
    basis of the previous exemption from national service had by the  point
    of departure fallen away.  It is reasonably likely that  the  Appellant
    would not have been granted an exit visa in view of the fact that:

      a)  he was not experiencing debilitating symptoms,

      b) that there is absolutely no evidence to suggest he was  seeking  to
         go abroad for medical treatment,

      c) that he was otherwise a fit young man able to  carry  out  national
         service even if that did not include a military component.

15. Fourth, on the basis of my finding  that  the  Appellant  left  Eritrea
    illegally, he would in light of MST be at risk on return on that  basis
    alone, and the appeal must succeed.

16. Fifth, there is an alternative scenario which I now turn  to  consider.
    On the basis that the Appellant had an exemption from national  service
    as at the  point  of  his  departure  from  that  country,  and  on  an
    assumption that he in fact  left  the  country  legally  at  that  time
    because of his exemption (a possibility that is frankly remote  to  say
    the least), I assess the issue of whether he would be at risk on return
    now.  In so doing I consider first whether or not the Appellant  is  in
    fact currently suffering from epilepsy.

17. Mr Tufan has sought to cast doubt on the significance  of  the  medical
    evidence before me (contained in the Appellant's supplementary bundle).
     With due  respect,  in  my  view  his  submission  on  this  point  is
    misconceived.  It is true that there is no specialist report from,  for
    example, a neurologist. It is also true that the GP who has written the
    letter at page 4 of the bundle  had  not  himself  met  the  Appellant.
    However, the author of the letter has clearly  had  regard  to  the  GP
    records, as is stated in paragraph  1.   The  author  goes  on  to  say
    categorically that according to those records the Appellant  has  never
    (as far as the surgery is aware) suffered from epilepsy, and that he is
    currently not receiving any medication for epilepsy.

18. I turn to look at the notes and the GP records themselves contained  at
    pages 5 to 8 of the bundle.  There  is  nothing  in  these  records  to
    indicate that the Appellant is suffering from epilepsy or is taking any
    relevant medication.  These records  cover  a  period  of  some  eleven
    months.  It is reasonably likely I find that the  GP  records  and  the
    accompanying  letter  are  a  reliable  source  of  evidence.   It   is
    reasonably likely that if in fact the  Appellant  were  suffering  from
    epilepsy this would be noted in the records and/or that he would be  in
    receipt of relevant medication over  the  course  of  the  eleven-month
    period.  There is nothing to that effect in the evidence.  It  is  true
    that people with epilepsy may not experience symptoms  for  periods  of
    time, perhaps even considerable periods. However,  applying  the  lower
    standard of proof  the  Appellant  makes  good  his  claim  not  to  be
    suffering from this condition.

19. In light of this the Appellant would return to Eritrea as a  person  to
    whom the previous exemption on medical grounds (assuming there ever was
    one) would no longer apply.  Upon  return  he  would  clearly  have  to
    explain himself as to where he has been since 2009, what  he  has  been
    doing, and what his circumstances were in general.  Of course, he could
    not be expected to lie, and it is quite obvious that he would be  asked
    about his health either on the basis that the authorities were aware of
    a previous exemption  and  wanted  to  check  whether  this  still  was
    applicable or whether they were not aware of any previous exemption and
    simply wanted to know why he had not done  national  service.   On  any
    view, the fact that the Appellant does not  suffer  from  epilepsy  any
    longer would become apparent to the authorities  (even  if  this  meant
    detaining him for a period to see whether or not he in  fact  displayed
    any symptoms).

20. One of two things are reasonably likely to follow as a  result  of  the
    foregoing. Either he is immediately  detained  as  being  in  effect  a
    person who has sought to  evade  national  service  and  is  persecuted
    and/or  ill-treated  contrary  to  Article  3  whilst   in   detention.
    Alternatively, he is sent straight for national service  on  the  basis
    that he is now fit to undertake it, in which case Articles 3  and/or  4
    are engaged (in light of MST).  Any which way one views this there is a
    risk on return for this particular Appellant.

21. In light of the  above,  the  appeal  is  allowed  in  the  alternative
    scenario I have set out.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
is set aside.

I determine that the Appellant's removal from this country would breach  its
obligations under the Refugee Convention and would also  be  unlawful  under
section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

I therefore remake the decision by allowing the Appellant's appeal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date: 11 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date: 11 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

    Annex 1: the Error of Law decision

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10866/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 April 2016                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     G B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss E Daykin, Counsel, instructed by Supreme
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease of reference I shall refer to the parties as they were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. Thus the Secretary of State is the  Respondent
    and GB is once more the Appellant.

 2. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Garro (the judge) promulgated on 13  January  2016  in
    which she allowed the Appellant's  appeal  on  refugee  and  Article  3
    grounds.




The judge's Decision

 3. The judge found that the Appellant was in fact  an  Eritrean  national,
    contrary to the assertions made by the Respondent in  her  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter.  The judge rejected the Appellant's claim to have  been
    a practising  Pentecostal  Christian,  or  that  he  was  arrested  and
    detained by the Eritrean authorities when still in that country.

 4. Notwithstanding this, the judge  went  on  to  consider  the  issue  of
    whether the Appellant left Eritrea illegally.  She cites passages  from
    background country information and then states at paragraph 60:

         "The background  evidence  also  considers  certain  categories  of
         people would  be  particularly  at  risk  of  arbitrary  detention,
         torture and ill-treatment, possible extrajudicial execution.  Among
         those categories include  [sic]  national  service  conscripts  and
         members of the armed forces deserting  from  the  army  and  people
         evading and refusing conscription on account of their  opinions  or
         beliefs."

 5. In paragraph 61 the judge goes on to say the following:

         "Although I have no evidence that he was ever conscripted into  the
         Eritrean army he appears to be a healthy young man and there is  no
         evidence before me that the Appellant has actually been  discharged
         from military service or was exempted from military service."

 6. Having said this the judge goes on to find that on return the Appellant
    would be regarded as a person who had left Eritrea illegally  and  that
    there was a real  risk  of  him  being  persecuted  and/or  ill-treated
    contrary to Article 3.  She finishes by stating in  paragraph  64  that
    her belief was that the country guidance decision in MO (illegal exit -
    risk on  return)  Eritrea  CG  [2011]  UKUT  190  (IAC)  supported  her
    findings.  The appeal was duly allowed.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The Respondent's grounds are twofold. First, that the judge had  failed
    to deal with the Appellant's own evidence that  he  had  been  exempted
    from military service on account of epilepsy.  Reliance was placed upon
    the answer given to question 176 of the asylum interview.   Second,  it
    is said that the judge failed to have  regard  to  the  aspect  of  the
    Respondent's case that even if the Appellant was Eritrean he would  not
    now be at risk on return in light of new country information,  some  of
    which was set out in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy on 12
    February 2016.

The hearing before me

 9. Mr Kotas relied on the grounds.  He submitted that the judge was simply
    wrong in regard to the exemption issue given that the Appellant himself
    had given evidence that he was exempt.  In view of this, there was  the
    possibility that the Appellant had in fact left Eritrea legally and the
    judge should have dealt with this issue in a lot more detail  than  she
    did.  In addition, Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  the  Respondent  had  an
    alternative position as set out in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter,
    namely that even if the Appellant was Eritrean and had left the country
    illegally he would not be at risk now  in  light  of  the  new  country
    information, in particular the Danish Fact Finding Report.   The  judge
    had failed to deal with this issue in any detail as well.

10. Miss Daykin submitted that it was open to the judge to follow MO rather
    than accepting the information contained  in  the  Danish  Report.   In
    fairness to her, Miss Daykin did accept that the judge  had  failed  to
    grapple with the competing country  information.   In  respect  of  the
    exemption issue, Miss Daykin quite  properly  accepted  the  judge  was
    factually wrong in respect of the absence of any evidence,  given  what
    the Appellant himself said in interview.  She suggested that this error
    was not material, however, partly because any exemption would not  have
    been from all national service and, secondly, that any exemption  would
    not in any event have been permanent.

Decision on error of law

11. In my view there are material  errors  of  law  having  regard  to  the
    judge's decision as a whole.

12. The judge was clearly  wrong  to  have  concluded  that  there  was  no
    evidence on the issue of exemption from military service given what the
    Appellant himself had said at  questions  175  to  176  of  the  asylum
    interview.

13. The error is material.  It is material because although  the  Appellant
    may have been healthy as at the date of the hearing before  the  judge,
    he left Eritrea back in 2009 and there was a possibility  that  he  had
    been exempt from national service in all its forms at  that  particular
    time.  It followed that there was a possibility that the Appellant  had
    left the country legally.

14. In this regard the issue was a live  one  and  required  more  detailed
    consideration than that accorded to it by the judge.

15. Although the rule 24 response from the Appellant has  set  out  country
    information which in  part  suggests  that  any  exemption  on  medical
    grounds would not be complete and /or  would  not  be  permanent,  that
    evidence cannot be said to be conclusive,  and  the  judge  has  simply
    failed to deal with the issue adequately.

16. The second error involves the competing  country  information  and  the
    applicability of the guidance in MO.  The Respondent's case  was  based
    in part on the alternative submission that in any event  the  Appellant
    would not be at risk on return because  of  a  change  in  the  country
    situation (in particular the information contained in the  Danish  Fact
    Finding Report).

17. Whilst the judge has cited passages which do refer to that report,  she
    has not grappled with the tension between this country information  and
    the guidance set out in MO. This is not to say that the judge was bound
    to have departed from MO, but she was in my view bound to deal with the
    matter by way of proper consideration, findings and clear reasoning  on
    the point.  There is no such consideration on the face of her decision.

18. In light of the way in which the Respondent's case was put, the judge's
    second error is also material.  I therefore set aside her decision.

Disposal

19. I am adjourning this appeal within the Upper Tribunal. I do so  because
    I am aware that the Upper Tribunal has heard or is in  the  process  of
    hearing new country guidance cases on Eritrea and these cases will deal
    expressly with the  Danish  Fact  Finding  Report  and  other  relevant
    information which is material to the present appeal. It is sensible  to
    await the outcome of these cases.

20. Both parties agreed with this course of action and  I  therefore  issue
    appropriate directions below.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I adjourn the appeal with directions



Directions to the parties:

   1.  The appeal is adjourned pending the promulgation of the  new  country
      guidance  cases  in   MST   AA/07733/2015,   TM   AA/06369/2015,   MYK
      AA/11206/2014, and AIA DA/00924/2014;

   2.  The parties shall liaise with the Upper Tribunal listings in order to
      fix a new date for the resumed hearing in due course;

   3.  The following findings of the First-tier Tribunal are preserved:

                a)     that the Appellant is an Eritrean national;

                b) that the  Appellant  was  not  a  practising  Pentecostal
                   Christian;

                c)  that the Appellant was  not  arrested  and  detained  in
                   Eritrea

   4. The following issues are live:

                a)  whether the Appellant was exempt from  national  service
                   at the time of his departure from Eritrea in 2009;

                b) whether he left the country illegally;

                c) risk on return in light of the new country guidance cases
                   (or in default MO and the current country information)

   5. Oral evidence from the Appellant on relevant matters will be permitted
      at the resumed hearing;

   6. The Appellant  is  to  file  and  serve  on  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
      Respondent an updated  witness  statement  and  any  further  evidence
      relied upon no later than 10 working days before the resumed hearing;

   7. Both parties are to comply with any further directions issued  by  the
      Upper Tribunal.



Directions to Listings at Field House

   1. This appeal is adjourned for a resumed hearing on a date to be fixed;

   2. The parties are to liaise with Listings when setting a new date;

   3. There is a 2 hour time estimate for the resumed hearing;

   4. An Amharic interpreter is required for the resumed hearing.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date: 25 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


