



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10760/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Resumed Hearing: Heard at Field House,     |     Decision & Reasons           |
|London                                     |Promulgated                       |
|On 9th September 2015                      |     On 2nd October 2015          |
|                                           |                                  |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                            mr surinder pal singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright, of Counsel instructed by Nasim & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clark, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Surinder Pal Singh was born on 31st July 1978 and  is  a
    citizen of India. Following an initial hearing in the Upper Tribunal on
    16th July 2015,  I  set  aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated on 9th February 2015 and adjourned the appeal to a
    resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal at or  following  which  I  would
    remake the  decision.  My  reasons  for  finding  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made an error of law such that its decision  fell  to  be  set
    aside were as follows:

REASONS FOR FINDING THAT TRIBUNAL  MADE  AN  ERROR  OF  LAW  SUCH  THAT  ITS
DECISION FALLS TO BE SET ASIDE

      i) The Appellant is a citizen of India born 31st  July  1978.  He  has
         been given permission to appeal against the decision of  First-tier
         Tribunal  Judge  Clarke   dismissing   his   appeal   against   the
         Respondent's decision to refuse his asylum and human  rights  claim
         and to issue directions to remove him from the UK  to  India  as  a
         person subject to administrative removal. (Section  20  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 1999)

History

     ii) The Appellant claims to have arrived  in  the  UK  via  Germany  in
         January 2001. He claimed  asylum  on  2nd  June  2001.  This  claim
         remained outstanding because of the Appellant's failure to  provide
         the Respondent with an address. The basis of his  claim  to  asylum
         rested upon his assertion that he  is  wanted  in  India  on  false
         charges because of his support for Khalistan.

    iii) The Respondent refused the Appellant's asylum application by way of
         two reasons for refusal letters dated 10th September 2001 and  21st
         November 2014 respectively.

     iv) The Respondent in coming to the decision to refuse asylum concluded
         that at best the Appellant was only a  very  low  level  Khalistani
         student supporter between 1997 and 2001 and further  there  was  no
         evidence of any sur place activities in the UK where he  has  spent
         over thirteen years.

      v) The Appellant had  also  claimed  that  he  is  in  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with a Miss Kittu, an Indian  national  but
         the mother of a 2 year old child whom it is claimed is the child of
         the Appellant.

    First-tier Tribunal Hearing

     vi) When the Appellant's appeal came before the  FtT  the  Judge  heard
         oral evidence from the  Appellant  and  his  claimed  partner  Miss
         Kittu. There were two strands  to  the  Appellant's  appeal;  first
         whether his claim to asylum was made out and secondly  whether  the
         claimed relationship with Miss Kittu was such that removal  of  the
         Appellant to India would constitute a breach of his Article 8  ECHR
         rights.

    vii) The FtT Judge found against  the  Appellant  on  both  issues.  The
         Appellant sought and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the
         Article 8 issue alone. There is no challenge, either in the grounds
         seeking permission or in  the  grant  of  permission,  against  the
         Judge's findings and conclusion dismissing the  Appellant's  asylum
         claim and therefore those  findings  contained  in   [17]  to  [22]
         stand.

   viii) The grant of permission succinctly sets out what is  in  contention
         regarding Article 8. The relevant parts are reproduced here:

             "It is arguable that the Judge's finding  that  the  Appellant
             was not in a genuine relationship  with  his  claimed  partner
             (Miss Kittu) and that he  did  not  have  a  genuine  parental
             relationship with their child was inadequately reasoned  given
             that the Appellant was named as the child's father on  her  UK
             birth certificate and Miss Kittu gave  oral  evidence  at  the
             hearing confirming that the relationship was genuine and  that
             the Appellant played an active role in their child's life.  IN
             such circumstances it is also arguable that the  Judge  failed
             to give adequate reasons for rejecting this evidence and  that
             her failure to do so amounted to an error of law.

             It is further arguable that these errors  materially  affected
             the Judge's  consideration  of  the  Appellant's  claim  under
             Article 8 and the best interest of the child under section  55
             of the 2009 Act."

    Error of Law

     ix) Mr Plowright relied in the main, on the grounds seeking permission.
         He submitted that the permission grant was clear. [23] to  [26]  of
         the Judge's decision could not stand because although the Appellant
         and his partner Miss Kittu both gave oral  evidence,  there  is  no
         analysis or reasoning why that evidence was rejected. This  renders
         that part of the determination defective and such defect amounts to
         material error. An appellant is entitled to know why his  case  has
         been rejected.

      x)  Mr  Walker  relied  on  his  Rule  24  response  to   defend   the
         determination. In fairness he did not press the  points  raised  in
         the response strongly.

    Consideration

     xi) I find merit in Mr Plowright's submissions. So far  as  the  asylum
         issue is concerned the Judge's findings of  fact  present  as  well
         reasoned and considered.

    xii) However so far as the Article 8 issue is concerned I find the Judge
         erred in his consideration of whether the Appellant and Miss  Kittu
         are in a genuine and subsisting relationship. I see no mention, let
         alone any clear  findings  made,  on  Miss  Kittu's  evidence.  The
         documents contained in the case file show that  she  gave  evidence
         and was cross-examined by the Respondent's representative.  Failure
         to give reasons on this core part of the evidence  clearly  amounts
         to a material error. I set aside the decision so far as the Article
         8 issue is concerned.

   xiii) I heard submissions from both parties as to the appropriate  course
         of action in the event that I came to the view set out above.  Both
         parties agreed that if I was to find an error of law in  the  terms
         set out above the matter should be set down for a  resumed  hearing
         in the Upper Tribunal. Evidence will need to be  called  from  both
         the Appellant and Miss Kittu and  findings  of  fact  made  on  the
         discrete  issue  of  the  genuineness   or   otherwise   of   their
         relationship.

    xiv) Accordingly this matter is now to set down for a resumed hearing in
         the Upper Tribunal before me on a date to be fixed.

     xv)  I emphasise there has been no challenge to the Ft-Ts  findings  on
         the asylum issue. I see no reason to set aside those findings,  and
         they are therefore preserved.

Resumed Hearing

 2. At the resumed hearing on 9th September 2015, Mr Plowright appeared for
    the Appellant.  Mr  Clark  a  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    appeared for the Respondent. I heard evidence from both  the  Appellant
    and Miss  Kittu.  Prior  to  the  commencement  of  their  evidence  Mr
    Plowright presented a photograph album showing photographs of a wedding
    ceremony which had taken place at the Gurdwara in 2011. The certificate
    from the Gurdwara makes it clear that this ceremony does not constitute
    a legal marriage. Those  photographs  were  accepted  by  Mr  Clark  as
    depicting the Appellant and Miss Kittu. There were  also  produced  two
    further photographs showing the Appellant together with Miss Kittu  and
    their child - one at a graduation ceremony and one taken  as  a  formal
    family portrait.

 3. In  addition  a  tenancy  agreement  relating  to  a  property  at  [50
    ..................] was handed in. I was told this had been  signed  by
    both Miss Kittu and Mr Singh as joint tenants of that property.

 4. Mr Clark on behalf of the Respondent handed in a  police  report  which
    showed that in April 2015 Miss Kittu had called the police to her  then
    address at [15...........]. She had called the police to  the  premises
    because the Appellant was making  threats  to  kill  against  her.  The
    police report shows that they attended and  treated  the  matter  as  a
    domestic one. I understand that the  Appellant  was  arrested  but  not
    charged with any offense.

 5. The Appellant Surinder Pal Singh gave evidence. He  relied  firstly  on
    the contents of his statement which had been put before the  First-tier
    Tribunal dated 18th January 2015. In summary the relevant parts of  his
    statement say as follows.  He has been living in the UK  for  13  years
    during which time he has established a private/family life.  He  refers
    to his relationship with Miss Kittu in these terms -

         "Whilst in the UK I have established his (sic) private  and  family
         life in the UK, I am in a relationship with Kittu  DOB:  06.12.1987
         Nat: Indian who has valid leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  General
         Student valid form (sic) 03.06.2014 valid until 29.02.2016. Copy of
         her status documents are enclosed.  We  have  one  child  from  our
         relationship for whom we share parental responsibility namely, S  K
         DOB: 01.08.2012 Nat: Stateless. Copy of her  Birth  Certificate  is
         enclosed.

         Due to the uncertainty of my immigration  status  our  daughter  is
         stateless she has  been  unable  to  be  recognised  as  an  Indian
         national or be issued an Indian passport. Furthermore,  my  partner
         and I have plans of getting married but again have been  unable  to
         do so, due to my immigration status, which has left  our  lives  in
         limbo.

         I have been living in the UK continuously since my arrival in 2001.
         I have been in the UK for over  13  years  in  which  time  I  have
         established his (sic) private and family life in the UK as well  as
         developing close ties to British society and culture. I  have  made
         many good friends in this country and have become accustomed to the
         British way of living, thus it is submitted my removal from the  UK
         would be a fundamental breach of his (sic) Rights under  Article  8
         of the Human Rights Act 1998 and ECHR and would not  be  reasonable
         or proportionate." - Statement dated 18th January 2015.

 6. In addition to the above, the Appellant said he didn't wish  to  return
    to India because his wife works full-time in the UK and he  helps  look
    after his daughter.  When  asked  what  would  be  the  effect  on  his
    daughter, should he return to India, he responded by saying "I  am  the
    one who looks after her - she is 3 years old - she goes to nursery."

 7. Mr Clark then asked a series of questions pursuing the line of  whether
    the Appellant had now obtained  any  cogent  evidence  to  support  his
    claimed o relationship with Miss Kittu and their child. Firstly he  was
    asked about where he now lived. He replied that he and his partner  had
    moved into a new property together  at  [              ].  The  tenancy
    agreement was produced. He was then asked about the  three  letters  of
    support which had been produced before the FtT. Were the signatories to
    those letters now here to give evidence?  The  Appellant  replied  that
    they were not, because they were busy at work. However he did agree  in
    response  to  Mr  Clark  that  none  of  those  letters  evidenced  his
    relationship with Miss Kittu. He agreed that was nothing further by way
    of letters of support. When asked why he had not approached his friends
    and asked them to come to the hearing and give evidence on his  behalf,
    he gave no reply.

 8. The Appellant was then asked about the relationship with his child.  He
    was asked who looked after his child during the day. He said  that  she
    goes to nursery five days a  week.  When  asked  about  his  daughter's
    teacher at nursery, he was able to give  very  little  information  and
    responded hesitatingly saying "One is Emma - I have  spoken  to  her  a
    couple of times, she looks after the daughter."

 9. He was aware that his daughter's doctor is Dr Khan and knew  that  last
    month his daughter had suffered with fever and cough.

10. He was then asked about the police report  and  the  domestic  violence
    incident. He agreed that Miss Kittu had contacted the police  in  April
    to make a complaint again him of threats to kill her. He  said  he  was
    arrested but not charged.

11. He then said that he has his mother living in India; his  siblings  all
    live in Finland. He described his mother as quite old and said  she  is
    financed by his brothers from Finland. She lives in  the  family  house
    with one servant. His wife also has a mother in India together  with  a
    sister living there. Her father lives in Australia.

12. He did agree that he had told Miss Kittu about his  immigration  status
    at the time they underwent the ceremony at the Gurdwara, but when asked
    whether she and the child would  accompany  him  to  India  should  his
    appeal fail, he replied by saying, "We have not really spoken about  it
    - she will go." That concluded his evidence.

13. I next heard from  Miss  Kittu.  She  gave  the  same  address  as  the
    Appellant. Her evidence amounted to this. She is a  national  of  India
    whose leave to remain expires, I understand, in 2018.

14. She told me that while she is working her daughter  attends  a  nursery
    but claimed that her partner looks after her the rest of the time.  She
    said she now works as a healthcare assistant and it would be  hard  for
    her to give this up.

15. She also said that her daughter was looked after by  the  Appellant  on
    one occasion when she had to visit Finland for five days. She said  she
    would not be able to see the Appellant during any holiday leave periods
    as she has just started her job and she is only allowed three  to  four
    weeks holiday a year.

16. When asked by Mr Clark why there was no evidence from her  landlord  to
    confirm that she and the Appellant were living together, she  responded
    saying that she was not aware that any such evidence was required.  She
    agreed that the three letters of support which had been put forward  on
    behalf  of  the  Appellant  at  the  original  hearing  were  from  his
    "friends". She also agreed that she had been  responsible  for  calling
    the police to her home in April. She put this down to what she called a
    lack of understanding between her and the Appellant.

17. Finally she said she was aware of the Appellant's lack  of  immigration
    status when they entered into their relationship and did say she  would
    go back to India with him if necessary, because she loves him and  they
    would not separate. That concluded her evidence.

Consideration/Remaking the Decision

18. I start my consideration at the point of my  setting  aside  the  FtT's
    decision for error of law. It is clear that the  FtT's  error  revolved
    around a lack of reasoning for finding  that  the  Appellant  and  Miss
    Kittu were in a genuine relationship and that in turn impacted  on  the
    genuineness of the relationship between him and their child.  Any  such
    findings on these points, could materially affect any consideration  of
    the Appellant's Article 8 claim and the best  interests  of  the  child
    under Section 55 of the Borders Act 2009.

19. In order to ensure that the Appellant had been given a full opportunity
    of having a fair hearing, I heard  evidence  from  both  him  and  Miss
    Kittu. In assessing that evidence I regret to say that I found  neither
    of them presented as credible. I accept that I was shown photographs of
    a ceremony which took place in the Gurdwara in 2011. It is also correct
    to say that there is a  certificate  of  marriage  from  the  Gurdwara.
    However that certificate clearly states that  the  ceremony  is  not  a
    binding civil ceremony.

20. On the other hand however, there was nothing to show,  other  than  two
    formal photographs, that the Appellant and Miss Kittu  are  in  what  I
    term a normal family relationship.

21. There was no evidence  from  either  of  them  fleshing  out  the  bare
    assertion that they made that they are in a relationship.

22. When the Appellant was asked why he  could  not  return  to  India  his
    response was along the lines that his wife works full-time and he helps
    look after his daughter. There was no evidence  of  any  depth  to  the
    relationship with the child. In my judgment the  reality  is  that  the
    Appellant may occasionally look after his daughter  but  in  truth  she
    attends nursery whilst her mother works for some  of  the  time.  I  am
    reinforced in this  view  that  there  was  no  real  evidence  of  the
    Appellant ever being involved in his daughter's upbringing in  the  way
    that a father would. He could not even  say  with  confidence  who  his
    child's teacher was when she was left at nursery let alone any evidence
    of time spent together as one would expect.

23. So far as getting letters of support concerning his  relationship  with
    Miss Kittu, the three letters produced are of little or no weight. They
    make no mention of the relationship as such, they  are  from  "friends"
    and yet despite knowing the importance of needing such  evidence,  none
    of these people attended the hearing.

24. So far as Miss Kittu is concerned her evidence was hardly helpful. When
    asked, what I consider to be the most pertinent question of all - would
    she go back to India to be with the Appellant - her lack of  enthusiasm
    for this idea rang through. She immediately responded saying  it  would
    be hard for her because she now works  in  the  UK.  When  asked  about
    visiting the Appellant during any leave periods, she  displayed  little
    enthusiasm for that course either. Her response was to make excuses  on
    the basis that she had just started her job. She finally  did  say  she
    would go back to India with the Appellant because  she  loves  him  and
    they are not going to be separated. I do not accept  this  evidence.  I
    gained the impression that her job and remaining in the UK are far more
    important to her than any relationship with the Appellant.

25. Equally I find her evidence not credible  when  she  asserts  that  her
    daughter needs the Appellant to remain here because he looks after her.
    As I noted either, the child goes to nursery and in my judgment it  was
    telling that for a couple who both claim that  their  child  needs  the
    Appellant, there was no real evidence of why she needs him, other  than
    possibly he picks her up  from  nursery  on  occasions.  There  was  no
    evidence of any father/child interaction such as one would expect  from
    a normal father/child relationship. No evidence of him supervising  any
    activities on behalf of his child, taking her to visit  places.  In  my
    judgment that lends weight to my finding that the  Appellant  and  Miss
    Kittu are not living together in a relationship as claimed.

26. That finding should be sufficient to dispose of  this  matter  since  I
    have made it clear that  there  is  no  reason  to  disturb  the  FtT's
    findings on the Appellant's asylum claim.

27. However for the sake of completeness it is correct  that  the  FtT  did
    consider whether the Appellant's Article 8 claim could be considered in
    that he is named as the father of Miss Kittu's child.

28. The FtT recognised that removal of the Appellant to India could  amount
    to an interference with his relationship with his daughter since he  is
    named on her birth certificate. The FtT therefore went on  to  consider
    the best interests of the child.

29. However as the FtT  correctly  pointed  out  the  child  is  an  Indian
    national and her mother is an Indian national. Her mother has leave  to
    remain at present it is true but since I have found in any  event  that
    the relationship between the  child's  mother  and  father  is  not  as
    claimed, I find that the Appellant plays no  significant  role  in  the
    child's life. Her best interests will of course be to remain  with  her
    mother in the UK. I find therefore  that  the  Appellant's  removal  to
    India would make little or no  difference  to  the  well-being  of  the
    child.

30.  Even if I am wrong about the extent  of  their  relationship,  I  find
    there is nothing unjustifiably harsh in saying that the Appellant, Miss
    Kittu and the child can return to India as a family unit. The Appellant
    on his own evidence has the ability to find work in India. Both he  and
    Miss Kittu are Indian nationals. Both have family members remaining  in
    India.

31. I find therefore that the Appellant has failed to show that  there  are
    good grounds for a grant of leave to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

Decision

The Appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  decision  of  21  November
2014 to refuse him leave to enter the United Kingdom is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


