
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10221/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 January 2017                    |On 11 January 2017                   |
|(Extempore Judgment)                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     E G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Fletcher, Counsel, instructed by Ahmed Rahman
                    Carr solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal by E  G  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated on 31 August 2016.   Mr  G's  appeal  against  the
    refusal of asylum was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Brien.
    Permission to appeal that decision was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lambert on 28 September 2016 and thus the appeal came before  me.



2.   The essence of the grounds upon which permission was granted  was  that
    the judge had failed to engage with the medical  report  both  physical
    and psychological by Dr Turvill in reaching his findings on credibility
    and risk on return.  The judge  in  his  determination  refers  to  the
    appellant  relying  on  the  expert  report  in  paragraph  51  of  his
    determination having already found that the appellant lacked  virtually
    complete credibility to the extent that the judge did not  even  accept
    that he was a Kurd.  The medical report sets out the physical  injuries
    which Dr Turvill finds to be consistent with the account given and  the
    report also refers in paragraph 92 of the report that Mr  G's  fear  of
    return was genuine, whether or not it was  objectively  justified.   Dr
    Turvill finds that Mr G is suffering from  PTSD  and  has  moderate  to
    severe depression overlapping with PTSD and that he requires  treatment
    from his GP for that condition.  It is not apparent from  the  decision
    that the judge took  account  of  the  psychological  elements  of  the
    medical report in assessing the  appellant's  account  and  nor  is  it
    apparent that the judge took account of the doctor's view that some  of
    the injuries were highly consistent with the  account  of  having  been
    tortured.

3.   For these reasons I am satisfied that the  judge  has  failed  to  have
    adequate regard to the medical evidence in reaching  his  findings  and
    there is therefore a material error of law such that  the  decision  is
    set aside to be remade.  I canvassed with both parties whether I should
    remake the decision myself or whether it  should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier for  a  further  decision  to  be  taken  with  no  findings
    preserved.  Both parties were content to leave this decision to me  and
    on  the  basis  that  the  psychological  issues  may  impact  on   the
    credibility findings regarding the appellant's claim, this  is  a  case
    where all the findings should be set aside and the matter  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be taken.  I  therefore
    remit it.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 10th January 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
