
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/10055/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 September 2016                      |On 06 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                 evan grant
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Boateng, Solicitor Advocate of Messrs Ansah
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    refused.



Reasons

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 14 May 1974  who  appeals
    against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   Keane
    promulgated on 7 August 2015 in  which  he  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against a decision made by the Secretary of State on 31  October
    2014 to make a deportation  order  against  him  as  a  result  of  his
    criminal offending.

3.   The application  had  previously  been  considered  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pooler who found that  not
    only was the application made out of time and that it was inappropriate
    to extend time but also that there was  no  merit  in  the  application
    made.

4.   The appellant entered Britain  in  October  1981  having  been  granted
    indefinite leave to enter in order to join his  mother  here.   Between
    1989 and November 2013 he acquired ten  convictions  for  26  offences.
    The decision to deport was made after he had been  convicted  of  seven
    breaches of a non-molestation order prohibiting contacting  his  former
    partner.   He  was  sentenced  to  26  weeks'  imprisonment.   Previous
    offences had included a conviction  on  26  September  1997  for  armed
    robbery.  The sentence on that occasion was four  years'  imprisonment.
    The offence had involved him stealing money from a female victim  after
    threatening her with a sawn off  shotgun.   Concurrent  sentences  were
    imposed for possession of a firearm.  In 2009 he had been  involved  in
    the attempted murder and robbery of two elderly women.

5.   The appellant did not attend the hearing of  his  appeal  before  Judge
    Keane on 22 July 2015 and no representative was instructed to appear on
    his behalf.  Judge Keane took into account the appellant's  history  of
    offending and also noted that he had six children in the United Kingdom
    with an age range of between 6 to 18.  He also  noted  the  appellant's
    claim that he was bisexual.

6.   The judge heard evidence from a  Detective  Constable  Burton  who  had
    characterised the appellant as an  exceptionally  dangerous  individual
    prepared to act violently and to prey upon the weak and vulnerable.  He
    told the court of incidents which had taken place in one day  in  which
    the appellant and  accomplice  had  robbed  four  individuals  in  four
    separate incidents.

7.   Judge Keane found that  the  appellant  was  a  particularly  dangerous
    criminal and likely to commit serious crimes if he were at liberty.  He
    noted there was no evidence provided as to  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant's relationship with his many children  nor  of  any  risk  he
    would suffer by reason of his unsubstantiated claim to be bisexual.  He
    found there was  an  overwhelming  public  interest  in  deporting  the
    appellant.

8.   The determination of Judge Keane was promulgated on 7 August 2015.   It
    was not until 16  February  2016  that  an  application  was  made  for
    permission to appeal in the First-tier.  That application,  as  I  have
    stated above, was refused  and  not  admitted  by  Judge  Pooler.   The
    grounds of application asserted that the notice of hearing had not been
    served on the  applicant  as  required  under  the  Rules  and  further
    asserted that the applicant had written to the Tribunal  to  advice  of
    his change of address and that he had asserted that he had not received
    any hearing notice from the Tribunal.   The  grounds  stated  that  the
    appellant had lived in Britain since the age of 7 and that he  was  now
    42 and that all members of his family, including his children, lived in
    Britain.  They stated that the fact that the Tribunal received a letter
    from the appellant's previous representatives that they were not acting
    for him, the Tribunal "could have at least endeavour (sic) to telephone
    him to ascertain his position".   It  was  stated  that  the  appellant
    reported regularly to the Home Office and  had  been  making  enquiries
    "with the immigration" as to the date of his appeal.  It  was  asserted
    that he had not received a fair trial.

9.   The grounds were renewed in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Unusually  it  was
    decided that an oral hearing  would  be  appropriate.   Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Jordan gave directions on 15 April 2016 in which  he  noted  that
    notice of hearing for a case management review had been served  on  the
    appellant's then representatives, JCWI,  and  on  the  appellant  whose
    address for service was given as c/o JCWI and that Ms Burgess  of  JCWI
    had appeared on behalf of the appellant on  15  December  at  the  case
    management review.  Following that hearing directions had been sent  to
    JCWI and to the appellant c/o JCWI.  Notice for the hearing on  20  May
    was sent to JCWI and to the appellant c/o JCWI  but  that  neither  had
    attended.  Further directions had been sent to JCWI on 27 May  and  the
    notice of hearing for 22  and  23  July  2015  sent  to  JCWI  and  the
    appellant c/o JCWI.  There was no appearance by or  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant on 22 July 2015 and the judge had been satisfied  that  there
    had been proof of proper service and the hearing had proceeded.  It was
    noted that the appellant's solicitors  had  written  to  JCWI  who  had
    replied on 12 February  2016  to  state  that  the  appellant  was  not
    formally a client of theirs as he had not  provided  them  with  either
    proof of  means  or  instructions  and  that  they  had  forwarded  all
    documents to the address he provided by recorded  delivery.   That  had
    been returned marked "not called for".

10.  The directions given by  Judge  Jordan  stated  that  either  JCWI  had
    misrepresented the position when they had attended the case  management
    review or in the letter of 12 February 2016 when they stated that  they
    had not had instructions from the appellant.  The directions criticised
    JCWI for allowing that organisation to  be  used  as  the  address  for
    service of correspondence and failing to  notify  the  Tribunal  either
    that they had never  had,  or  no  longer  had  instructions  from  the
    appellant when documents were served  on  them.   The  directions  also
    stated that JCWI had failed to notify the Tribunal that they  had  been
    forwarding letters to the appellant which had been returned marked "not
    called for" when they were aware that the Tribunal reasonably  believed
    that the appellant had been properly served at the  only  address  that
    had been provided for service.  It was directed therefore that a senior
    representative of JCWI was required to attend the hearing and also that
    the appellant attend and that JCWI should explain whether  or  not  the
    assertions made in the preamble to directions were correct.

11.  JCWI then wrote to the Upper Tribunal on  24  June  including  evidence
    from three witnesses explaining  what  had  happened.   Ms  Burgess  in
    particular had described how she had attended on the appellant where he
    was detained in October 2014 at which time he  had  been  eligible  for
    legal aid.  He had then been granted bail and  had  been  requested  to
    provide proof of means in order to confirm  his  financial  eligibility
    for legal aid.  An appointment had been made which the appellant failed
    to attend.  However, following  the  decision  to  deport  him  he  had
    attended the offices of JCWI and instructed that an appeal be launched,
    although he did not provide  confirmation  of  his  means.    JCWI  had
    attended the CMR on 15 December 2014 on the appellant's promise that he
    would provide proof of means.  Thereafter there had been  a  series  of
    missed appointments such that by 20 May 2015, on  the  hearing  of  the
    case management review, JCWI had felt compelled to attend in  order  to
    safeguard the appellant's  position.   There  were  then  other  failed
    appointments and the appellant had  failed  to  provide  the  requested
    proof of means.  Six weeks before the hearing JCWI  had  contacted  the
    appellant but he had failed to respond or provide proof of  means.   In
    those circumstances JCWI had been unable to continue to  represent  the
    appellant.  Moreover, the appellant had failed to notify JCWI that  his
    uncle was no longer supporting him and that  he  had  changed  address.
    JCWI effectively had done as best as they could by  seeking  to  notify
    the appellant at his latest address provided to them by the respondent.
     As there was no response, JCWI could do no other than cease to act for
    the appellant.  They had written to the appellant to  that  effect  and
    notified the Tribunal that they were no longer acting.  An attempt  had
    been made to deliver a letter by special delivery prior to the hearing.



12.  It is of note that  on  12  February  2016  JCWI  had  written  to  the
    appellant's present  representatives  explaining  that  notwithstanding
    numerous attempts to seek proof of means the appellant  had  failed  to
    comply and that two attendances before the Tribunal would be  conducted
    without payment in order to safeguard the appellant's position.   Until
    they secured legal aid they could not formally act on his  behalf.   It
    was evident that the final letter which had  been  marked  "not  called
    for" had been returned to JCWI in September 2015 and therefore they had
    not been in a position to inform the  Tribunal  prior  to  the  hearing
    there had been no effective service.

13.  Copies  of  the  documentary  evidence  from  JCWI  and  their  various
    attachments were sent by the Upper Tribunal to both solicitors and  the
    appellant.

14.  The application was set down for an oral hearing on 11  July  but  that
    was later adjourned by the Tribunal of its own motion.   Unfortunately,
    that was not drawn to the attention of Judge Jordan who considered  the
    application on  11  July  without  representatives  being  present  and
    dismissed the application.  His decision however was set aside by Upper
    Tribunal Judge Goldstein on 8 August 2016.  The application  then  came
    before me on 12 September 2016 when Mr Boateng appeared  on  behalf  of
    the applicant and Mr Melvin appeared on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.

15.  I asked Mr Boateng what evidence  there  was  that  the  appellant  had
    himself contacted the Tribunal before the hearing on 22 July 2015.   He
    was unable to produce any such evidence.   He  endeavoured  to  explain
    that the appellant's uncle had notified JCWI that he  could  no  longer
    support the appellant but then indicated that that had been in  January
    this year.  He argued however that as the appellant had been  reporting
    to the Home Office and that, in that way, he  asserted  JCWI  had  been
    able to send to him the determination  of  Judge  Keane,  the  Tribunal
    should have taken steps to  contact  the  appellant  through  the  Home
    Office.  However,  he  could  produce  no  legal  authority  for   that
    assertion.  When pressed, he stated that he had no evidence to back  up
    the  various  assertions  which  had  been  made  in  the  grounds   of
    application.  His argument appeared to  focus  on  the  assertion  that
    attempts should have been made to contact the appellant  and  that  the
    fact that he was not present at his hearing meant that he did not  have
    a fair trial.

16.  The issue before me is whether or not there is  an  arguable  error  of
    law in the determination of Judge Keane.  The grounds of appeal do  not
    argue that there was an error of law with regard to  the  substance  of
    the decision - they merely repeat various factors which the  judge  was
    required  to  take  into  consideration  and  it  is  clear  from   the
    determination that he did take those factors into account.  The reality
    is that the sole issue is whether or not the judge erred by  proceeding
    to hear the appeal in the absence of the appellant.

17.  It is clear  however  that  he  had  no  other  option  other  than  to
    determine the appeal on the evidence before him.   Proper  service  had
    been made on the appellant's representative and  the  Tribunal  had  no
    address for the appellant himself.  JCWI had endeavoured to contact the
    appellant at the address which he had given to them.  It was not  until
    after the hearing that they were  aware  that  their  letter  had  been
    returned marked "not  called  for".   JCWI  were  therefore  not  in  a
    position to inform the Tribunal prior to the hearing that they had been
    unable to contact the appellant.  The reality is that both the Tribunal
    and JCWI took all steps which  they  could  take  to  ensure  that  the
    appellant was informed of the hearing.  The fact that the appellant did
    not  tell  the  Tribunal  of  his  address  and  did  not  respond   to
    correspondence from JCWI and  did  not  keep  in  touch  with  them  is
    entirely his responsibility.  There was simply no error of law in Judge
    Keane going on to determine the appeal and it  would  be  inappropriate
    for his decision to be set aside.

18.  Accordingly this application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is refused.





Signed                                  Date 06 October 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


