
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10772/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 August 2015                    |On 9 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                     J S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Jeygarajah, counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
For the respondent:    Mr Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            Decision and Reasons

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka of Tamil ethnicity born  on  28
    September 1982.

 2. An anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal and  remains
    appropriate.  I make a direction accordingly.

 3. For ease of reference, I maintain the descriptions of  the  parties  as
    appellant and respondent, as they were  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and reasons, albeit it is  the  respondent  who  pursues  this
    appeal.

Background

 4. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in the determination of the First-tier
    Tribunal panel ("the panel") promulgated on 8 September 2014, in  which
    it allowed the appellant's appeal against the  refusal  of  his  asylum
    claim.

 5. The matter has a protracted history which I summarise as follows.   The
    appellant arrived in the UK in 2007 and claimed asylum. His  claim  was
    refused in 2007 and he was excluded from the protection of the  Refugee
    Convention under Article 1F.  Nonetheless, he was granted discretionary
    leave for six months valid until March 2008 (later extended to  January
    2009).  Various proceedings followed, culminating  in  judicial  review
    proceedings and the Supreme Court's judgment of 10 March  2010  (R  (on
    the application of JS) (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 15).  The Supreme
    Court ordered a re-determination by the respondent of the asylum  claim
    and Brown LJ stated as follows (paragraph 40): "...  in  re-determining
    the respondent's asylum application,  the  Secretary  of  State  should
    direct himself in accordance with this Court's judgments, not those  of
    the Court of Appeal".

 6. The respondent reconsidered the appellant's  claim  and,  in  a  letter
    dated 17 November 2013, found that the appellant was excluded from  the
    protection afforded by  the  Refugee  Convention  pursuant  to  Article
    1F(a), (b) and (c).  The respondent nonetheless considered  the  asylum
    claim and dismissed it on all grounds.

 7. The appellant's appeal against that  decision  was  heard  by  a  panel
    consisting of First-tier Tribunal Judges Keane and Griffith on 15  July
    2014.  The appellant attended  that  hearing  but  did  not  give  oral
    evidence.  The  panel  heard  the  oral  submissions  of  the  parties'
    representatives.  It found that it "did not agree with  the  statements
    made by the respondent in support of the certificate that the appellant
    is not entitled to the protection of the Geneva Convention"  (paragraph
    57).  The panel found "the respondent has failed to establish that  the
    appellant is excluded from  the  protection  of  the  Convention  under
    Article 1F and [did] not uphold the certificate"  (paragraph  68).  The
    panel went on to allow the appeal against refusal of his  asylum  claim
    on the grounds that he was at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

 8. The respondent applied for permission to appeal the panel's decision on
    the  following  grounds  which  I  summarise  (numbering  as   in   the
    application):

          1. The panel erred in noting and accepting the submission of  the
             appellant's representative  that  the  appellant  "was  not  a
             commander". That submission was in direct  conflict  with  the
             agreed facts before the Supreme Court.

          2. The panel concluded at paragraph 47 that  the  respondent  had
             "imputed" high rank to the appellant whereas the  respondent's
             decision on this was based on the statement  of  agreed  facts
             before the Supreme Court and the appellant's own evidence.

          3. There was no adequate explanation as to why the panel found no
             evidence of the appellant's involvement in aiding crimes.

          4. The content of paragraphs 49 and 8 were in conflict as regards
             the finding that the appellant was not a commander within  the
             intelligence unit. The panel did not explain  why  they  found
             the appellant had no knowledge of  the  LTTE's  commission  of
             crimes in government controlled territory.

          5. The  panel  failed  to  deal  adequately  with  conflicts  and
             inconsistencies as between the agreed  statement  of  evidence
             before  the  Supreme  Court  and  the  appellant's   post-2010
             evidence before the  tribunal.  The  panel  made  no  negative
             findings as a result of those inconsistencies and his  failure
             to participate in further interviews.

          6. The panel erred in finding that the appellant was not  obliged
             to attend further interviews which had been requested  by  the
             respondent as a result of the Supreme Court's guidance.

          7. The panel misrepresented the respondent's argument as  regards
             the appellant's role as bodyguard to Pottu Amman, namely  that
             it was a criminal offence to offer protection to  a  convicted
             criminal or fugitive.  The panel made no assessment as to  why
             it did not consider it to be a  crime  for  the  appellant  to
             provide protection to a man who was  subject  to  an  Interpol
             'Red Notice'.

          8. The panel noted that  the  respondent  had  not  followed  the
             Supreme  Court's  instruction  as  to  what  "needed   to   be
             investigated and focussed on" yet made  no  negative  findings
             against the appellant for his  failure  to  attend  interviews
             which would have assisted the respondent to follow the Court's
             instructions.

          9. The panel noted the respondent had not  pinpointed  the  exact
             crimes the appellant had committed; if the respondent had been
             able to identify specific crimes, criminal  proceedings  would
             have been instigated.  The  test  for  exclusion  purposes  is
             "serious reasons for considering".

         10. The panel failed to conduct a proper consideration of the case
             against the appellant in dismissing the Article 1F(b) argument
             in that it only assessed one of the three points raised.   The
             panel failed to address the "terrorism  for  the  purposes  of
             1F(b) argument or the argument about  the  illegal  possession
             and transfer of weapons".

 9. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Macdonald in the following terms:

         "4. It can readily be seen that the  rank  held  by  the  appellant
         might be a matter of considerable importance as adverse  inferences
         could more readily be taken against the appellant  the  higher  the
         rank that he had obtained. Accordingly, from what is  said  in  the
         grounds, the panel's factual finding is a material one  and  it  is
         said to be a factual error which in this case may translate into an
         arguable error of law.

         5. On this basis permission to appeal is granted and in  line  with
         Ferrer (limited appeal grounds; Alvi [2012] UKUT 00304 (IAC)  [sic]
         permission is granted on all grounds. ..."

The Hearing

10. I was provided  by  Ms  Jeygarajah  with  a  copy  of  the  appellant's
    supplementary witness statement which had been before the panel in July
    2014. It was agreed by  both  parties  that  this,  although  dated  16
    February 2008, should be dated 16 February 2009, given the content.

11. I heard lengthy submissions by both parties' representatives  and  have
    taken these into account.

The Submissions

12. Mr Wilding adopted the grounds summarised above. He referred me  to  JS
    which, he said, set out the correct approach to Article 1F.   He  noted
    the wider  approach  than  that  relating  to  criminal  liability.  He
    submitted that there was a "sliding scale of culpability"; it  was  not
    necessary for the appellant to be a high ranking  official.  The  issue
    was the appellant's complicity in crime. He referred to the headnote to
    AA (Art 1F(a) - complicity - Arts 7 and 25  ICC  Statute)  Iran  [2011]
    UKUT  00339(IAC)  in  that  "in  establishing  this  (wider)  form   of
    complicity liability  under  international  criminal  law  it  was  not
    necessary to establish that the appellant's acts  formed  'part  of"  a
    crime against humanity committed  by  others  in  the  sense  that  the
    appellant's acts were of such a character as, in  themselves,  to  fall
    within one or more of the categories of acts which if committed as part
    of a widespread or systematic  attack  directed  against  any  civilian
    population were capable of amounting to a crime against humanity  under
    Art 7 of the ICC Statute." He submitted that it was not a  question  of
    what acts the appellant had done but the  end  game  to  which  he  had
    contributed.

13. I was also referred by Mr Wilder to various paragraphs of  MT  (Article
    1F(a) - aiding and abetting)  Zimbabwe  [2012]  UKUT  00015  (IAC)  and
    headnote (iii) to  the  effect  that  commission  of  a  crime  against
    humanity or other excludable act can take the form of commission as  an
    aider  and  abettor,  as  a  subsidiary  (or  non-principal)  form   of
    participation.  He emphasised that the respondent's case,  put  to  the
    panel, had been set out  fully  in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter,
    applying the relevant law and particularly Article 1F(a), (b) and  (c).
    Detailed consideration had been given to the  appellant's  role  in  an
    LTTE intelligence group, predicated  and  based  on  the  agreed  facts
    before the Supreme Court.  The case against the appellant was, he said,
    clearly identified in paragraphs 73-79 of the refusal letter and was to
    the effect that the appellant had contributed to the LTTE's ability  to
    carry out widespread and indiscriminate  attacks,  notwithstanding  the
    respondent accepted the appellant could not be linked to  any  specific
    event. The respondent's position was that this was  not  fatal  to  the
    application of Article 1F and the respondent's  case  was  set  out  at
    paragraphs 82-84 of the refusal letter. The respondent's  position  was
    that criminal responsibility extended to lesser participants who enable
    the crimes to  be  perpetrated;  they  were  indispensible  cogs.   The
    respondent then went on to list the seven  factors  identified  by  the
    Supreme Court as indicative of accomplice activity and to  apply  those
    in paragraph 88 of the refusal letter.  She identified that whilst  the
    appellant did not have a direct personal involvement in the crimes,  he
    made a  significant  contribution  to  the  activities  of  the  LTTE's
    intelligence  wing  and  thus  a  significant  contribution  to   three
    specified  international  crimes.   Mr  Wilding  submitted   that   the
    respondent had applied the test identified  by  the  Supreme  Court  at
    paragraph 38 of the judgment.

14. Mr Wilding further  submitted  that,  as  regards  Article  1F(b),  the
    respondent's case was  that  this  was  engaged  on  three  limbs:  the
    appellant had acted as bodyguard  to  Pottu  Amman  and  had  committed
    serious non-political crimes; he  had  been  involved  in  the  illegal
    possession and  transfer  of  weapons  and  he  had  been  involved  in
    terrorism for the purposes of 1F(b). He relied on Re T  (HL)  (1996)  2
    WLR for the definition of political crimes and terrorism. He identified
    paragraphs 108 and 109 of the reasons letter as applying  the  relevant
    law to the appellant's circumstances.  He submitted that these  matters
    had been drawn to the attention of the panel in oral submissions.

15. As regards the decision itself, Mr Wilding  submitted  the  panel  made
    several errors of law. With regard to the application of Article 1F(a),
    the appellant was agreed to have been second in  command  of  a  combat
    unit; he had described himself as a person who would be made a major or
    lieutenant colonel if he died. It was not open to the panel to find  he
    was not a commander as this finding went against the agreed facts which
    suggested he was in a position of authority; he  was  not  an  ordinary
    foot soldier.

16. At paragraph 49 of the decision, the panel relied on  the  respondent's
    acceptance she had not identified any crime committed by the appellant;
    this, Mr Wilding submitted, was to misconstrue the  respondent's  case.
    The panel had misunderstood the  concept  of  complicity  in  exclusion
    cases; there was no requirement for a specific crime  to  be  involved;
    the  issue  was  the  appellant's  role  and  responsibility  and   his
    contribution. The panel had, he said, erred in seeking  to  identify  a
    specific crime; there was no requirement for this.  It  was  irrelevant
    that, as stated by the panel,  the  appellant  says  he  did  not  have
    personal involvement: the appellant significantly  contributed  to  the
    LTTE's crimes against humanity. It  was,  he  submitted,  difficult  to
    reconcile the case put in the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  with  the
    appellant's  evidence  that  he  had  no  personal  involvement.    The
    principal error of law was that there was no  need  for  the  panel  to
    search for a  particular  crime.   Furthermore,  paragraph  49  of  the
    decision was the "beginning and end" of Article  1F(a);  paragraphs  50
    and 51 dealt with inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence  and  not
    with  1F(a).   In  any  event,  the  panel's  finding  as  regards  the
    appellant's  role,  activities  and  knowledge  did   not   rebut   the
    respondent's case against  the  appellant.  The  tribunal  should  have
    looked at whether those activities in themselves  meant  the  appellant
    was complicit in the LTTE's activities and  their  campaign;  that  is,
    whether it amounted to aiding and abetting.

17. Mr Wilding submitted that the panel's paragraph 48 did not address  the
    issue raised by Article 28 as to whether he had been  involved  in  the
    commission of crime generally,  and  not  just  a  specific  crime,  as
    identified in JS and MT.  The panel had misapplied the law  by  failing
    to  engage  with  the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant  had  made  a
    significant contribution.

18. It was submitted that  paragraph  50  contained  inadequate  reasoning:
    there was no resolution  of  the  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
    evidence  or  explanation  for  failure  to  accept  the   respondent's
    submissions on the issue.  The  panel  had  not  engaged  in  a  proper
    assessment of the case put for the respondent.  Furthermore, the  panel
    had failed to draw any negative inferences  from  the  failure  of  the
    appellant to participate in  further  interviews  with  the  respondent
    whilst criticising the respondent for failing  to  follow  the  Supreme
    Court's  guidance  and  produce  an  accurate  analysis  based  on  the
    evidence.  Whilst it was accepted that  the  panel's  failure  to  draw
    negative inferences might not be material to  the  outcome,  it  should
    have been considered in paragraph 50  where  the  panel  addresses  the
    inconsistencies in the evidence.

19. As regards the findings on Article 1F(b), it  was  submitted  that  the
    panel had failed to make findings on material matters, particularly two
    of the three heads. This was a material error  of  law.  Secondly,  the
    panel had misunderstood the case put with  regard  to  the  appellant's
    work as a bodyguard to Pottu Amman which was that he was  intentionally
    keeping Pottu Amman away from justice.

20. In summary, the panel had failed to take a  holistic  approach  to  the
    activities and involvement of  the  appellant.   Mr  Wilding  submitted
    that, if his submissions on errors of law in relation to Article  1F(a)
    were successful, it followed that the findings of the panel in relation
    to 1F(c) were infected.

21. Ms Jeygarajah opened her submissions by saying that the issue  in  this
    case had always been about indirect participation.  She submitted  that
    the respondent had identified, post-appeal, issues which had  not  been
    developed in the lengthy reasons  for  refusal  letter  or  before  the
    panel.

22.  With  regard  to  the  appellant's  decision  not  to  attend  further
    interviews, she said  that  the  appellant  had  understandably  become
    exasperated by the questioning.   The  respondent's  issue  as  to  the
    inconsistency of the appellant's evidence was before the panel and  had
    been addressed  in  the  decision.  At  no  stage  had  the  respondent
    submitted to the panel that there were inconsistencies as  between  the
    appellant's evidence and the  agreed  statement  of  facts  before  the
    Supreme Court. The respondent had  not  suggested  that  the  appellant
    lacked credibility. The respondent's ground 5 was not grounded  in  the
    reasons for refusal and appeared to be an  attempt  to  relitigate  the
    matter. There  was  no  requirement  on  the  panel  to  make  negative
    findings, given that the respondent did not suggest it.  In any  event,
    she submitted, a high court judge had decided in  JR  proceedings  that
    there was no requirement on the appellant to attend further interviews.
    To suggest that the respondent had not been able  to  comply  with  the
    Supreme Court's instructions for failure of  the  appellant  to  attend
    further interviews was an excessive interpretation of the judgment.

23. Ms Jeygarajah submitted that no point  had  been  taken  at  the  time,
    before the panel, with regard to her submissions as to the  appellant's
    lack of status as a commander. This was  a  matter  which  had  assumed
    importance  since  the  decision  had   been   promulgated.    If   the
    respondent's rejection of  this  submission  had  not  been  postulated
    before the tribunal, there could be no error of law. In the words of Ms
    Jeygarajah:  if the respondent downplays a point she can't  up-play  it
    on appeal.

24. It was submitted that if the respondent wished to pursue  a  ground  of
    appeal to the effect that one or more errors  of  law  in  relation  to
    Article 1F(a) and/or (b) would impact on the findings regarding Article
    1F(c), she should apply to amend her grounds of appeal, particularly as
    this was such an important issue and there has been lengthy litigation.

25. Ms Jeygarajah disputed Mr Wilding's use of the words  "complicity"  and
    "sliding scale" as being of little assistance post-JS. There  was,  she
    said, no concept of a  sliding  scale.   She  referred  me  to  various
    paragraphs of JS emphasising that mere membership of the LTTE  was  not
    sufficient  to  engage  Article  1F.   She  identified  the   need   to
    demonstrate that any contribution be  intentional.    She  noted  Brown
    LJ's comments as to the material which might justify  a  decision.  She
    submitted that a connection with the LTTE's  intelligence  wing,  as  a
    bodyguard, was not sufficient to exclude engagement of  the  Convention
    and the panel had recognised this.

26. The panel had noted, according to Ms Jeygarajah, that it could not  fix
    the appellant with responsibility even for  indirect  participation  in
    terrorist acts committed by the LTTE; it recognised that there  had  to
    be some common purpose or plan. Ms Jeygarajah noted paragraph 27 of  JS
    to the effect that there could be no question  of  presuming  that  the
    appellant's voluntary membership of the LTTE amounted to complicity  in
    the  crimes  in   question.   Nor   could   the   appellant's   command
    responsibility be a basis for regarding  him  as  responsible  for  war
    crimes: it was a combat unit  and  there  was  no  suggestion  here  of
    Article 28 liability. She had conceded at  the  hearing  that,  if  the
    appellant were found to have had responsibility as a commander  in  the
    intelligence wing, direct or indirect contribution would be deemed.

27. According to Ms Jeygarajah, paragraphs  101-3  of  the  refusal  letter
    illustrated the weakness of the respondent's case, namely that  it  was
    recognised that  weapons  could  be  used  for  military  purposes  (ie
    legitimate use) but also for suicide bombings etc.  If  they  could  be
    used  for  either  purpose,  the  respondent  could   not   demonstrate
    justification   for   exclusion.     There   had   to   be   individual
    responsibility yet the appellant was a military man, as set out in  his
    supplementary witness statement: nothing he described amounted to  more
    than acting as a bodyguard. He was not permitted as a military  man  to
    know more. In any event, it  could  not  be  said  that  the  LTTE  was
    predominantly a terrorist organisation. Intelligence activities covered
    military and civilian matters, such as protecting borders.

28. My attention was drawn to the appellant's evidence as to the nature and
    extent of his activities whilst in the LTTE. It was submitted his  role
    in  the  organisation  and  his  contribution  was   insufficient   for
    exclusion.  Exclusion clauses were to be  read  restrictively.   I  was
    also referred to AH (Article 1F(b) -  'serious')  Algeria  [2013]  UKUT
    00382 (IAC).  It was submitted that the respondent could  not  rely  on
    the appellant having contributed to the  commission  of  serious  crime
    because no crime had been identified by her; the respondent referred to
    the appellant's transporting members of the intelligence wing as  being
    a substantial contribution to terrorism but his  mere  involvement  was
    not sufficient for such a finding: his  actions  could  have  been  for
    military intervention which is  outside  the  exclusion  criteria.  The
    appellant had set out his  personal  experience  in  his  supplementary
    witness statement which had been provided in response to the War Crimes
    Unit report  received  by  the  appellant  in  2009;  he  said  it  was
    considered important to avoid  contact  with  civilians;  he  described
    himself as a military man who was not part of the intelligence unit. Ms
    Jeygarajah described in detail the appellant's evidence as regards  his
    LTTE military career and submitted that the panel's findings were based
    on evidence which was before the respondent at the date of decision. Ms
    Jeygarajah took me  to  various  answers  given  by  the  appellant  in
    interview. She referred to the appellant's evidence [Q141] that he  was
    not in the intelligence wing, that he was a  fighter  in  the  commando
    wing of the intelligence unit.  He was a commander on  the  battlefield
    but not the intelligence wing. He had no knowledge of the operations of
    the intelligence wing.  He referred to periods when he was  in  command
    of a sub unit yet not active at that time [Q230]; he  had  admitted  to
    moving military equipment and claymores but  denied  transporting  such
    equipment during the ceasefire.

29. Ms Jeygarajah noted that the respondent's representative at the hearing
    had conceded that, if the appellant's claim  were  not  excluded  under
    Article 1F, he would be at risk on return and would face persecution.

30. Finally, Ms Jeygarajah submitted that  all  the  relevant  reasons  for
    refusal had been considered  by  the  panel.  She  submitted  that  the
    tribunal was not required to produce detailed reasons on every point at
    issue.  It had correctly used the JS judgment as its starting point and
    had been guided by paragraphs 30, 33-39 of that judgement.  Contrary to
    the terms of the R24 reply, Ms Jeygarajah submitted that  she  had  not
    called the appellant to give oral evidence because his  case  had  been
    fully set out.  As regards the respondent's concerns about the lack  of
    findings with regard to  alleged  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
    evidence, that issue had been addressed by the panel  in  paragraph  50
    and was, in any event, considered irrelevant by the panel.  Read in the
    context of the panel's summary of the reasons  for  exclusion,  it  had
    given  adequate  reasons;  there  was  no   misunderstanding   of   the
    respondent's case.

31. Mr Wilding made no application to amend the grounds of appeal.

Error of Law

32. The tribunal identified it was for the respondent  to  demonstrate  the
    exclusion criteria applied. It  also  recognised  (paragraph  36)  that
    Article 1F was to be interpreted restrictively and used cautiously.  It
    noted that Kerr LJ, in  JS,  had  stressed  the  need  to  examine  the
    appellant's personal role and his actual involvement  in  the  relevant
    criminal activity.  It noted Kerr LJ's statement that  the  appellant's
    "participation in the relevant criminal activity can only be determined
    by focusing on the role he actually played. Only  in  this  way  can  a
    proper  enquiry  be  undertaken  into  the  question  of  whether   the
    requirements of Articles 25 and 30 of the ICC Rome  Statute  have  been
    met." (paragraph 58 of JS).  The panel also noted paragraph  20  of  JS
    that "not every type of conduct would amount to  a  significant  enough
    contribution to the crime for this to create criminal liability".   The
    panel took into account the relevant provisions of Articles 25, 28  and
    30 which are set out at paragraphs 37-39 of its decision. It also noted
    the provisions of the  UNHCR  Guidelines  on  International  Protection
    insofar as they relate to the operation of exclusion under  Article  1F
    (paragraph 40).  The panel indicated it was guided by paragraphs  33-39
    of JS as to the approach to be taken to the application of Article  1F.
    The panel clearly identified at paragraph 42 the  basis  on  which  the
    respondent had concluded there were serious reasons for considering the
    appellant had made a substantial contribution to the commission of  war
    crimes.

33. The panel's starting point  in  its  decision-making  process  was  the
    statement of agreed facts prepared for the Supreme Court hearing  which
    is quoted at paragraph 8 of the determination. Whilst it is not  stated
    specifically in the decision that the statement is adopted by the panel
    and forms part of its findings, by inference that is the  case.  Indeed
    neither party, before me, suggested otherwise.

34. Paragraph 39 of JS cites

         "Article  1F's  reference  to  there  being  "serious  reasons  for
         considering" the asylum-seeker to have committed a war  crime".  It
         goes on to say that "serious  reasons  for  considering"  obviously
         imports a higher test for exclusion than would, say, an  expression
         like   "reasonable   grounds   for    suspecting".    "Considering"
         approximates rather to "believing"  than  to  "suspecting".   I  am
         inclined to agree with what Sedley LJ said  in  Yasser  Al-Sirri  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  222,
         para 33: "[the phrase used] sets a standard above suspicion. Beyond
         this, it is a mistake to  try  to  paraphrase  the  straightforward
         language of the Convention; it has to be treated as meaning what it
         says."

    It is clear that the panel had in mind this guidance in  its  decision-
    making.

35. I am unable to find that the submission of the appellant's  counsel  to
    the panel, to the effect that the appellant was  not  a  commander,  is
    inconsistent with the agreed statement of facts: the  summary  of  that
    statement, at paragraph 8  of  the  panel's  decision,  refers  to  the
    appellant as being a team leader of a 9-man combat unit, the leader  of
    a 45-man platoon and the leader of a mobile unit and a  chief  security
    guard to Pottu Amman, the intelligence division's leader. Later he  was
    a "second in command" of the combat unit of the Intelligence  Division.
    The statement does not refer specifically or impliedly to the appellant
    as a "commander". Indeed when he held two of those leadership roles  he
    was still a minor, being under 18.  This  suggests  that  it  would  be
    inappropriate to identify his roles as  command  roles  merely  on  the
    basis of their  description.   This  is  consistent  with  the  panel's
    observation that "the Supreme Court  gave  a  clear  pointer  that  the
    appellant's three years with the mobile  unit  was  the  "better  case"
    against him".   Given that pointer by the  Supreme  Court  it  was  not
    unreasonable for the panel to focus its  attention  primarily  on  that
    period.  Furthermore, the panel noted the terms of Article 28 which  is
    concerned with the responsibility of commanders and other superiors and
    the  reference  to  "effective  command  and  control"  and  "effective
    authority and control" and the requirement that they  "knew  or  should
    have known that such crimes were being or were about to be  committed".
    Throughout the decision the panel gives weight to the  appellant's  own
    evidence as regards his activities. Thus its  decision  to  accept  the
    submission of the appellant's representative, which was not  challenged
    at the time as being inconsistent with the agreed statement of evidence
    before the Supreme Court, is sustainable on the evidence. Nor was it an
    error of law for the panel to identify the respondent's case  as  being
    that she had imputed high rank to the appellant  as  a  result  of  his
    circumstances (paragraph 47 of the decision).  For the reasons set  out
    above, that finding is not at odds with the statement of  agreed  facts
    which  makes  no  reference  to  any  particular  rank  or  indeed  the
    appellant's seniority. Nor are the findings in paragraph 49, as regards
    the appellant's role in the mobile unit, in conflict  with  the  agreed
    statement of facts.  According to the agreed statement:

         "At 18 he was appointed to  lead  a  mobile  unit  responsible  for
         transporting  military  equipment  and   other   members   of   the
         Intelligence Division  through  jungles  to  a  point  where  armed
         members of the division could be sent in plainclothes  to  Colombo.
         He continued to do this for some three years  from  September  2000
         until early 2004 except for some two and a half months  (from  late
         April to early June 2002) when he was appointed one  of  the  chief
         security guards to Pottu Amman the Intelligence Division's  leader,
         whom he accompanied as a trusted aid on visits to the LTTE District
         Leader Colonel Karuna, and  other  prominent  LTTE  members.   From
         early 2004 to September 2006 he served as a second  in  command  of
         the combat unit of the Intelligence Division. ..."

    The panel finds in paragraph 49 that the

         "... respondent has speculated about the nature and extent  of  the
         appellant's knowledge and awareness, based on his long service with
         the LTTE and his association with the Intelligence  Unit.  We  find
         that he was a part of a small unit responsible for transporting  or
         escorting unidentified agents and military equipment from place  to
         place as ordered and that that was the extent of his activities and
         his contribution to the LTTE's strategy.  We  find  he  was  not  a
         commander within the Intelligence Unit and are not satisfied on the
         evidence that there is sufficient nexus between the  activities  of
         the appellant and the actions of the LTTE's  intelligence  Unit  to
         find that he meets Article 28 or to clothe him with  the  requisite
         level of knowledge and  awareness  (mens  rea)  necessary  to  meet
         Articles 30 [sic].  It  follows  that  we  do  not  find  that  the
         appellant's  personal  contribution  to  the   LTTE's   aims   were
         sufficient to meet Article 1F(a)."

    This finding, that the appellant did not have sufficient knowledge that
    crimes were being committed such  as  to  engage  Article  28,  is  not
    inconsistent with the agreed statement of facts. In effect,  the  panel
    accepted the  evidence  of  the  appellant  as  regards  his  state  of
    knowledge at the time. This is set out at the end of paragraph 44: "...
    when asked to transport military equipment he did  not  know  what  the
    equipment was  being  used  for.  He  never  asked  questions  and  was
    forbidden from discussing his orders with anyone. He said they told him
    nothing and kept their faces hidden".

36. Whilst there is no specific reference in paragraph 41  to  Article  25,
    that paragraph follows from various citations which include Article  25
    at paragraph 37. Paragraph 41 starts "In light of those  provisions..."
    which suggests the panel  had  Article  25  in  mind  when  making  the
    findings at paragraph 41.  Furthermore, it is implicit from the panel's
    findings generally that it considered the  appellant's  activities  and
    knowledge to be limited.  The panel has  cited  the  respondent's  case
    (which includes Article 25) and focussed  principally  on  the  "better
    case" against the appellant, namely his three years within  the  mobile
    unit working for the Intelligence Division. The  panel  addresses  this
    "better case" by reference to the appellant's own evidence and applying
    the correct standard of  proof.  It  also  notes  the  Supreme  Court's
    observation that the respondent had been entitled to conclude that  the
    LTTE in general and the Intelligence Division in particular were guilty
    of widespread criminal acts and atrocities. It goes on to  address  the
    conclusions of  the  respondent  in  that  respect  and  considers  the
    respondent has "imputed" certain characteristics to the appellant as  a
    result of his personal experiences and circumstances.

37. The panel correctly identifies at paragraph 48 that the matters  listed
    in Article 28 are in the alternative  (and  this  includes  aiding  and
    abetting) but states it "can find no or no compelling evidence that  he
    personally participated in or had sufficient knowledge, if any, of  the
    war crimes or crimes against humanity  particularised  in  the  Special
    Cases Unit report of October 2013 and repeated in the refusal  letter".
    Whilst this  is  a  somewhat  blanket  finding,  it  is  supported  and
    justified by the subsequent paragraphs (49 - 51). What follows is  also
    consistent with the  agreed  statement  of  evidence  and  the  earlier
    findings at paragraphs 43-44.  Taking the decision  and  reasons  as  a
    whole, there is adequate explanation for the panel's finding that there
    was no evidence of the appellant's involvement in aiding  and  abetting
    crimes.  In doing so it gave weight to the evidence of the appellant.

38. As regards the ground that there were conflicts and inconsistencies  as
    between the appellant's evidence before the Supreme Court and his post-
    2010  evidence  before  the  tribunal,  the  panel  took  into  account
    paragraphs  91-94  of  the   refusal   letter   and   those   purported
    inconsistencies are addressed by the  panel  at  paragraph  50  of  its
    decision. The  panel's  consideration  in  that  regard  is  more  than
    adequate and its findings are sustainable on the  evidence:  the  panel
    found that, in two cases, on examination of the evidence, there were no
    inconsistencies, the respondent  having  misrepresented  the  evidence.
    The panel noted that, in any event, the inconsistencies  identified  by
    the respondent did not serve to establish the appellant's knowledge  of
    what the intelligence officers would be doing  once  they  had  reached
    their destination or the intended use of  the  weapons,  such  that  he
    could be found to have furthered or contributed to the commissioning of
    war crimes by his actions.  There is no error of  law  as  regards  the
    panel's findings on this issue.

39. Nor is there an error of law in the panel's finding that the  appellant
    was not obliged to attend further  interviews  when  requested  by  the
    respondent: I have not been referred  to  any  guidance,  case  law  or
    legislation in support of this proposition.  The appellant had attended
    various interviews, including after the Supreme Court judgment, and  it
    was not incumbent on the panel to  make  an  adverse,  or  indeed  any,
    finding as a result  of  his  failure  to  attend  further  interviews,
    particularly as the reason for his failing to attend further interviews
    was clear  from  the  latest  record  of  interview:  he  was  becoming
    increasingly distressed by the process.  By that stage  the  respondent
    had already made one decision that the  appellant's  asylum  claim  was
    certified and the Supreme Court had ordered that  that  the  respondent
    make a fresh determination. The appellant had provided a  supplementary
    witness statement addressing the issues raised by the respondent's  War
    Crimes Unit Report dated 1 June 2007  insofar  as  it  related  to  him
    personally.  I do not consider that the appellant ought  to  have  been
    criticised by the panel for failing to continue  to  attend  interviews
    which he found distressing and in circumstances where  such  interviews
    were for the purpose of enabling the respondent to build her  case  for
    exclusion against him and there was no requirement on him to attend. It
    was open to the respondent to cite those inconsistencies in support  of
    her position on exclusion and she did so.   The  fact  that  the  panel
    found that some of those inconsistencies did not actually exist and the
    remainder were of  no  relevance  suggests  that  the  failure  of  the
    appellant to attend further interviews was not considered by the  panel
    to be of any relevance to its findings and that there  was  no  adverse
    inference to be drawn. It follows also from the panel's findings on the
    purported inconsistencies and their relevance, that it was open to  the
    panel to place reliance on  the  appellant's  evidence  in  making  its
    findings. This it did.

40. The respondent claims the panel misrepresented her position  as  regard
    the appellant's role as bodyguard to Pottu Amman, namely that it was  a
    criminal offence to  offer  protection  from  justice  to  a  convicted
    criminal or fugitive.  It is alleged that the panel made no  assessment
    as to why it did not consider this to be a crime.  The panel noted this
    issue in paragraph 10 of the decision, when  listing  the  reasons  for
    refusal. It is also identified at paragraph 53.  I can be inferred that
    the panel had this issue in mind albeit it made no specific findings on
    it. It noted the appellant was not assigned to guard Pottu Amman at the
    time of the relevant murders and found that there was no evidence  that
    the appellant had any knowledge of  the  criminal  proceedings  against
    Pottu Amman arising from the bombings.  It is implicit from  this  that
    the  panel  did  not  accept  the  respondent's  proposition  that  the
    appellant "willingly acted as bodyguard to an individual who  had  been
    listed by India as an "absconding offender" in the crime of murder  ...
    and was a  fugitive  from  justice"  (as  stated  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal).   Thus the panel's finding is grounded in the appellant's own
    evidence on his involvement in Pottu Amman's security  unit  and  after
    application  of  the  correct  test,  namely   "serious   grounds   for
    considering". Its findings were open to it on the evidence.

41. Mr Wilding submitted that the panel had  failed  to  conduct  a  proper
    consideration  of  the  respondent's  case  against  the  appellant  in
    dismissing the Article 1F(b) argument, in  particular  that  the  panel
    only addressed one of the three points raised, namely  the  appellant's
    role as bodyguard to Pottu  Amman;  the  panel  did  not  consider  the
    appellant's illegal possession and transfer of weapons or his  role  in
    acts of terrorism.  It is the appellant's evidence that for three years
    he provided weapons to LTTE  intelligence  wing  members  operating  in
    government controlled territory. At paragraph 101 of  her  reasons  for
    refusal letter, the respondent stated "once the weapons  were  left  in
    government controlled territory [he] had no further  control  over  how
    they were used or who they were used by. As  such,  there  are  serious
    reasons for considering that [he] could not know  whether  the  weapons
    were used for legitimate military purposes (i.e.  attacks  on  the  Sri
    Lankan military), terrorist attacks such as attacks  on  civilians,  or
    criminal activity."  The respondent concluded that the  nature  of  the
    appellant's clandestine operations for the LTTE gave  rise  to  serious
    reasons for considering that the weapons in question had been illegally
    imported and held by the LTTE and that neither the appellant, nor those
    individuals to  whom  the  appellant  had  provided  weapons,  were  in
    possession of the requisite documentation  to  allow  them  to  legally
    possess firearms; the illegal transportation of weapons through a state
    would generally be perceived as unlawful at  the  international  level.
    The respondent went on to say at paragraph 103  that  "by  transporting
    these  weapons  into  government  controlled  territory,  you  made   a
    significant contribution to the process by which LTTE members were able
    to acquire arms and explosives and, as a logical extension of this,  to
    commit the crimes  noted  by  the  Supreme  Court  ("suicide  bombings,
    attacks upon civilians, assassinations, kidnappings  and  the  forcible
    recruitment of children.")".

42. This  is  a  significant  plank  of  the  respondent's  case  that  the
    appellant's claim was excluded under Article 1F(b), namely that he "has
    committed a serious non-political crime outside the country  of  refuge
    prior to his admission to that country as a  refugee".  The  respondent
    asserts (page 35 of her reasons for refusal letter)  that  the  weapons
    had been imported illegally but she cites no  evidence  in  support  of
    this conclusion. Irrespective of whether the movement of weapons by the
    appellant was contrary to Sri Lankan law, the appellant's own evidence,
    which was accepted generally by the panel throughout their decision and
    reasons, was that he did not know what the weapons were being used for;
    he was following orders; he was told  not  to  ask  questions.   It  is
    implicit from his evidence, which the  panel  accepted  throughout  its
    decision and reasons, that he undertook his duties  on  a  need-to-know
    basis. There is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  weapons  he  was
    transporting had been "illegally imported".  If the panel had addressed
    this issue in its decision, it would have relied  (as  it  had  in  all
    other aspects of the appeal) on the appellant's own evidence in drawing
    conclusions as to the nature and extent of the appellant's  activities.
    It found at paragraph 49 with regard to this period of the  appellant's
    LTTE career, that the appellant "was part of a small  unit  responsible
    for  transporting  or  escorting  unidentified  agents   and   military
    equipment from place to place as ordered and that that was  the  extent
    of his activities and his contribution to the  LTTE's  strategy".   The
    panel also found at paragraph 49, albeit in relation to Article  1F(a),
    that there was not "sufficient nexus  between  the  activities  of  the
    appellant and the actions of the LTTE's Intelligence Unit to find  that
    he meets Article 28 or to  clothe  him  with  the  requisite  level  of
    knowledge and awareness (mens rea) necessary  to  meet  Articles  [sic]
    30".

43. The panel  took  into  account,  throughout  its  decision-making,  the
    Supreme Court's view that the better case  against  the  appellant  was
    this role as leader of a combat unit for three years and his activities
    in that role. As the Brown LJ says at paragraph  28  "As  para  108  of
    Gurung concluded: "If, however, he has transported explosives for  LTTE
    combatants in circumstances where he must have known what they were  to
    be used for, there may well be a serious  1F  issue."   The  panel  has
    given weight to the appellant's own evidence as regards  his  state  of
    knowledge and relied on it to make findings that  Articles  1F(a),  (b)
    and (c) were not engaged as regards the activities of the  intelligence
    officers he was transporting and whose weapons  he  also  carried.  The
    panel's general findings on the appellant's state of mind, his role and
    activities (albeit in relation to other Articles) are sufficiently wide
    as to address the respondent's case about the  illegal  possession  and
    transfer of weapons.  The panel accepted his evidence that  he  had  no
    knowledge of the operations or activities  of  the  intelligence  wing,
    being a military man, and had not transported military equipment during
    the ceasefire. For these reasons, albeit there is no  mention  of  this
    issue in relation to Article 1F(b) and the standard of  proof  is  low,
    there is no material error of law, it being implicit from the remaining
    findings of the panel that the appellant had insufficient knowledge  or
    awareness for Article 1F(b) to be engaged.

44. As regards the respondents' assertion at paragraph 105-110  that  there
    were serious reasons for considering that the appellant was engaged  in
    terrorist activities, the panel's  failure  to  address  this  is,  for
    similar reasons, not a material error of  law.   In  that  regard,  the
    definition of terrorism in  Article  2  includes  the  requirement  for
    "knowledge of the fact that such participation will contribute  to  the
    criminal activities of the terrorist group".  For the reasons  set  out
    in the preceding paragraphs in relation to the possession and  transfer
    of illegal weapons, which I adopt in relation to this issue, the  panel
    made no material error of law in its  decision;  it  had  already  made
    general findings, which are  of  relevance  to  this  issue,  that  the
    appellant did not have the necessary knowledge or  awareness  that  his
    actions would contribute to criminal  activities  by  the  intelligence
    wing.

45. Given the panel's findings generally, which are based on  the  evidence
    before it, it was open to the panel  to  find,  as  it  did,  that  the
    respondent had not followed the guidance of the  Supreme  Court  as  to
    what was needed by way of investigation and focus.

46. For these reasons, therefore, I find that there are no material  errors
    of law in the decision of the panel.

Decision

47. The decision and reasons of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  panel  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law.

48. I do not set aside the decision.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge       Dated: 12 January 2016



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge       Dated: 12 January 2016
