
IAC-BFD- MD
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10543/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th May 2015                     |On 28th May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts


                                   Between

                                     b f
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G Patel, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a citizen of China appeals with  permission  against  the
    decision of a First-tier Tribunal (Judge Wilson) in which it  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal  to  grant  her
    asylum.

 2. The Appellant's claim to  asylum  centres  around  both  hers  and  her
    husband's claimed activity in supporting the  Chinese  Democracy  Party
    (CDP). Added to this there is a claim that her sur place activities  in
    the UK, on behalf of the CDP place her at risk.  She  now  also  claims
    that she is a practising Jehovah's Witness and this adds to the risk to
    her if returned to China.

 3. When the Appellant's appeal came before Judge Wilson he comprehensively
    disbelieved her claim. Documentary evidence  was  produced  before  the
    Judge and included articles of anti  Chinese  authority  material.  The
    Appellant's claim is that she  is  the  author  of  this  material  and
    because it has been published she will be at serious risk of harm  from
    the Chinese authorities.

 4. The Judge when conducting the hearing questioned the identity/expertise
    of the translator of the articles (Dr Yang). He also failed to consider
    material evidence which was  available  to  him  from  the  Appellant's
    brother-in-law.

 5. As Miss Patel pointed out in her submissions Dr Yang's credentials have
    never been questioned and the Judge had insufficient cause to  question
    the accreditation and qualification of the  translator  of  many  years
    experience. The translations go to the heart of the appellant's  claim.
    Further  an  important  piece  of  evidence,  namely  the  letter   and
    translation at pages 16-17 of the bundle has clearly been overlooked by
    the Judge.  This amounts to a material error.

 6. Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the Respondent relied upon his Rule 24 response
    and said that the Judge had given  adequate  reasons  for  the  adverse
    credibility findings.

Error of Law

 7. I am satisfied that the decision of the FtT cannot stand  and  must  be
    set aside for legal error. The evidence of the Appellant's  brother-in-
    law pages 16-17 of the appellant's bundle forms a material part of  the
    Appellant's claim to asylum and it is only  right  that  it  should  be
    included in any evaluation of the appellant's claim. Its inclusion  may
    well affect the outcome of the claim and therefore to overlook it is  a
    material error. Any evaluation of the expertise  or  otherwise  of  the
    translator of documents is a matter for the Judge, although regard must
    be given to the flexibility outlined  in  the  new  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum chamber) Rules 2014.   In
    all these circumstances the appropriate course is for this appeal to be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh rehearing. No  findings
    of fact are preserved. The matter will be reheard by a Judge other than
    Judge Wilson.

Notice of Decision

 8. The appeal of the Appellant is allow on the ground that the FtT made  a
    material error of law in its assessment of  the  documentary  evidence.
    The appeal is remitted to  the  FtT  (not  Judge  Wilson)  for  a  full
    rehearing.

Direction regarding anonymity - rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

The Appellant is granted anonymity on the basis that  the  First-tier  Judge
granted anonymity in respect of the Appellant's dependents.  That  situation
shall remain.

Signature     Dated

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
