
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10597/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 September 2016                  |On 12 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     as
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Talacchi, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge R Sullivan)  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision made on 26 November 2014 refusing her  claim  for
    asylum and deciding to remove her.



Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born on 28  August  1989.
    She first arrived in the UK with her mother on 14 April 2005 with entry
    clearance as a visitor valid until 21 September 2005.   She  overstayed
    and on 14 May 2012 applied for leave to remain outside  the  rules  but
    this application was rejected because of problems with  the  completion
    of the application form -and the payment of the  relevant  fee.   On  4
    July 2012 she made a further application but this  was  refused  on  16
    December 2013 and a subsequent appeal was dismissed with permission  to
    appeal being refused.  The appellant was detained on  13  October  2014
    and then made a further application on 24 October  2014  for  leave  to
    remain but this was refused with no right of appeal on 7 November 2014.
     On 30 October 2014 the appellant was served  with  removal  directions
    and she claimed asylum on 6 November 2014.  Her application was refused
    on 26 November 2014.

3.   The appellant based her claim on her fear of  people  her  father  owed
    money to, of traffickers who had facilitated her journey to the UK  and
    of the former partner of her maternal aunt with whom her father had had
    an extramarital relationship.  She also  included  with  her  documents
    submitted in support of her claim materials about LGBT  issues  in  the
    Philippines, having disclosed in her interview that she was a  lesbian.
    The respondent did not accept that the appellant  and  her  family  had
    been threatened by any agency in the Philippines or in the UK  or  that
    there was any risk from her aunt's partner.  She also found that  there
    was no evidence  of  any  risk  arising  from  the  appellant's  sexual
    identity on return to the Philippines.

4.   The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against this decision was  listed
    on  6  January  2016  but  was  adjourned  for  investigation  of   the
    appellant's claim to have been trafficked, the Tribunal directing  that
    the competent authority make a decision whether she  was  a  victim  of
    trafficking or not within a period of six weeks.  The  matter  was  re-
    listed for hearing on 30 March 2016 but that hearing was converted to a
    case management review as the respondent had been unable to obtain  the
    appellant's consent to enable the referral process to take place.

5.   The appeal was re-listed for hearing on 24 May 2016 when there  was  no
    appearance by or on behalf of the  appellant.   The  judge  noted  that
    notice of the hearing had been sent to the appellant on 30  March  2016
    at the address she had provided for service and had not  been  returned
    undelivered.  There had been no message to explain her  non-attendance.
    The respondent's representative told the judge that a letter  had  been
    sent to the appellant on 11 May  2016  seeking  information  about  her
    claim that she had been  trafficked  but  there  was  no  record  of  a
    response.  The address was the same as that used by  the  Tribunal  for
    service  of  the  notice  of  hearing.   At  the  judge's  request  the
    presenting officer made enquiries to confirm whether or not  there  had
    been a response to the letter dated 11 May 2016 but he  was  unable  to
    obtain any further information.

6.   The judge took into account the overriding objective in rule 2  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber)  Rules  2014  and  decided  in  the  light  of  the  time  and
    opportunities the appellant had had to state and support her case  that
    it was in the interests of justice to hear the appeal in  her  absence.
    The judge went on to consider the evidence and for the reasons she gave
    found that the appellant had failed to show that she  was  entitled  to
    asylum or humanitarian protection or that  removing  her  would  be  in
    breach of her human rights.

The Grounds and Submissions

7.   In her grounds of appeal the appellant  said  that  she  had  lost  the
    hearing notice but had gone to the Tribunal on  25  May  2016  to  make
    enquiries and had also called the Home Office about the  hearing.   She
    had sent an apology letter both to the Tribunal and to the Home Office.
     She had  given  her  consent  to  the  trafficking  referral  and  had
    cooperated.  The grounds then go on to challenge the findings  made  by
    the judge.

8.   Permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted by the Upper Tribunal on the basis that:

         "The grounds are arguable in view of the  indication  on  the  case
         file that the appellant attended the previous two hearings  of  her
         appeal which were adjourned at the respondent's request, as well as
         the fact that she has now been  substantively  interviewed  by  the
         respondent regarding her claims, which  adds  some  weight  to  her
         arguments.  There are indicators that the appellant is  potentially
         a vulnerable person and one would hope that she  obtains  competent
         legal representation at the earliest opportunity."

9.   Mr Talacchi accepted that the appellant had not  attended  the  hearing
    but submitted  that  an  adequate  explanation  had  been  given.   The
    appellant had attended the hearing centre on 25 May 2016, the day after
    the hearing, and  had  written  a  letter  of  apology  to  the  court.
    Further, this was not a case where the  appellant  had  failed  to  co-
    operate with the trafficking referral which had been proceeding.

10.  Mr Whitwell submitted that her failure to attend should  be  looked  at
    in the context of the  appellant's  immigration  history,  as  she  was
    someone who was familiar with the appellate process.  This appeared  to
    be a case, so he submitted, of someone who had simply  forgotten  about
    the hearing but that in itself was not a good reason for the judge  not
    to proceed.  The costs  thrown  away  should  be  properly  taken  into
    account as a relevant even if not a determinative factor.  He  accepted
    that progress had been made on the trafficking referral but  there  had
    been a lack of willingness by the appellant to progress matters.

11.  In reply Mr Talacchi argued that it could  properly  be  inferred  that
    the appellant had  co-operated  with  those  enquiries.  She  had  been
    interviewed by the relevant authorities and must have responded to  the
    letter of 11 May 2016.  This was not a case  of  someone  intentionally
    avoiding the hearing or of failing to co-operate.





Consideration of whether the judge erred in law

12   I must consider  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  by
    proceeding with the hearing in the absence of the appellant.  It is not
    in dispute that the appellant did not attend  the  hearing  on  24  May
    2016.  It is her assertion that she had lost her notice of hearing  and
    made enquiries but received no further information.  She says that  she
    wrote to the Tribunal and this is confirmed by a letter on  the  appeal
    file marked as received on 1 June 2016 from the appellant saying that:

         "We owe the judge and the court  an  apology.   We  have  lost  the
         letter of our schedule of our hearing, we did call the Home  Office
         days before they couldn't give us any date because we have provided
         them with the old Home Office reference number and  that  they  had
         decided to go to the hearing on 25 May which was not their date."

    The letter goes on to sincerely apologise.  It  requests  understanding
    and expresses the appellant's concern about her mother and  sister.  It
    confirms that her father had taken a photograph as  evidence  they  had
    gone to the Tribunal on 25 May 2016, which is enclosed with the  letter
    although there is nothing in the photograph  to  confirm  the  date  of
    attending the hearing centre.  The letter was seen by Judge Sullivan on
    2 June 2016 and is so endorsed.  However, by that time  the  judge  had
    sent has dated her decision dated 31 May 2016  for  issue  and  it  was
    promulgated on 2 June 2016. At the stage the judge saw the letter,  she
    was not in a position to recall  the  decision  should  she  have  been
    minded to do so.

13.  It is clear from the judge's  decision  that  she  proceeded  with  the
    hearing because there was no message to explain  the  appellant's  non-
    attendance at the hearing [2] and it appeared that  the  appellant  had
    not co-operated  in  the  process  of  the  trafficking  referral,  had
    withheld her signature from a consent form for several months  and  had
    failed to respond to a written request for information [26].

14.  Whilst there must be concerns about the appellant's account  of  losing
    the notice of hearing and then going to the hearing centre on  the  day
    after the hearing had taken place, these must be set against  the  fact
    that she had attended the hearing on 6 January 2016 and I was told  and
    accept that her father had attended on her behalf  on  30  March  2016.
    When she did find out about the date of hearing she wrote a  letter  to
    the Tribunal received on 1 June 2016 and, although the  judge  saw  it,
    the timing was such that she had already sent her decision for issue.

15.  The judge also took into account the fact that the  appellant  appeared
    not to have co-operated in the trafficking referral  process  but  that
    position has been clarified in submissions before me.  It is now  clear
    that the competent authorities were considering the matter in June 2016
    and it can reasonably be inferred  that  the  appellant,  whatever  had
    happened previously, was co-operating at that stage.   I  am  therefore
    satisfied that when considering whether to proceed with the hearing the
    judge proceeded, albeit through no fault of hers, on a mistaken factual
    basis causing unfairness: E v Secretary of State [2004] EWCA Civ 49.

16.  I have taken into account Mr Whitwell's submissions about the  need  to
    consider the appeal in the light of the immigration history as a  whole
    and not to leave out  of  account  the  costs  implications  but  I  am
    satisfied in the circumstances of  this  case  that  the  interests  of
    justice must prevail over those factors and that the  appellant  should
    have the opportunity of attending a hearing so that any issues  arising
    not only from her appeal against the asylum decision but also from  the
    decision of the competent authority on the  issue  of  trafficking,  if
    relevant, can be fully explored.

Decision

17.  For these reasons I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
    law by proceeding in the absence of the appellant.  The decision is set
    aside.  Both representatives accepted that in these  circumstances  the
    appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  full  re-
    hearing before a different judge.  No application has been made to vary
    or discharge the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal, which
    remains in force.


Signed        H J E Latter                       Date:   9 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter



