
IAC-TH-WYL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10302/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 May 2015                       |On 8 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          mr saryas sardar mohammed
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Rudd, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and Mr  Mohammed
    as "the appellant".

 2. No  application  for  anonymity  has  previously  been  made  in  these
    proceedings and there is no material before me to date to suggest  that
    such an order is required.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 20 April 1991 who arrived in
    the United Kingdom on 4 December 2007 and who lodged an application for
    asylum some two days thereafter.  On 18 February  2008  the  respondent
    refused his application but decided to  grant  discretionary  leave  to
    remain until 19 October 2009 as an unaccompanied minor.  On  9  October
    2008 the appellant made a further application to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on asylum and  human  rights  grounds.   The  respondent  again
    refused the application and the appellant's appeal was dismissed  in  a
    decision promulgated  on  10  May  2011.   The  appellant  applied  for
    permission to appeal and on 2 June 2011 the First-tier Tribunal granted
    such permission.  However, on 12 December 2011 the Upper Tribunal found
    that there was an error of law in the Immigration Judge's decision  and
    the Secretary of State was required to make a fresh  decision.   On  20
    August 2014 the appellant's solicitors lodged  further  representations
    and  supporting  documents.   Thereafter  on  19  November   2014   the
    respondent made a decision to refuse to grant asylum to  the  appellant
    under paragraph 336 of HC 395 (as  amended)  and  made  a  decision  to
    refuse to vary the appellant's leave to remain.   The  respondent  also
    made a decision to remove the appellant  by  way  of  directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 4. The appellant  appealed  that  decision  and  following  a  hearing  at
    Bradford and in a decision promulgated on 26 January 2015 Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Cox allowed the appeal on asylum grounds and  under
    Article 3 but dismissed it on Humanitarian Protection grounds.

 5. The judge's findings as to fact and credibility are to be gleaned  from
    paragraphs 23 through to 42.  He found at  paragraph  41  that  on  the
    totality of the evidence there is a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood
    that the circumstances  in  Baghdad  would  be  unduly  harsh  and  the
    appellant could not reasonably be expected to return there.   He  noted
    that the appellant's claim for asylum had already been considered by an
    Immigration Judge and that he was bound by the authority of  Devaseelan
    v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702.  In the first decision  the  judge  accepted
    that the appellant is an Iraqi Kurd from Kirkuk and that his father had
    some involvement with the Ba'ath Party.  However the judge rejected the
    appellant's claim that his father had a high profile  with  that  party
    and that there would be a backlash from other Kurds either at the point
    of regime change or since.  Additionally the judge  was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant was telling the truth, did not accept  that  he  had
    been approached by members of the Ansar Al-Sunna, and  then  threatened
    by them verbally or in writing.

 6. The Presenting Officer before the judge in the instant appeal  accepted
    that the judge had no reason to go behind the judge's positive findings
    of fact as to the appellant being from Kirkuk  which  is  a  "contested
    area" that, in these circumstances, the respondent  accepted  that  the
    appellant could not safely return to Kirkuk at present.

 7. Therefore the issue before Judge Cox  was  agreed  to  be  whether  the
    appellant, as a Sunni  Muslim  Kurd  from  Kirkuk,  can  reasonably  be
    expected to relocate to Baghdad.  The judge noted that the Home  Office
    Presenting  Officer  stated  that  at  present  individuals  from   the
    contested areas are only being returned to Baghdad  and  accepted  that
    the appellant could not travel  to  the  KRI  because  of  the  general
    security situation in Iraq outside Baghdad.

 8. The representatives also  agreed  that  as  the  appellant  is  from  a
    "contested area" the present country guidance cases were  not  relevant
    to the determination of the issues before the judge.  Reliance by  both
    of them was placed on paragraph 1.3.63 of the Country  Information  and
    Guidance Report for Iraq dated 24 December 2014.

 9. The judge went on to consider evidence in relation to  the  appellant's
    identification and found that he ought to be able to obtain  his  civil
    status ID card were he to be returned.

10. He then considered the issue of internal flight  recognising  that  the
    appellant is a young man who at the time of the hearing was 23 years of
    age and had shown an ability to adapt to life in  the  United  Kingdom.
    He noted how well the appellant spoke English and recognised  the  life
    skills that he holds which will stand him in good stead in Baghdad.

11. The judge then went on at paragraph 37 to find that were the  appellant
    to be returned to Baghdad his circumstances  would  be  very  different
    from when he first arrived in the United Kingdom.   At  that  time  the
    appellant was a minor and was quickly placed  under  the  care  of  the
    local Social Services.  If the appellant were returned  to  Baghdad  he
    would get little if any support, especially as he  is  a  young  single
    male.  His difficulties would be compounded by the  fact  that  he  has
    never been to the city before and would need to  quickly  identify  and
    familiarise himself with a host community sharing a similar  ethic  and
    religious background.

12. Further the judge was satisfied that the general situation  in  Baghdad
    is  deteriorating.   He  drew   this   conclusion   from   an   Amnesty
    International report dated 30 October  2014  to  be  found  within  the
    appellant's bundle at  page  60.   That  report  found,  amongst  other
    things, that "dozens of cases of abductions and  unlawful  killings  by
    Shi'a militias in Baghdad ..."

13. The judge further considered the Country of  Information  and  Guidance
    with particular reference  to  "reports  of  internal  displacement  to
    Baghdad and the  south  and  sectarian  divisions".   Paragraph  1.3.63
    states:-

         "However since these  determinations  were  promulgated,  Iraq  has
         experienced significant civil unrest  and  displacement,  following
         widespread territorial losses to non-state  armed  groups,  notably
         ISIL.  To  consider  the  reasonableness  of  internal  relocation,
         decision  makers  must  refer  to  the  latest  country  facts  and
         guidance. Decision makers are reminded to refer to the very  latest
         country information available. See Annex O: Sources of  Country  of
         Origin Information (COI)"

    Paragraph 1.3.66 states:-

         "In particular reports have shown  that  Baghdad  has  become  less
         ethnically and religiously diverse,  with  fewer  'mixed  sect'  or
         Sunni areas. This may explain why in  Baghdad  IDPs  are  concerned
         that the hospitality of the host  community  will  not  last  long,
         raising doubts as to whether Baghdad presents a durable option  for
         relocation."

14. The judge concluded that there was an acknowledgement by the respondent
    that there are doubts  as  to  whether  Baghdad  represents  a  durable
    solution for IDPs and in all the circumstances and  on  the  individual
    facts of this particular  appeal  the  judge  found  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant's life  skills  developed  in  the  United
    Kingdom would be  of  much  assistance  to  him  in  Baghdad.   He  was
    satisfied that there is a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  the
    circumstances there would be unduly harsh and the appellant  could  not
    reasonably be expected to return there.

15. The respondent sought permission to appeal and in a decision  dated  17
    February 2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin  concluded  that  it  was
    arguable "as argued  in  the  grounds  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    consideration of  the  COI  report  and  misconstrued  its  content  as
    suggesting Baghdad was unsafe for Sunni Kurds.  On the basis  that  the
    judge may also have erred in departing from the country guidance of  HM
    and Others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409 (IAC)".

16. Thus the appeal came before me.

17. Mr Avery argued that pertinent to this appeal was the  current  country
    guidance of HM and Others (Article 15(c)) Iraq  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00409
    (IAC) which found that, generally, returns to Baghdad are feasible.  In
    this appeal the judge found that the return of the appellant was not an
    option  because  Baghdad  is  not  a  durable  solution  for  returning
    displaced persons.  The basis in  evidence  for  this  is  the  Country
    Information and Guidance Report  and  in  particular  paragraph  1.3.66
    thereof.  He contended that there has been a misrepresentation  of  the
    evidence and that the relevant extract from the report notes that there
    is the possibility that there  may  be  some  future  difficulties  for
    Sunnis in Baghdad.  That possibility does not equate  to  a  reasonable
    likelihood.  Furthermore the judge has not assessed  the  case  on  the
    basis of the evidence of the circumstances at the date of the  hearing.
    Moreover the Tribunal  should  have  taken  account  too  of  paragraph
    1.3.67.  That states:-

         "Nonetheless Baghdad has for decades been an attractive destination
         for those seeking refuge because of its close proximity to conflict
         areas, the lower costs of living compared to KRI,  and  because  it
         has sizeable Shia and Sunni IDP populations. At the end of  October
         2014 there were 127,446 IDPs residing in Baghdad. According to  IOM
         a significant majority of IDPs in Baghdad were Arab Sunnis."

    From this it is clear that there is a large Sunni population  currently
    in Baghdad and there is no evidence to show that they are currently the
    subject of ill-treatment and that although the areas in which they live
    may be reducing there is no evidence to show that they are  subject  to
    persecution or that there is a real  possibility  that  they  will  be.
    Therefore the judge's assessment of risk on  return  is  unfounded  and
    wrong  and  his  asylum  and  Article  3  assessments  are  accordingly
    unsustainable.

18. Mr Rudd contended that the issue before the judge was a narrow one  and
    his assessment of the risk was perfectly adequate, the key issue  being
    that the appellant is a 20 year old Sunni Muslim, male and from  Kirkuk
    and formed therefore "perfect fighting  material"  for  Islamic  State.
    The conclusions of the judge turned upon the  specific  facts  of  this
    appeal and there can be no criticism of his analysis which is  detailed
    at paragraphs 29 to 38 of his decision.  The  judge,  contrary  to  the
    respondent's submissions, was not concluding that  it  was  unsafe  for
    IDPs to return to Baghdad but that for  this  specific  appellant  that
    would be the position  on  a  consideration  of  the  totality  of  the
    evidence including that provided by the respondent and  that  contained
    within  the  appellant's  bundle  including  at  page  59  an   Amnesty
    International Report headed "Absolute Impunity:  Militia Rule in  Iraq"
    dated 13 October 2014.

19. I find that the judge has not erred as asserted by the respondent.   He
    has carried out a clear analysis of the documentary evidence  that  was
    before him including not  only  background  material  produced  by  the
    respondent but also by the appellant.  He has recognised that there are
    specific facts within  this  appeal  in  relation  to  this  particular
    appellant which, when set into the  context  of  the  totality  of  the
    background material render it unsafe for the appellant to  be  returned
    to Baghdad.  This is the conclusion at paragraph 41 of his decision.

20.  The  Amnesty  International  Report  was  not  referred  to   in   the
    respondent's grounds seeking permission to appeal.  The judge refers to
    it at paragraph  38  of  his  decision  where  he  notes  that  Amnesty
    International has documented dozens of cases of abductions and unlawful
    killings by Shi'a militias in Baghdad, Samarra and  Kirkuk,  with  many
    more such cases reported all over the country.   The  judge  took  into
    account the totality of the material, as I say, and concluded that  not
    only was he not bound by country guidance cases but  that  the  general
    situation in Baghdad is a deteriorating one.  The Amnesty International
    Report goes on  to  conclude  that  crimes  against  Sunnis  are  being
    perpetrated against the  background  of  increased  sectarian  tensions
    within Iraq and that there have been mass human rights abuses  with  IS
    fighters carrying out frequent  bomb  attacks  in  predominantly  Shi'a
    areas in the capital and  elsewhere  that  either  deliberately  target
    Shi'a civilians - sometimes in places of  worship  or  indiscriminately
    kill or injure civilians along with members of the security  forces  or
    of pro-government militias.  Shi'a militias, for their part  have  been
    taking advantage of the atmosphere  of  unlawfulness  and  impunity  to
    abduct and kill Sunni men.

21. Mr Rudd emphasised, rightly, that this was a facts specific  case.   He
    was right to do so.

22. The judge has given adequate reasons for coming to the conclusions that
    he did.  They were open to be made on the totality of the evidence.

Conclusions

23. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

24. I do not set aside the decision.



Signed        Date 5 June 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

