
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10567/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Date Sent                  |
|On 7 January 2014                               |On 3 February 2014         |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                Rekan Zahiri
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Rekan Zahiri, was born on 10 June 1991  and  is  a  male
    citizen of Iran.  The appellant had appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against a decision of the respondent dated 7 November  2012  to  remove
    him as an illegal entrant from the United  Kingdom.   That  appeal  had
    been dismissed by  the  Tribunal  (Judge  Saffer)  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 11 January 2013.  But by a decision dated 24 July  2013,
    I found that there were  errors  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination such that the decision fell to be set aside.   A  resumed
    hearing took place at Bradford Upper Tribunal on 7 January 2014.

 2.  The  appellant  no  longer  has   the   assistance   of   professional
    representatives.  He attended in person and sought an adjournment.   He
    showed me a letter which indicates that he will have  an  operation  on
    his leg (he says in order  to  amputate  it)  on  28  January  2014  in
    Doncaster.  He did not appear to be in any obvious physical  discomfort
    or pain but he claimed that his mind was  focused  on  the  forthcoming
    operation to the extent that he would be unable to give  clear  answers
    in cross-examination.  There was no medical evidence  to  support  that
    contention.  I refused the application for the adjournment and told the
    appellant that I believed that he was fit enough to answer questions in
    cross-examination.  I told him that I would halt the  cross-examination
    and the hearing if I was persuaded that he was unable to put  his  case
    to the Tribunal as he would have  wished.   That  eventuality  did  not
    occur.  The cross-examination was, in fact,  brief  and  there  was  no
    indication  whatever  that  the  appellant  was  unable  (through   the
    interpreter) to understand the questions and to give coherent answers.

 3. My reasons for finding that the First-tier Tribunal made  an  error  of
    law were as follows:

         REASONS FOR FINDING THAT TRIBUNAL MADE AN ERROR OF LAW,  SUCH  THAT
         ITS DECISION FALLS TO BE SET ASIDE




         1.   The appellant, Rekan Zahiri, was born on 10 June 1991 and is a
         male citizen of Iran.  The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (Judge Saffer) against a decision of the respondent  dated
         7 November 2012 to remove him from the United Kingdom as an illegal
         entrant.  The First-tier Tribunal, in a  determination  promulgated
         on 11 January  2013,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant  now
         appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   Granting permission, Judge McGeachy stated:

         "I considered there was 'Robinson' obvious ground of appeal in this
         case as I considered it is clearly arguable that the Judge  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal had not  fully  engaged  with  the  appellant's
         claim and had not given sufficient reasons for rejecting the claim.
          I will therefore grant permission to appeal."

         3.   Although the respondent has filed a Rule 24 letter on 7  March
         2013 opposing the appeal,  Mrs  Pettersen  at  the  Upper  Tribunal
         hearing did not persuade me to  preserve  the  determination.   The
         appellant claims to be Kurdish and to have  been  tortured  by  the
         Iranian authorities about seven years  ago.   At  the  end  of  the
         determination, Judge Saffer wrote:

         "21. I accept that his credibility is damaged  by  his  failure  to
         claim asylum en route here.

         22.  I accept that  it  is  reasonably  likely  the  appellant  has
         chronic osteomyelitis of his right  tibia  which  causes  pain  and
         restriction of movement to the right leg given the letter  from  Dr
         Ahmed.  He has failed to establish that any hospital  treatment  he
         required is reasonably likely to have occurred  in  a  military  or
         prison hospital given the background evidence of hospital treatment
         for prisoners being inadequate.

         23.  I do not accept it is reasonably likely he was detained  as  a
         juvenile and ill-treatment in  the  manner  he  claimed  given  the
         background evidence of children and juveniles in conflict with  the
         law are sent to the JCRC through competent courts.

         24.  I do not accept that it is reasonably likely  his  father  was
         ill-treated or detained in the manner claimed or at all as I do not
         have to accept the appellant's word just because he said and  given
         the adverse credibility findings I have found (sic).

         25.  I am not therefore satisfied that it is reasonably likely  the
         authorities of Iran  believed  the  appellant's  holds  anti-regime
         political beliefs, he has been involved in anti-government activity
         or has information that may lead to those who do.  There is no real
         risk he will be detained when he returns to Iran  and  ill-treated.
         Accordingly he has failed to establish that he is a refugee."

         4.   It was  open  to  the  judge  to  find  that  the  appellant's
         credibility was damaged by his failure to claim asylum en route  to
         the United Kingdom but I do not consider that a single sentence  is
         adequate to support such a finding.  The judge has not engaged with
         any explanation given by the  appellant  for  not  claiming  asylum
         before he reached the United Kingdom and, although he was of course
         not obliged to accept any such explanation, he should at least have
         addressed it.

         5.   At [12] the judge quotes background evidence (the  Country  of
         Origin Information Report) which indicates that  prison  conditions
         are poor, "many prisoners have had heart  attacks  ...  and  prison
         authorities refuse to transport ailing prisoners to  hospital  even
         when the prisoners urgently  needed  treatment  that  can  only  be
         provided outside  of  prison  and  even  when  the  prison  doctors
         themselves recommend it."  The background evidence did not indicate
         that each and every prisoner who has a medical  problem  is  denied
         treatment so it is not entirely clear why the judge concluded that,
         applying the standard of  reasonable  likelihood,  the  appellant's
         account of having been treated for his injuries in  a  military  or
         prison hospital should have been so readily rejected.  This is  not
         to say that the judge could not have concluded that the appellant's
         account of his treatment was untrue; it is simply that the analysis
         is so brief as to render it unsound.

         6.   The same is the case concerning the judge's rejection  of  the
         appellant's claim to have been ill-treated and imprisoned in  Iran.
         At [13], the judge notes the Country of Origin  Information  Report
         (COIR) and  what  it  says  regarding  the  operation  of  Juvenile
         Correction and Rehabilitation Centres  (JCRCs).   The  COIR  states
         that "all children and juveniles in conflict with the law are  sent
         to the JCRC" although at the beginning of  the  same  paragraph  it
         notes that "in general" children  accused  of  committing  criminal
         acts are detained in a JCRC.  The judge was quite right to  examine
         the appellant's account in the context of the  background  material
         and, once again, it was open to him to reject the appellant's claim
         as untruthful.  However, at [16], the judge wrote "[the  appellant]
         was taken to an army hospital and had ten operations over the years
         he was  detained  there."   It  may  well  be  the  case  that  the
         appellant's account is so at odds over the background  material  as
         to render it  implausible.   I  find,  however,  that,  whilst  the
         findings were open to him,  the  judge  should  have  attempted  to
         engage thoroughly with the appellant's written  and  oral  evidence
         before  rejecting  his  account.   The  real  problem   with   this
         determination lies less in [22] and [23] even though  the  findings
         of those paragraphs are poorly reasoned.  The real difficulty  lies
         in [24].  Here, the judge rejects out of hand the appellant's claim
         that his father was ill-treated and detained simply because (i) the
         judge believes that he does not  have  to  accept  the  appellant's
         account just because he uttered it  and  (ii)  on  account  of  the
         "adverse credibility findings" which he had made at [22] and  [23].
         It   is   this   paragraph   which   renders   this   determination
         unsustainable.  As  regards  (i),  it  will  rarely,  if  ever,  be
         satisfactory to reject an appellant's account simply because it  is
         not supported by  other  evidence.   Further,  the  judge  at  [24]
         attaches a weight to his earlier poorly-reasoned findings ("adverse
         credibility") which they cannot support.  To reject the entirety of
         an appellant's account because  parts  of  it  may  not  be  wholly
         supported  by  general  background  evidence  seems  to  me  to  be
         unreasonably harsh.

         7.   In the circumstances, I find that the judge has erred  in  law
         such that his determination falls to be set  aside.   The  decision
         will be remade in the Upper Tribunal  at  or  following  a  resumed
         hearing.  I stress that the appellant  still  needs  to  prove  his
         case; none of the findings of fact of Judge Saffer will stand.   If
         it does not do so, this appeal is likely to fail.

 4. The burden of proof in the appeal is on the appellant and the  standard
    of proof is whether there is a real risk that the appellant would  face
    persecution or treatment contrary to the ECHR (in particular,  Articles
    2 and 3) if he returns to Iran.

 5. The appellant's claim may be summarised as follows.  He claims to be an
    Iranian national of Kurdish ethnicity.  He has suffered injuries to his
    right leg and uses crutches to help him walk.   I  have  no  reason  to
    doubt that the problems with his leg have led to his surgeons  deciding
    to amputate it in Doncaster at the end of January 2014.  The  appellant
    claims to have worked as a shepherd with his father.  In the mountains,
    he would encounter the Peshmerga and occasionally  provided  them  with
    food.  The appellant claims that he and his  father  were  reported  to
    Ettela'at and they  were  arrested.   They  were  both  ill-treated  in
    detention and his father died some 6-8 months after  his  arrest.   The
    appellant claims to have been kept in detention for seven years  before
    his leg became infected and swollen.  He claims to have remained  as  a
    prisoner in the hospital to which he was removed and during  that  time
    had ten operations to his leg.  Some  months  before  he  came  to  the
    United Kingdom, he claims that the hospital received a letter from  the
    government directing the doctors to kill him by lethal injection.   The
    doctor assisted the appellant in escaping having contacted an Imam from
    the appellant's village and together they arranged for an agent to help
    the appellant leave the country.  The appellant travelled by  lorry  to
    the United Kingdom.

 6. The respondent accepts that the appellant is a  Kurd  but  rejects  the
    credibility of his account of past events in Iran.  The refusal  letter
    of 7 November 2012 at [16] states:

         Your account of  remaining  in  a  hospital  for  seven  years  and
         receiving  all  necessary  medical  treatment  which  included  ten
         operations, is considered  wholly  inconsistent  with  the  country
         information  relating  to  medical  treatment  for  prisoners   and
         entirely inconsistent with the  treatment  you  claim  your  father
         received.  Additionally, you have provided no credible evidence  as
         to why the authorities would spend a considerable amount  of  money
         on treating you for seven years only then to ask  the  hospital  to
         kill you.

 7. I have examined that central "core" incident in the appellant's account
    in the context of all the evidence both oral and  written  and  in  the
    light of the remainder of  the  appellant's  account  of  past  events.
    Having anxiously scrutinised that evidence, I  have  concluded  that  I
    concur with the observations of the Secretary of State set out at  [16]
    of the refusal letter.  The Country of Origin  Information  Report  for
    Iran, which is quoted together with the US Department of State  Country
    Report for 2010 in the refusal letter, indicates that prison conditions
    are poor.  The report  records  that  "prison  authorities  refused  to
    transfer ailing prisoners to hospitals even when [they] urgently needed
    treatment ..."

 8. The Tribunal should hesitate before finding an account  implausible  or
    untrue simply on the basis that it  does  not  accord  with  background
    material;  other  considerations  may  well  be  relevant.   Here,  the
    appellant has not simply given an account of having been treated  in  a
    prison hospital following an injury; he has claimed that  he  underwent
    ten operations on his leg over a  period  of  several  years  spent  in
    prison.  That level of medical care sits very uneasily indeed not  only
    with the background evidence relating to prisons in Iran  but  also  in
    the wider context of the treatment by the  prison  authorities  of  the
    appellant's father (who died in custody) and the appellant's claim that
    subsequently the Iranian authorities attempted to kill  him.   Frankly,
    it made no sense whatsoever that an individual whose  involvement  with
    rebel forces would,  during  such  a  lengthy  detention,  have  become
    entirely apparent be kept, at the expense of the  Iranian  authorities,
    indefinitely in prison and there given a  level  of  medical  treatment
    which, as a poor and illiterate shepherd, the appellant could not  have
    expected outside the confines of the prison.  The  background  material
    indicates  that  the  Iranian  authorities  operate   a   sophisticated
    bureaucracy and that they deal ruthlessly with those whom they consider
    a threat to the state.  I do not accept that  those  authorities  would
    detain the appellant apparently without any purpose other than to treat
    his medical conditions only then to decide that he should be  summarily
    disposed of.

 9. My difficulties in accepting  the  truth  of  the  appellant's  account
    regarding his detention are significantly intensified  by  the  account
    which he has given of his escape from the prison.  Not  only  does  the
    appellant claim the doctor  who  had  been  charged  with  killing  him
    decided to put his own life at risk by saving the appellant,  but  that
    the same doctor also took the highly dangerous  step  of  contacting  a
    complete stranger in the appellant's village in order to  help  arrange
    an agent to remove the appellant from Iran.  I do not accept this  part
    of the account as true.

10. I stress that I have considered this element of the appellant's account
    only by reference to all the evidence before me.   However,  I  do  not
    accept that the appellant and his father were arrested and detained  as
    claimed nor at all.  The question then arises whether the remainder  of
    the appellant's account, even if accepted as true, would give  rise  to
    any risk to him upon return to Iran.  I find that it does not.  Even if
    I were to accept (and I see no reason to do  so  in  the  light  of  my
    rejection of the core incident of the appellant's claim as  fabricated)
    that the appellant's uncles were rebels who fled abroad  and  that  the
    appellant and his father may have given food to the Peshmerga,  I  find
    that the appellant had completely failed to  prove  that  such  matters
    would ever come to the attention of those who may interrogate him  upon
    return to Iran.  It is possible that the appellant will  be  questioned
    because he may have made an illegal exit  from  Iran  but,  absent  any
    evidence of anti-state activities, I do not find that that  fact  alone
    would expose him to a real risk of harm.

11. In conclusion, therefore, I find that the appellant is not a witness of
    truth and I do not accept any part of his account as true.  I certainly
    reject the core element of the  appellant's  account  relating  to  his
    arrest and detention.  Even if I were to accept the  remainder  of  the
    account as true, I find that the appellant would not face a  real  risk
    of persecution or ill-treatment upon  return  to  Iran  either  at  the
    airport or subsequently living in his home  area  of  the  country.   I
    acknowledge  that  the  appellant  may  have  physical  and   practical
    difficulties if his leg is amputated but the same would be true  if  he
    were to remain in the United Kingdom.  His  medical  condition  is  not
    such as to entitle him to international protection.  As regards Article
    8 ECHR, I find that the appellant may have  developed  a  private  life
    during the years he has remained in this country but he has provided no
    details of that life (there was no evidence of  his  associations  with
    any  other  individuals  here)  and  his  removal  in  pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim of the  control  of  immigration  policy  would,  in  my
    opinion, be proportionate.  Having regard to the same factual matrix, I
    find that the appellant is not entitled  to  a  grant  of  humanitarian
    protection.

DECISION

12. This appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

13. This appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

14. This appellant is not entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.




Signed                              Date:  16 January 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

