
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/10172/2014
                                                               Aa/10174/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 January 2016                    |On 27 January 2016                   |
|Delivered Orally                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                                     N S
                                     A K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Blundell, Counsel, instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellants, a husband and wife, in which  AK's
    appeal was a dependent upon the outcome of her  husband's  appeal,  the
    "Appellant". They are citizens of Afghanistan born on  8  October  1961
    and 8 October 1964 respectively.  They appeal against the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox, who, following a hearing at Richmond  on
    5 August 2015 and in a determination  subsequently  promulgated  on  27
    August 2015,  dismissed  their  appeals  on  asylum  and  human  rights
    (Article 3 of the ECHR) grounds, the Appellants being recorded  as  not
    pursuing any Article 8 claim.

2.   Permission to appeal the decision was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Andrew on 24 September 2015 on the basis that it was an  arguable
    error of law for the Judge to have failed  to  take  into  account  the
    relevant country  guidance  concerning  Sikhs  in  Afghanistan  or  the
    country information as to the present position for Sikhs. It was  noted
    that as submitted, it was apparent from the skeleton argument filed  at
    the hearing that the appellants relied  on  the  Convention  reason  of
    religion.

3.   At paragraph 50 of  his  determination  the  Judge,  however,  recorded
    that:

         "Mr Khan [that being the Appellants' Counsel before  him]  did  not
         pursue the Appellant's religious profile  as  part  of  the  asylum
         claim and the Appellant's own evidence supports this position."

4.   Earlier at paragraph 5 of the determination the Judge had  recorded  as
    follows:

         "The first Appellant inferred a fear due to his status as an Afghan
         Sikh but this was not pursued by the Appellant or Mr  Khan  at  the
         appeal hearing."

5.   At paragraph 9 of his determination the Judge stated inter alia:

         "Mr Khan filed and served a skeleton argument.  He  also  confirmed
         that the Appellant's religious status is insufficient to engage the
         Refugee Convention.  Mr Khan confirmed that the issues are confined
         to imputed political opinion and Article 3 of the ECHR."

6.    I  note  however  that  in  contrast  and  at  paragraph  33  of   the
    determination under the subheading "Submissions" the Judge recorded  as
    follows:

         "33. Mr Khan relied upon his skeleton argument and made submissions
             that the Appellant genuinely fears return to Afghanistan.  The
             fears arising from his business dealings continue to escalate.
             The Appellant maintains his fear of the Taliban  and  provided
             further details today."

7.   I pause there, because clearly as recorded by the  Judge,  Mr  Khan  in
    his submissions before him, placed reliance on  his  skeleton  argument
    upon which clearly over paragraphs 7 to 19 he referred to "the  general
    situation of Afghan Sikhs and whether it would be safe for them  to  be
    returned" and in so  doing  his  skeleton  argument  placed  particular
    reliance on the relevant country guidance available at the time of  the
    hearing, namely SL and Others (Returning Sikhs and Hindus)  Afghanistan
    CG [2005] UKIAT 00137, and the subsequent decision in  DSG  and  Others
    (Afghan Sikhs: Departure from CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 0048.

8.   The Respondent in her Rule 24 response,  relied  upon  what  the  Judge
    recorded at paragraphs 5, 9 and 50 in opposing the Appellant's  appeal.
    It  is  submitted  by  the  Appellant  in  that  regard,   that   those
    observations do not  sit  well  with  the  Judge's  acknowledgement  at
    paragraph 33 of the  determination  that:  "Mr  Khan  relied  upon  his
    skeleton argument and made submissions  that  the  Appellant  genuinely
    fears return to Afghanistan".  Mr  Khan  unequivocally  relied  on  his
    skeleton argument  that  clearly  and  in  some  detail,  included  the
    contention that apart from the  Appellant's  fears  "arising  from  his
    business dealings ..." and "his fear of the Taliban",  he  also  feared
    return for religious reasons as a Sikh.

9.   The question of whether the Judge was  correct  in  recording  that  Mr
    Khan before him and on the Appellant's behalf, was clear  that  he  did
    not  pursue  the  asylum  appeal  on  the  basis  inter  alia,  of  his
    religion/ethnicity, when the opening sentence of the Judge's  paragraph
    34 records Mr Khan's submission before him that "Sikhs  are  vulnerable
    in Afghanistan" suggests, I find, a significant confusion.

10.  I have had regard with the agreement of the  parties,  to  the  Judge's
    written Record of Proceedings (ROP)  and  to  the  extent  that  it  is
    legible, I see that it is recorded by him under "Submissions"  that  Mr
    Khan indeed referred to the Appellant's "fear from  business  ...  from
    the Taliban" but there is reference to "paragraph 19 [that I note dealt
    with the background  evidence  concerning  the  Sikh  community  facing
    considerable hostility in Afghanistan] - General  discussion".  Notably
    there is also reference to "Sikhs are vulnerable in Afghanistan  -  two
    Muslim partners pursue them ..? .. on to A".   There is also  reference
    to the Judge's record of Mr Khan's submission that Sikhs were a  "small
    population that will not merge into the community.  No  sufficiency  of
    protection."

11.  Overall therefore and upon a  reading  of  the  determination  in  this
    regard as a whole, there is clearly a confusion that is  not  resolved,
    as to whether or not the Judge was correct in  his  understanding  that
    the Appellant's claim for refugee protection on the  Convention  ground
    of religion was not pursued.  I could find  nothing  in  the  ROP  that
    confirms that this  was  Mr  Khan's  stated  position  as  recorded  in
    paragraphs 5, 9 and 50 of the determination.

12.  It is apparent to me that this is a matter where even  if  it  was  the
    Judge's understanding that Mr Khan at the outset of the  hearing,  "did
    not pursue the Appellant's religious profile  as  part  of  his  asylum
    claim" it appears that in  the  course  of  the  hearing  the  position
    arguably changed and that in consequence  it  was  therefore  incumbent
    upon the Judge to deal with this issue and in  failing  to  do  so  the
    Judge fell into legal error.

13.  There was handed to  me  at  me  at  the  outset  of  the  hearing,  Mr
    Blundell's skeleton argument which in summary largely reflects  what  I
    have said above.

14.  It is right to say that most helpfully and  in  my  view  realistically
    and at the outset of the  hearing,  Mr  Walker  informed  me  that  the
    determination  was  confusing  and  that  upon  his  reading   of   the
    determination  and  Counsel's  skeleton  argument  before  the   Judge,
    "religion must have been a main factor in the Appellant's  claim  given
    the situation of Sikhs in Afghanistan that has been the position for  a
    number of years".  He therefore informed me that he  conceded  that  in
    consequence, the determination disclosed a material error of law.

15.  In those circumstances I did not trouble Mr Blundell to address me.

16.  It was further agreed that having regard to the  error  of  law  found,
    the length of the hearing estimated at two and a half hours, there were
    highly compelling reasons falling within paragraph 7.2(b) of the Senior
    President's Practice Statement as to why the  decision  should  not  be
    remade by the Upper Tribunal.  It  was  clearly  in  the  interests  of
    justice that the appeal be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.   I
    agreed with the parties  that  in  consequence  of  the  error  of  law
    identified, it was apparent that the Judge's failure to deal  with  the
    claimed Convention reason of religion, would  have  inevitably  tainted
    the Judge's adverse findings in respect of the  other  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's asylum claim and that in the  circumstances  it  was  right
    that in ordering that the appeal be heard afresh, none of the  findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge should be preserved.

17.  At the remitted hearing cognisance  can  of  course  be  taken  of  the
    recent country  guidance  decision  in  TG  and  Others  (Afghan  Sikhs
    persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595 (IAC).

18.  For the reasons I have above given and by agreement with  the  parties,
    I conclude therefore that the appeal should be remitted to a First-tier
    Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox,  to  determine
    the appeal afresh at Taylor House Hearing Centre on the first available
    date with none of the Judge's findings preserved.  I am  informed  that
    for that purpose an interpreter in Punjabi will be required.

Notice of Decision

19.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside and noon of its findings preserved.

20.  I allow the Appellants' appeal to the extent that I  remit  the  making
    of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House before a First-
    tier Tribunal Judge other than the Judge to whom I have above referred.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal anonymised the appeal in  accordance  with  the  FTT
(IAC) Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 2011.  That order is preserved.


Signed   Date 23 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

