
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/10325/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15th December 2014                         |On 02nd January 2015         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                        MR ABDIRAHMAN MOHAMED ALAALE
                       [ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:       Mr P Toal of Counsel
Respondent:              Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting
                  Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

         Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia born  on  1  June  1979  appealed
    against the decision of the respondent dated 2 March 2011 to refuse  to
    grant him asylum and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom. The
    appellant challenged the decision and First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lucas
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds. Permission  to  appeal
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Sharp  only  on  the  ground
    relating to Article 15 (c), the Judge saying that given that the  Upper
    Tribunal decision is expected shortly which will address the issue that
    it may be advisable for the appeal to be delayed until  that  decision.
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic in a decision dated  21  March  2014  stated
    that the first-tier Tribunal made errors  of  law  in  respect  of  its
    findings and conclusions and article 15 (c) and that that part  of  the
    decision is set aside and shall be remade by the upper  Tribunal  at  a
    resumed hearing.


 2. At the resumed hearing the appellant was represented  by  Mr  Toal  who
    invited  me  to  apply  the  current  country  guidance  case  to   the
    appellant's appeal.


 3. Mr Bramble set out the retained  findings  of  Judge  Lucas  and  Judge
    Chohan who on principles set out in Devasaleen v  SSHD  [2002]  UK  IAT
    00702 accepted the findings of Judge Lucas. He stated that Judge  Lucas
    found that there was no evidence that the appellant was from a minority
    clan, as claimed. He also stated that the  appellant  has  a  wife  and
    children living in a district of Mogadishu for support on  his  return.
    He also stated that the appellant's journey to the United  Kingdom  was
    sponsored by a distant cousin who lives in the United States. He  asked
    that the appeal be dismissed.


 4. Mr Toal in reply said I must apply the country  guidance  case  to  the
    facts.


 5. The starting point in this appeal in accordance with the principles set
    out  in  Devaseelan  must  be  the  findings  by  Judge  Lucas  in  his
    determination dated 21 June 2011. The principle findings  at  paragraph
    42 to 47 are the following.


    . The appellant's claim is not credible or objectively justified. It  is
      internally contradictory and inconsistent with itself. The appellant's
      inability to remember key dates and key events can only  be  explained
      by a manufactured claim for asylum.


    . It is not accepted that the appellant was ever abducted by a  majority
      clan in Somalia. The evidence at his screening interview or the  claim
      as advanced originally is inconsistent.


    . There is no mention by the appellant that he was detained even on  one
      occasion by the Al Shabab which  was  his  original  claim.  There  is
      reference to his home  having  been  confiscated  and  no  mention  of
      detention, still less multiple detentions as was later advanced by the
      appellant.


    . The reality is that there is no evidence to suggest that the appellant
      is from a minority clan in Somalia. The appellant's wife and  children
      remain in Somalia  and  have  not  fled  elsewhere.  There  is  little
      objective evidence about the clan from which the appellant  claims  to
      emanate and the only basis for the assertion is the oral  evidence  of
      the appellant himself. The appellant is not a credible witness and  no
      weight is placed on his assertions with regard to his clan membership.


    . In any event, it is accepted that the issue of clan membership is less
      significant than hitherto as a result  of  the  emergence  of  the  Al
      Shabab clan membership is therefore not determinative of asylum claims
      emanating from Somalia. Little weight is placed upon  the  appellant's
      assertions that he was detained by a majority clan on  two  occasions.
      The same lack of weight  is  placed  on  his  assertion  that  he  was
      released by the same majority clan following his detentions.


    . It is no surprise that the focus of the appellant's claim  appears  to
      now have shifted to a generalised fear of Al Shabaab. This is  because
      of the lack of evidence of his minority clan status.


    . The appellant has no realistic credible fear of Al Shabaab in Somalia.
      He has simply come to the United Kingdom for reasons other than for  a
      genuine or objectively justified fear of persecution for a  Convention
      reason.


 6. The appellant's appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

          Consideration of the Country Guidance Case

 7. I now consider the case of MoJ & Ors (return to Mogadishu) (Rev1)  (CG)
    [2014] UKUT 442 (IAC) as it applies to the facts of  appellant's  case.
    It was agreed at the hearing that the  only  issue  in  the  appeal  is
    whether the appellant is captured by  the  guidance  in  this  case  in
    respect of 15 (c).


 8. It states in the headnote that generally a person who  is  an  ordinary
    civilian (i.e. not associated with the security forces; any  aspect  of
    government or official  administration  or  any  NGO  or  international
    organisation) or returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence  will
    face no real risk of persecution or risk of harm  such  as  to  require
    protection under Article 3 of  the  ECHR  or  article  15  (c)  of  the
    qualification directive. In particular, he will not be at  risk  simply
    on account of having lived in a European location for a period of  time
    of being viewed with suspicion either by the authorities as a  possible
    supporter of  Al  Shabab  as  an  apostate  or  someone  whose  Islamic
    integrity has been compromised by living in a western country.


 9. The country guidance case further states that there has been a  durable
    change, in the sense that the Al Shabaab withdrawal from  Mogadishu  is
    complete and there is no real prospect  of  a  re-established  presence
    within the city. That was not the case  at  the  time  of  the  country
    guidance case given by the Tribunal in MM. It was  stated  that  it  is
    open to an  ordinary  citizen  of  Mogadishu  to  reduce  his  personal
    exposure to the risk of "collateral damage" in being caught up in an Al
    Shabaab attack of which he is  not  a  target  by  avoiding  areas  and
    establishments that are clearly identified as likely Al Shabaab targets
    and it is not unreasonable to expect him to do so.


10. The case further states that a person returning to  Mogadishu  after  a
    period of absence would look to his  nuclear  family,  if  he  has  one
    living in the city,  for  assistance  in  re-establishing  himself  and
    securing a livelihood. It is also possible to seek assistance from clan
    members who are not close relatives, such help is  only  likely  to  be
    forthcoming from majority clan members,  as  minority  clans  may  have
    little to offer.


11. The significance of clan membership in the Mogadishu has changed. Clans
    now provide, potentially, social support  mechanisms  and  assist  with
    access to livelihoods, performing less of a  protection  function  than
    previously. There are no clan militias in Mogadishu, no  clan  violence
    and no clan-based discriminatory treatment, even for majority members.


12. It is accepted that a person facing return to Mogadishu after a  period
    of absence and who has no nuclear family or close relatives in the city
    to assist him in re-establishing himself on return, there will need  to
    be a careful assessment of all the circumstances. These  considerations
    will include, but are not limited to;


    . Circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
    . length of absence from Mogadishu;
    . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
    . access to financial resources;
    . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether there may be employment or
      self-employment;
    . means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;
    . why his ability to fund the journey to the West no longer  enables  an
      appellant to secure financial support on return.


13. The case states that, put  another way,  it  will  be  for  the  person
    facing return to explain why he would not be able  to  access  economic
    opportunities that have been produced by the economic boom,  especially
    as there is evidence to the effect that returnees are  taking  jobs  at
    the expense of those who have never been away.


14. The case states that it will therefore only be those with  no  clan  or
    family support who are not in receipt of remittances  from  abroad  and
    who have no real prospect of securing access to a livelihood, will face
    the prospect of living in circumstances falling  below  that  which  is
    acceptable on humanitarian grounds.


15. The new evidence indicates clearly that it is simply not only those who
    originate from Mogadishu who may now generally return to  live  in  the
    city without being subject to an Article 15 (c) risk of facing  a  real
    risk of destitution. On the other hand, relocating to Mogadishu  for  a
    person of a minority clan with no formal links to the city,  no  access
    to funds and other forms of clan,  family  or  social  support,  it  is
    unlikely to be realistic in the absence of means to  establish  a  home
    and some form of ongoing financial support there will be a real risk of
    having no alternative but to live in makeshift accommodation within  an
    IDP, there is a real possibility of having to live in  conditions  that
    will fall below acceptable humanitarian standards.


16. I have considered that the appellant's appeal  against  this  criteria.
    The evidence is that the appellant has a wife and eight children living
    in Mogadishu. The appellant can return to his family and live with them
    in their accommodation. He will have the support of his family  on  his
    return. The appellant is not from a minority clan  and  therefore  will
    get the support of his clan members on his return.




17. The appellant claims that his journey to the United Kingdom was paid by
    his relative who lives in the United States. This demonstrates that the
    appellant will be able to have access to resources on his  return  from
    this relative, if necessary.


18. The burden is upon the appellant to show that he will be  destitute  on
    his return to Mogadishu. No credible evidence has been provided by  the
    appellant or in submissions at the hearing for why the  appellant  will
    not be able to find employment in Mogadishu and take advantage  of  the
    economic upturn in Somalia.


19. It has been found that  the  appellant  came  to  this  country  as  an
    economic refugee and therefore he can return to Mogadishu and  continue
    his life with this family and make a living in Somalia.


20. I find that the appellant would  not  be  at  risk  on  his  return  to
    Mogadishu having considered his appeal according to  the  criteria  set
    out in the country guidance case.


    DECISION


        I dismiss the appeal.



   Signed by
   Mrs S Chana
   A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal             Dated 28th  of  December
    2014



















