







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10928/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |                       Decisions &       |
|                                  |Reasons Promulgated                      |
|On: 10 June 2015                  |                       On: 23 June 2015  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                                     K P
                       (anonymity direction continued)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai, counsel (instructed by Tamil Welfare
Association)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on 28  April  1992.  Her
      appeal against the decisions of the  respondent  refusing  her  asylum
      claim and seeking her removal by way of directions  was  dismissed  by
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge in a decision promulgated  on  26  March
      2015.


   2. Permission to appeal against that decision was granted  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Levin on 24 April 2015. He found that  it  is  arguable
      that the Judge erred in his consideration of  the  issue  of  internal
      relocation as he merely considered whether it would be  safe  for  the
      appellant to relocate to Colombo, but failed to  have  regard  to  the
      guidelines of the House of Lords referred to in Januzi v  SSHD  [2006]
      UKHL 5 and to consider whether it would be reasonable to expect her to
      relocate to Colombo in the light  of  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
      appellant had been raped in her home village. Accordingly, Judge Levin
      stated that the decision disclosed an arguable error of law "solely on
      the issue of internal relocation."


   3. Ms Kiai, who had not represented the appellant before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, sought to rely on additional grounds of appeal  pursuant  to
      paragraph 5(3)(c) of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules. The appellant
      had been represented by different  representatives  when  the  initial
      grounds for permission were drafted.


   4. She contended that the first ground that she wished to rely on was  in
      any event 'inherently linked' to the ground of permission  upon  which
      permission had already been granted.


   5. Mr Tufan did not object to the application and the appeal  accordingly
      proceeded on the basis of  the  original  and  additional  grounds  of
      appeal.


   6. Ms Kiai in essence submitted that  the  Judge  failed  to  assess  the
      extent to which the appellant would be perceived in Sri Lankan society
      as being  different  because  of  the  rape,  deliberate  scarring  on
      sensitive parts of her body as well as a broken marriage 'as a  result
      thereof'.  Given  her  past  and  current  medical  and  psychological
      condition, the issue raised is whether she would be able to  withstand
      such treatment by the society in Sri Lanka.


   7. She submitted that  the  Judge  should  have  given  consideration  to
      whether it would be safer for her to live in Colombo without fear from
      those army personnel who had been responsible for  her  fear,  despite
      any medical and/or psychological treatment, having  acknowledged  that
      the position in the home village of the appellant could probably  best
      be described as uncertain.


   8.  Ms  Kiai  further  contended  that  there  had  been   a   procedural
      irregularity. She referred to the determination where  it  is  evident
      that an adjournment request was made on behalf of the appellant so  as
      to obtain a psychiatric report.


   9. The Judge noted at [28] that such a request for adjournment  had  been
      made. Counsel who represented the appellant at that  hearing  referred
      to a medical report from Professor Lingam in which he  stated  that  a
      psychiatric assessment of the appellant was required.


  10. The report from Professor Lingam  was  dated  6  March  2015  and  the
      appellant had been examined by him on 4 March  2015.  The  appeal  was
      heard on 10 March 2015. Accordingly, the report has been prepared only
      a few days prior to the date of the hearing.


  11. In his report at page 8,  Professor  Lingam  stated  that  her  mental
      health needs had not been assessed by him but attention "must be given
      to them." He stated that the findings  that  he  set  out  "correlated
      well" with the history given by the appellant and are typical  of  the
      ill treatment described by her, namely the rape and burn injury.


  12. Professor Lingam was concerned about her mental health which he stated
      would need addressing:


"........At this time she appears very stressed and she is low in her  mood.
She stated that she cries a lot, gets bad dreams and so on. I am aware  that
she has taken overdose."


  13. Ms Kiai submitted that the Judge's approach to the adjournment request
      was flawed. At [57] and [58] he stated that he had  already  read  the
      medical evidence available. He did not consider it necessary to  agree
      to the request for an adjournment for the psychiatric report. He  felt
      well able to presume that such a report would  be  likely  to  suggest
      ongoing counselling and perhaps other therapeutic treatment.


  14. He noted that rape is a terrible experience and it can  often  take  a
      great deal of help to enable recovery to take place.  The  Judge  felt
      that he could therefore take that as  read:  [57]  and  [58].  If  the
      report was being requested to strengthen the claim that the event  had
      occurred in the first place, he noted that he  had  already  made  his
      finding in that connection. If it were to indicate  that  professional
      help is usually required in the aftermath of such an assault, he "took
      that on board also."


  15. The Judge stated that he would have been happy to have looked at  such
      a report if it had been available. There had been plenty  of  time  to
      have such a report. There had been no  previous  applications  for  an
      adjournment. Someone professionally advising the appellant should have
      thought of the need for such a report a long time previously,  without
      the reference to what the professor said [58].


  16. Ms Kiai submitted that the Judge's "conclusions" as to the prospective
      content of the report as simply addressing the  need  for  counselling
      and therapeutic treatment were  speculative.  The  psychiatric  report
      would however address more than  the  need  for  counselling.  Such  a
      report would deal with many other significant matters such as clinical
      diagnoses, including PTSD,  depression  and  their  extent,  including
      relevant symptoms. In particular, suicidal  ideation  was  a  relevant
      consideration.


  17. The report would, she submitted, have assisted  to  highlight  whether
      the appellant's condition reached the degree of severity so  that  her
      appeal could succeed as did the third appellant in the  reported  case
      of GJ (Post Civil War: Returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319  (IAC).
      His appeal succeeded on the basis of the severity of his mental health
      condition and the lack of access to the necessary care  and  treatment
      in Sri Lanka.


  18. At paragraph 456 of GJ the Tribunal noted that the third applicant was
      considered by a consultant psychiatrist to have clear plans to  commit
      suicide if returned and he was mentally very  ill,  too  ill  to  give
      reliable evidence. The  Tribunal  approached  the  assessment  of  his
      circumstances  on  the  basis  that  it  would  be  possible  for  the
      respondent to return him to Sri Lanka without his coming to harm. Once
      there, he would be in the  hands  of  the  Sri  Lankan  mental  health
      services. The resources there are sparse and limited to the cities.


  19. The Tribunal went on to hold that in the light of the respondent's own
      evidence that there are facilities only in the cities and that they do
      not provide appropriate care for mentally ill people, and the severity
      of his mental illness, it was not satisfied that returning him to  Sri
      Lanka "today" complied with the UK's international  obligations  under
      Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention. His appeal  was  accordingly
      allowed under Article 3.


  20. Ms Kiai submitted that the evidence showed that this appellant - KP  -
      had also attempted suicide. That attempt was made on 23 November 2013.
      The background was that she  had  aborted  her  pregnancy,  which  she
      stated arose from the rape incidents in October 2011. The  termination
      occurred on 4 January 2012. She subsequently went back to Sri Lanka to
      get married - an arranged marriage - on 15 July 2012. She married  her
      husband on 18 July 2012 but returned to the UK  a  day  later  without
      having consummated the marriage for fear of her  husband  finding  out
      her scars which had occurred as a result of the rape.


  21. Her  husband  did  subsequently  discover  (November  2013)  what  had
      happened to her prior to the marriage. He then stopped contact. It  is
      then that the appellant went into depression and on 23  November  2013
      attempted suicide. She had  stated  that  she  kept  getting  suicidal
      thoughts. She was admitted to the Newham  General  Hospital  following
      her attempt at suicide in November 2013. She disclosed a  report  from
      that hospital (page 43), which noted  that  she  was  admitted  on  23
      November 2013.


  22. The clinical presentation notes relating to that admission stated that
      she was brought in after she took an overdose of  Tramadol.  This  had
      followed a telephone argument with  her  husband  in  Sri  Lanka.  She
      informed a friend and the ambulance attended  her  flat.  She  had  no
      recollection of any of the following events.


  23. On examination she was reported as being drowsy  but  'rousable'.  She
      was admitted for Tramadol overdose. She was provided  with  medication
      and gradually recovered.


  24. Ms Kiai accordingly submitted that  the  proposed  psychiatric  report
      sought  would  have  addressed  the  'core  issues'  of  future  risk,
      including whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  her  to  relocate
      internally, as well as addressing Article 3 and Article 8 issues.


  25. Ms Kiai also submitted that the Judge  failed  to  take  into  account
      relevant evidence. At [61] he referred to  the  appellant's  attackers
      and the ordeal and the consequence of the rogue action  of  individual
      and undisciplined soldiers.  This was in no  way  connected  to  their
      work in protecting the State. He went on to  conclude  that  the  same
      soldiers who abused her did not return to her family home.


  26. Ms Kiai submitted that the Judge ought  to  have  had  regard  to  the
      guidance in  PP  (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1828  which
      considered the plight  of  Tamil  women  who  are  residing  in  areas
      formerly under the control of the LTTE. The Court recognised the heavy
      militarisation  in  such  areas.  The  Court   also   recognised   the
      vulnerability of Tamil women living in such heavily militarised areas.
      The vulnerability stems from the acts of violence to  those  women  by
      the government personnel  stationed  in  those  areas.  That  evidence
      accordingly supported the appellant's claim that this would not  be  a
      "one off" ordeal.


  27. In the circumstances, she submitted that the decision  should  be  set
      aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh remaking  of
      the decision relating to her asylum, Article 3 and Article 8 claims.


  28. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tufan submitted that it did not appear
      that it was argued before the Judge that  relocation  to  Colombo  was
      unreasonable. As the Judge noted, she had lived there before  and  had
      relatives there. It could not realistically therefore be  said  to  be
      unreasonable to expect her to relocate.


  29. Mr Tufan referred to the House of Lords decision in Januzi and  Others
      v SSHD [2006] UKHL 5, and in particular to  paragraph  46  where  Lord
      Hope stated that if the possibility of internal relocation is  raised,
      the relevant comparisons are between those in the place of  relocation
      and those that prevail elsewhere in the country of his nationality.


  30. At [47] of Januzi the question was whether it would be unduly harsh to
      expect a claimant who is being persecuted for a Convention  reason  in
      one part of his country to move to a less hostile part before  seeking
      refugee status abroad. The words "unduly harsh" set the standard  that
      must be met for this to be regarded as unreasonable. If  the  claimant
      can live a relatively normal life there, judged by the standards  that
      prevail in his country of nationality generally and if  he  can  reach
      the less hostile part without undue hardship or undue  difficulty,  it
      will not be unreasonable to expect him to move there. See also [48] of
      Januzi.


  31. Ms Kiai in reply referred to a speech made at the Global Summit  by  a
      human rights lawyer. This is titled  "the  Forgotten  Victims  of  the
      Unfinished War in Sri Lanka: Tragic Plight of  the  Tamil  Widows  and
      Victims of Sexual Violence in Sri Lanka and Abroad." Tamil  widows  in
      Sri Lanka are the  most  vulnerable  prey  for  this  state  sponsored
      ongoing rape and sexual violence. Lack of  safety  and  a  culture  of
      impunity are major obstacles to such widows. The author also  referred
      to the lack of mental health treatments and psychological  support  to
      those having suffered  sexual  abuse  and  who  have  been  left  with
      permanent mental scars, exhibiting PTSD symptoms. This was an  article
      obtained from the web dated 12 March 2014.


     Assessment


  32. I accept that the Judge has speculated as  to  the  relevance  of  the
      psychiatric report.


  33. He correctly stated that there had been plenty of time to have such  a
      report  ready.  However,  Professor  Lingam's  report  was  only  made
      available a few days prior to the date of hearing. He correctly  found
      that the appellant's representatives at the time should  have  thought
      of the need to obtain such  a  report  a  long  time  previously  "and
      without reference to what the professor said." [58]


  34. It had been submitted before the Judge [50] that the appellant clearly
      needed a proper treatment plan and ongoing help. It was submitted that
      the instructing solicitors had been at fault in not dealing with these
      matters significantly earlier but that the  appellant  should  not  be
      prejudiced in that respect.


  35.  The  appellant  had,  as  noted,  attempted  suicide.  The   proposed
      psychiatric report could  accordingly  have  assisted  in  identifying
      whether her condition reaches the level of severity  as  that  of  the
      third appellant in GJ, supra. There the Tribunal allowed his appeal on
      the basis of the severity of his mental health condition and the  lack
      of access to the necessary care and treatment in Sri  Lanka.  It  does
      not appear that the Judge had been referred to the relevance  of  that
      authority having regard to the appellant's mental health condition  at
      the time.


  36. I have also had regard to the Judge's reference at paragraph 61 of the
      determination to the appellant's attackers and ordeal as a consequence
      of the action of individuals  and  undisciplined  officers  which  was
      ".....in no way connected to their work in protecting the State."


  37. The Judge did not consider the guidance  in  PP  (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD
      [2014] EWCA Civ 1828  which  considered  the  plight  of  Tamil  women
      residing in areas formerly  under  control  of  the  LTTE.  The  Court
      recognised the heavy militarisation in such areas.  The  vulnerability
      stemming from the acts of violence to those women by government  armed
      personnel stationed in those areas  supported  the  appellant's  claim
      that this may not be a "one off" ordeal.


  38. I have had regard to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 regarding  the  power  the
      First-tier Tribunal has to adjourn or postpone  a  hearing  under  its
      case management powers.  There  is  no  longer  a  specific  test  for
      adjournment set out in the procedure rules. Regard  should  have  been
      had to the overriding objective  set  out  in  Rule  2  requiring  the
      Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.  The  earlier  position
      was that the objective was to deal  with  cases  fairly,  quickly  and
      efficiently.


  39. I have had regard  to  the  decision  of  the  President,  Mr  Justice
      McCloskey, in Nwaigwe (Adjournment: Fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).
      The crucial question is whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
      party of her right to a fair hearing.


  40. I have also had regard to the Presidential Guidance note no. 1 of 2014
      set  out  in  Ms  Kiai's  skeleton.  Factors  weighing  in  favour  of
      adjourning an appeal even at a late stage include whether further time
      is needed because of a delay in obtaining evidence  which  is  outside
      the party's control, for example, where an  expert  witness  fails  to
      provide a report within the period expected. That is to be balanced by
      factors weighing against the grant of an adjournment, namely that  the
      application was not made at the earliest opportunity or is speculative
      or that it does not show that anything material would be  achieved  by
      the delay.   She also referred to the decision in SH  (Afghanistan)  v
      SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.


  41. At paragraph 13 in SH, the Court of Appeal held that when  considering
      whether the Immigration Judge ought to have  granted  an  adjournment,
      the test was not irrationality. The test was not whether his  decision
      was properly open to him or was Wednesbury unreasonable  or  perverse.
      The test and sole test was whether it was unfair.


  42. Ms Kiai submitted that in the instant appeal, it was not  possible  to
      say that at the stage when the adjournment was requested,  any  report
      obtained  by  the  appellant  from  a  psychiatrist  could   make   no
      difference.


  43. After the parties had  concluded  their  submissions,  I  reserved  my
      decision. An email was then produced by  the  appellant's  instructing
      solicitors enclosing a note  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal prepared by the appellant's former  counsel,  which  she  had
      subsequently sent to her former solicitors. In it she referred to  the
      application she made for an adjournment. I asked that  this  email  be
      made available to Mr Tufan.


  44. In her note of the hearing on 10 March  2015,  Ms  Qureshi  of  Temple
      Court Chambers, stated that she submitted copies of the medical report
      to the Court. Based on that report, she asked  the  appellant  whether
      she wanted a psychiatric report so as to  determine  her  mental  well
      being and whether  there  were  any  further  risks  of  suicide.  The
      appellant confirmed that she would like such a report to be obtained.


  45. Ms Qureshi stated that she made submission on  all  issues,  including
      medical evidence, objective  evidence  and  subjective  evidence.  She
      submitted that without a psychiatric report, the  Tribunal  could  not
      determine whether the appellant has further risk of suicide  and  what
      her  current  state  of  mental  affairs  was.  She  noted  that   the
      determination was reserved.


  46. As observed by Mr Justice McCloskey, in Nwaigwe, supra,  in  practice,
      in most cases the question will be whether the  refusal  deprived  the
      affected party of his rights to a fair hearing. Where  an  adjournment
      refusal  is  challenged  on  fairness  grounds,  it  is  important  to
      recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether  the
      First-tier Tribunal acted reasonably. Rather, the test to  be  applied
      is that of fairness: was there any deprivation of the affected party's
      right to a fair hearing.  I  find  that  the  appellant  has  been  so
      deprived.


  47. I find from the background circumstances that prevailed at the date of
      the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, that fairness in this case
      required that an adjournment should have been granted for the  purpose
      of obtaining a psychiatric  report.   That  could  have  informed  the
      Tribunal whether the appellant's mental condition was  severe  to  the
      extent that she was entitled to succeed on that ground,  coupled  with
      the lack of access to necessary care and treatment  available  in  Sri
      Lanka (GJ, supra, at paragraph 456).


  48. The appellant had already attempted suicide. That evidence was  before
      the First-tier Tribunal. The need for a proper psychiatric  evaluation
      had been underlined by Professor Lingam.


  49. In the light of the fact that the core issues of the appellant's  past
      ill treatment had been accepted by the  Judge,  the  report  would  be
      directly relevant to suicide risk and Article 3 of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention.


  50. Having regard to the case law and the 2014  rules,  I  find  that  the
      decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  refusing  the  adjournment  was
      unfair in the circumstances.


  51. I accordingly set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  The
      parties agreed that in that event, the matter should  be  remitted  to
      the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be re-made.


  52. I have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
      regarding remitting an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh
      decision.


  53. I am satisfied that the effect of the error has been  to  deprive  the
      appellant of a fair hearing,  or  an  opportunity  to  have  her  case
      properly put and  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  This  is
      accordingly an appropriate case for remitting the case.


  54. The appeal is accordingly remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
      fresh decision to be made. The necessary administrative process should
      be complied with as soon as reasonably possible.


         Notice of Decision


              The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of           law and it is set aside and remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross for               a  fresh  decision
to be made.


         Anonymity direction is continued.








         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer





         Signed and dated:  19 June 2015




