
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10792/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 6th May 2014                                 |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                             MAQSOODAN MAQSOODAN
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Rawlinson of Counsel instructed by Sriharans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Reed  made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 11th February 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  27th  May  1979.   She
    arrived in the UK as a visitor on 12th December 2012 and claimed asylum
    on 20th December 2012 on the basis that she had  suffered  difficulties
    as a consequence of her Christian faith in Pakistan. She said that  her
    husband and his family are also Christian, but neither family  approved
    of the marriage and she does not  have  contact  with  her  own  family
    although her parents are in  contact  with  her  in-laws  who  live  in
    Lahore.

 3. The Appellant  claimed  that  members  of  her  husband's  family  were
    attacked in an incident at a local  church  in  October  2011  and  her
    husband's uncle's son was killed.  The judge was satisfied that someone
    of the same name was killed on that date. However  he  did  not  accept
    that the Appellant had any connection with the person  who  was  killed
    for a number of reasons, which are as follows.

 4. The Appellant relied upon a report from SPRO  News  which  contained  a
    footnote from a local Catholic priest in  which  he  referred  to  land
    grabbing in the  district.   It  was  the  Appellant's  case  that  the
    incident centred around a local church where Muslims wanted to build  a
    mosque and the judge found it was not credible, if so, that the  priest
    would not have mentioned it.

 5. The judge said that the report indicated that twenty  other  Christians
    were injured in the attack which was committed by a  local  influential
    Muslim landlord named Mohammad Ali Durrani.  Bearing in  mind  that  Mr
    Durrani was named in the report and the Appellant had  close  relatives
    who were said to have been involved, it was not credible that, when the
    Appellant was asked at interview for the names of the persons  who  had
    carried out the attack, she said that she did not know them.   Even  if
    she was illiterate, as a relative of the deceased, the Appellant  would
    have become aware of the involvement of the influential local landlord.



 6. The judge commented that the Appellant's sister-in-law, who  had  acted
    as her Sponsor in the visit appeal, lived in  Slough  but  had  neither
    appeared to give evidence on her behalf nor had written  any  statement
    setting out what she knew about what had  happened  to  the  family  in
    Pakistan.

 7. He also noted that the sister-in-law had told  the  Tribunal  that  the
    Appellant lived in a place called Puja but the judge had not been  able
    to locate any reference to Puja.

 8. The Appellant claimed  that  she  had  been  attacked  because  of  her
    Christian faith and there had been a subsequent threat to burn her  out
    of her home.  The judge accepted that it was plausible that  there  may
    have been an incident in which the  Appellant  had  been  attacked  and
    subsequently threatened, but he noted that no arson  attack  ever  took
    place.

 9. The Appellant claimed that there had been a rift between  her  and  her
    parents because of the marriage but the judge did not accept that  this
    was the case because it was not credible that  the  Appellant's  father
    would visit his in-law's house every two or three months to see them if
    he was estranged from his daughter and her husband.

10. He took account of the evidence which had been given in the  appeal  in
    respect of the visit visa and noted that  there  was  an  inconsistency
    between what the Appellant said then, which was that her husband had  a
    lucrative job in Rawalpindi as a painter and builder, and was away from
    home for periods  for  work,  which  was  at  variance  with  what  the
    Appellant said now, that her husband was unwilling to come home because
    of threats made by her family.

11. At the  hearing  the  Appellant  claimed  that  her  husband  had  been
    kidnapped by the Taliban which the judge did not find credible  because
    there was no reference to kidnapping anywhere in  the  interview  apart
    from an answer at the end to a  general  question  asking  if  she  had
    anything to add. She said that she was worried about  her  husband  and
    children and her husband was in hiding or kidnapped.   The  judge  said
    that the Appellant said that she already knew that her husband had been
    kidnapped by the Taliban before she came to the UK and if  so,  it  was
    not credible that she would have answered the question in the way  that
    she did.

12. The judge took into account all of the background evidence relating  to
    the position of Christians in Pakistan and accepted that there had been
    a number of attacks on Christians and Churches there, but they  had  to
    be seen in the context of  the  number  of  Christians  living  in  the
    country as a whole.  He concluded that the Appellant had not shown that
    she would not be able to practise her faith as she would wish to do and
    that she had family members including her husband and  her  own  family
    and her in-laws to whom she could turn to for support.

The Grounds of Application

13. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in his interpretation of the evidence from the  priest,  that
    she only found out the information that Mr Durrani was involved in  the
    attack after the event, that the absence of a  witness  statement  from
    her sister-in-law should not have adversely affected  her  credibility,
    that the Appellant did not know what  checks  the  judge  had  made  in
    respect of the name of Puja, that the judge had failed to particularise
    what  he  meant  when  he  said  that  the  Appellant  had   not   been
    straightforward in relation to other aspects of her claim and  that  he
    had materially erred in law in his interpretation of  question  161  of
    the interview when the Appellant mentioned the kidnap of her husband.

14. Permission to appeal was granted for the reasons stated in the  grounds
    by Designated Judge MacDonald on 7th March 2014.

Submissions

15. Mrs Rawlinson relied on her grounds and in particular stated  that  the
    judge had been in error  when  he  said  that  the  priest  would  have
    mentioned that the dispute was about the building of a mosque. She took
    me to the interview record and submitted that the  Appellant  had  been
    asked whether she had knowledge at the time of the names of the  people
    involved, whereas in fact she only found out afterwards that it was  Mr
    Durrani.

16. Mr Diwnycz submitted that the judge's findings were open  to  him.  The
    Appellant had not even known the name of the church where she said that
    she worshipped for many years and it was open to the judge to  conclude
    that her activity and  involvement  with  her  faith  in  Pakistan  was
    limited.

Findings and Conclusions

17. There is no  error  in  this  carefully  considered  and  well-reasoned
    determination.

18. With respect to the challenge to  the  judge's  interpretation  of  the
    report of the incident in October 2011, it is headed

         "Pakistan:  Muslims  attack  over  land  dispute;  Christian  child
killed."

19. The footnote reads

         "A local Catholic priest, Father John from Khanewal  said  that  it
         was not the first incident of land grabbing in  Khanewal  district;
         and  influential  Muslim  feudal  landlords  target  the  weak  and
         vulnerable people on a routine basis."

20. The judge was fully entitled to hold  it  against  the  Appellant  that
    there is no mention in the report or the footnote of Muslims wanting to
    build a mosque on the site of the church and nothing irrational in  his
    rejection of the Appellant's account on that basis.

21. With respect to Mr Durrani and the lack of reference to his name in the
    interview,  again  there   is   nothing   perverse   in   the   judge's
    interpretation of the interview record.  Question 46 reads

         "How did you know it was them?"

    The answer was

         "Because they already had some problem with the boys  who  live  in
         Chuk."

22. The next question, 47 reads

         "Do you know the names of the Jamaat Islam who attacked."

    The answer was

         "I don't know."

23. Whilst it is possible to interpret that answer as Mrs  Rawlinson  seeks
    to do, namely that the Appellant did not know at the time the names  of
    the attackers, the more straightforward explanation is the one favoured
    by the judge i.e she would have become aware of the involvement  of  Mr
    Durrani, since he was an influential  local  figure,  through  word  of
    mouth in the subsequent twelve months.  He was also entitled to observe
    that the report continues by stating that  100  families  live  in  the
    village where Christians were said  to  be  a  minority.  This  was  at
    variance with what the Appellant said i.e there  was  only  one  Muslim
    family in the village, the rest being Christian.  No comment is made on
    that finding in the grounds.

24. The next two points, namely the absence of a witness statement from the
    sister-in-law and the difficulty which the judge had  in  locating  the
    Appellant's claimed place of birth, have more merit.  Corroboration  is
    not required and it is unclear what research the judge did. However  it
    is immaterial in the context of the judge's findings as a whole.

25. Mrs Chamberlain sensibly did not pursue the allegation that  the  judge
    had failed to particularise when he said that  the  Appellant  had  not
    been straightforward in relation to other aspects  of  her  claim.   He
    clearly did.

26. Finally the judge  was  plainly  entitled  to  conclude  that,  if  the
    Appellant was truthful in her claim that her husband had been kidnapped
    and she knew that the Taliban had taken him before she came to the  UK,
    she would have mentioned it in the substantive part  of  her  interview
    and would not have answered the final question in the way that she did.



27. The judge's conclusion, that there had not  been  a  rift  between  the
    Appellant and her parents, is well-reasoned and not challenged  in  the
    grounds.  Neither is his finding that her involvement with her faith in
    Pakistan was limited since she did not know  the  name  of  the  church
    which she said that she had attended.

28. There is no error in this determination which shall stand.

Decision

29. The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


