
                                                    [pic]




Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                       Appeal Number:
AA/10734/2014

                                         AA/10748/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                           Decision & Reasons
Promulgated
On: 5 August 2015                                     On: 14 August 2015


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
                       Upper Tribunal Judge Markus QC

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     SAK
                                     FAK
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr Collins, instructed by S-K Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


This appeal is  subject  to  an  anonymity  order  made  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
(Procedure) Rules 2005. Neither party invited us to rescind  the  order  and
we continue it  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.

In this decision we refer to the Secretary of State as  the  respondent  and
to SAK and FAK as the appellants,  reflecting  their  positions  before  the
First-tier Tribunal.

SAK is the mother of FAK, a  minor  aged  15  years'  old.  FAK's  claim  is
entirely dependent on that of SAK and it is expedient to refer only  to  her
as the appellant for the purposes of this decision.

This is an appeal by the respondent against the decision promulgated  on  27
May 2015 of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  K  Chamberlain  which  allowed  the
appellants' asylum  and Article 3 ECHR appeals.

The background to this case is that the appellant was subjected  to  serious
physical and psychological domestic abuse by her husband  over  many  years.
The appellant came to the UK in 2014 with FAK to  visit  two  of  her  adult
children.  The appellant claimed that prior to leaving Pakistan her  husband
threatened to kill her and that after coming to the UK  he  issued  a  false
FIR against her, accusing her of theft.

The appellant then claimed  asylum  maintaining  that  she  feared  that  on
return her husband would kill her, that she would  be  arrested  as  he  had
issued the FIR against her and  that  the  abuse  would  continue,  possibly
worse as it would be unmediated by her  adult  children  who  had  all  left
home.

Before  Judge  Chamberlain,  as  set  out  at  [10]  of  her  decision,  the
respondent accepted that the appellant had been subjected to  the  level  of
domestic violence set out in her claim but  did  not  accept  the  claim  of
threats to kill or that he had issued an FIR.   The  respondent's  position,
summarised at [11]-[13] of the decision, was also that the  appellant  could
obtain sufficient protection and could relocate to  avoid  further  harm  on
return.

Judge Chamberlain found at [29] that the appellant  had  been  subjected  to
domestic abuse in line with the respondent's concession  and  also  at  [30]
that FAK has been physically abused by his father. At  [20]-[27]  she  found
that it had not been shown  that  an  FIR  had  been  issued.  At  [29]  she
declined to make a finding on threats to kill where the domestic  abuse  was
accepted by the respondent, that being sufficient to make  the  appellant  a
member of a particular social group.  The judge went on to find at  [31]-[37
]that the appellant would not be able to  obtain  sufficient  protection  or
relocate internally, leading to a finding that she was a refugee.

The first ground of appeal, set out in  paragraph  2,  maintained  that  the
First-tier Tribunal  erred in finding that there was a  risk  on  return  at
all, stating:

      "Past persecution does not automatically result in a well founded fear
      of persecution on return. This was very much challenged in the refusal
      letter, where it was not accepted that the first  appellant's  husband
      maintained an adverse interest in her."

With respect to the drafter of the grounds, we were not  able  to  find  any
part of the refusal letter (RFL)  challenging  continuing  adverse  interest
from the husband, albeit the threats to kill and FIR were not  accepted.  On
the contrary, at paragraph 21 of the RFL the respondent's position was  that
"you  would  be  able  to  return  to  Pakistan  and  live  elsewhere   (our
emphasis)". On our reading, the respondent's refusal  letter  is  predicated
on the acceptance that if she returned to her husband, the  appellant  would
experience abuse similar to that she suffered in the past.  The  reason  the
claim could not succeed was not because of insufficient risk  from  him  but
because the appellant could obtain sufficient protection  (paragraphs  22-30
RFL) or relocate internally (paragraphs 31-38 RFL).

If more is needed to reject this part  of  the  respondent's  challenge,  we
noted that Judge Chamberlain was clearly  aware  that  future  risk  was  an
essential part of her assessment. At [5a]  she  sets  out  the  need  for  a
current, real risk on return for an asylum claim to be made out. At [7]  she
again refers to the appellant having to establish, to  the  lower  standard,
"a future risk". The undisputed  evidence  before  her  of  past  abuse  was
clearly sufficient to support a finding of future risk of similar  treatment
if the appellant returned to her husband.

The respondent puts the  same  argument  in  a  slightly  different  way  at
paragraph 3 of the grounds, maintaining that  the  adverse  finding  on  the
existence of an FIR undermined  the  claim  of  an  ongoing  risk  from  the
husband. As above, that was not the respondent's position before the  First-
tier Tribunal.  Ms Savage  sought  to  extend  this  submission  before  us,
maintaining that the First-tier Tribunal also erred in failing  to  make  to
make a finding on the claim of threats  to  kill,  that  being  material  to
future risk. That argument must  fail  for  the  same  reasons,  that  there
remained an undisputed risk to the appellant from her husband such that  she
could not be expected to return to him and an assessment of  sufficiency  of
protection and internal relocation made.

At paragraph 4 of the grounds the respondent put forward a third  challenge,
maintaining that the First-tier Tribunal judge should have assessed  whether
the appellant could relocate to an area a long way from her husband.

The difficulty with that challenge is that on the facts as found  there  was
nothing before the First-tier Tribunal that could have allowed  it  to  find
that the appellant could relocate. Judge Chamberlain made  sustainable  (and
unchallenged) findings at [33-[35] that living in a women's shelter was  not
an option for this appellant . Those findings are not  challenged  now.  The
judge also found at [32] that the appellant could not go to  live  with  her
daughter as her husband would be able to locate her there. That  finding  is
also not challenged and appears to us, in any event,  to be uncontentious.

The only other option put forward  by  the  respondent  is  at  the  RFL  at
paragraph 37, that the appellant could start her  "life  at  a  new  place".
However, the country evidence put forward by the respondent in  the  RFL  at
paragraph  35,  citing  from  the  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report,
indicates that:

      "Women are not recognized as an individual member  of  the  community,
      they are members of their male dominated  family...  What  do  widows,
      divorced or spinsters do? They live  with  their  parents  or  in-laws
      family. Older women with grown up children normally  depend  on  their
      sons or daughters. There are always exceptions to their situations  in
      the rural context but generally it is not socially safe and acceptable
      for [single] women to live in the rural context".

We were not  taken  to  anything  that  suggested  that  the  situation  was
materially different in an urban environment such  that  it  could  be  said
that it was open to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  find  that  there  was  an
internal relocation option for the  appellant  in  Pakistan  as  the  single
mother of a minor child

For completeness sake we should also indicate that,  albeit  sufficiency  of
protection was  addressed  in  the  RFL,  it  was  not  suggested  that  the
appellant could gain any meaningful redress  from  the  authorities  in  the
form of her husband being detained or injuncted from harming her.  That  was
why the respondent accepted that she would have  to  relocate  in  order  to
avoid him. Albeit the submission for the respondent at paragraph 26  of  the
RFL was that Pakistan  has  a  functioning  security  system  with  domestic
violence legislation that "would come into force (our emphasis)",  the  only
practical aspect of this which was relied upon was for the appellant  to  go
to a shelter. That is why it had to be shown that an internal flight  option
was available to her, the Judge here finding that there was not.

For these reasons, we did not find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal disclosed an error on a point of law.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Signed:

[pic]

Upper                  Tribunal                  Judge                  Pitt
         Date: 6 August 2015
