
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10503/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 15th September 2014                        |On 27th October 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                  Mr m h h
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     None.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 26th September 1989 and
    a Muslim Tamil.  He arrived in the UK as a student on 22nd January 2011
    with leave to remain until  16th  May  2012.   He  thereafter  remained
    without leave until 5th November  2013  when  he  was  encountered  and
    arrested and claimed asylum.

 2. He appealed against a decision to remove him dated 22nd  November  2013
    by way of directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act
    1999 following a refusal to grant him asylum,  humanitarian  protection
    and protection under the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   The
    respondent did not accept that the  appellant  had  been  arrested  and
    detained or that a warrant had been issued for his arrested.

 3. His appeal was dismissed following a  hearing  on  29th  November  2013
    before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Maxwell  under  the   fast   track
    provisions.  Upper Tribunal Judge King TD at the  subsequent  leave  to
    appeal hearing on 16th December 2013 ordered that the decision  be  set
    aside and remade by way of a rehearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and no findings were preserved.

 4. He suggested that Asdur Marsook, a lawyer, should identify any  earlier
    dealings he had with the appellant  and  that  a  copy  of  the  arrest
    warrant should if possible  be  obtained.   Mr  Marsook  wrote  to  the
    Tribunal on 28th November 2013 putting forward a couple  of  amendments
    in relation to the appellant's mother's affidavit, namely the date  the
    affidavit was issued, November not August, but he stated he was not  in
    a position to obtain a copy  of  the  arrest  warrant  without  written
    instructions from the appellant.

 5. A second solicitor in Colombo was instructed in relation to the  arrest
    warrant and a solicitor applied for an adjournment which  was  refused.
    This Sri Lankan lawyer instructed by Vincents was Mr Seneviralna.

 6. On  20th  March  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Woolley  heard  the
    appellant's appeal and dismissed his appeal on all grounds.

 7. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew.

 8. The application was  renewed  to  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy  who
    granted permission to appeal on all grounds.

 9. On 12th  September 2014 Vincent Solicitors confirmed that  it  did  not
    have instructions to represent the client at the proposed hearing.

10. The grounds of appeal stated that the appellant obtained  the  services
    of two lawyers to confirm that there was an  arrest  warrant  with  his
    name and provided evidence that they  were  both  members  of  the  Sri
    Lankan Bar.  In her determination Judge Woolley found that  an  accused
    could apply for a copy of an arrest warrant but  it  remained  on  file
    with the courts and a copy handed to the  police.   However,  she  then
    stated that she would have expected an explanation as to  why  one  was
    not obtained by the appellant's Sri Lankan lawyer [62].  The judge then
    stated that she would have expected additional evidence in respect of

     (i)      when the lawyer Mr Marsook was instructed [64]

     (ii)     the case papers [65]

     (iii)    the date the appellant was put on an escaped list [66]

     (iv)     why the case came to be listed on 10th June 2011 [68]

     (v)      whether there were any court proceedings prior to that [68]

     (vi)     the nature of the warrant [68] and

     (vii)    why the warrant was issued in Colombo [70]

11. The judge stated that she did not know what instructions were given  to
    the Sri Lankan lawyers [68] and acknowledges that she was assessing the
    appellant's case in the light of the  lower  standard  of  proof  [71].
    Nonetheless she drew an adverse credibility finding in the light of the
    fact that the evidence she considered as missing and relevant (appeared
    to be readily available).  The appellant submitted there was no support
    for that contention.  First the judge noted herself that  the  evidence
    is that in the ordinary run of  events  an  arrest  warrant  could  not
    ordinarily be available, its absence cannot therefore  rationally  call
    for an  explanation  and  the  absence  of  an  explanation  could  not
    rationally lead to an adverse inference.

12. In the absence of any  evidence (beyond pure speculation) either lawyer
    had access to the case papers, the absence of details from those papers
    could  not found an adverse inference.

13. Third, there was evidence before the judge in the form of the email  to
    the Sri Lankan Bar Association that indicated that a lawyer  was  being
    sought to confirm whether there was a record of the arrest warrant.

14. In that  context  and  in  the  absence  of  any  suggestion  that  the
    instructions ought to have been wider, the judge had fallen into  error
    in seeming to demand  an  explanation  for  the  absence  of  the  full
    narrative of the appellant's case from the Sri Lankan lawyer.

15. The case turned on whether there was an arrest warrant in existence and
    the appellant acted, properly asking his UK lawyer  to  liaise  with  a
    registered Sri Lankan lawyer to confirm whether such an arrest  warrant
    was on the register.  They confirmed it was. The  judge's  reasons  for
    rejecting this evidence were speculative and unfair and amounted to  an
    error of law.

The Hearing

16. At the hearing the appellant attended and had the assistance of a Tamil
    interpreter and I explained in outline the  grounds  submitted  by  his
    solicitors.  He confirmed that he no longer instructed  solicitors  and
    was attending in person.  He could not afford to instruct solicitors.

17. The appellant stated that his family would not be able to approach  the
    authorities to ask for an arrest warrant.  This was the reason he could
    not produce it.

18. Mr Whitwell stated that the  judge  had  set  out  in  detail  why  she
    rejected the evidence between paragraphs 58 to 70  and  which  lead  to
    paragraph 71 where on assessment overall she  found  the  evidence  not
    credible in line with Tanveer Ahmed.  She had set out the determination
    in reasoned findings which were open to her and which characterised the
    appellant's grounds as a mere disagreement with the judge's findings.

Conclusion

19. A particular issue in this case was whether there was evidence  for  an
    arrest warrant for the appellant and the judge approached the  evidence
    by considering it overall.

20. The finding against an arrest warrant being issued is prefaced at  [41]
    where the judge clearly states that she did not  find  the  appellant's
    evidence credible, not least because  in  his  screening  interview  he
    stated that he was arrested in 2009 and then in 2010 and then specified
    April 2010 after having read the letter from Mr  Marsook,  one  of  the
    lawyers.

21. Specifically, the judge found that she accepted that the appellant  and
    his father may have been arrested  from  a  shop  in  Jaffna  and  were
    detained in Jaffna police station  but  she  found  that  this  was  an
    arbitrary arrest by the  authorities  and  common,  especially  in  the
    north.

22. The judge also found at [70] that she would have  expected  the  arrest
    warrant to have been issued in Jaffna and there was no  explanation  as
    to why it should be issued in Colombo.

23. The fact is that there were two lawyers who were said to have submitted
    evidence in relation to the arrest warrant and the question before  the
    judge was whether   the  lawyers  had  been  instructed  to  produce  a
    statement which was a fabrication or whether it was truthful.

24. The judge states it is not disputed  that  both  of  the  lawyers  were
    practising members of the Sri Lankan Bar and they both state that  they
    have inspected  an  arrest  warrant.  She  records  at  [61]  that  she
    carefully considered their evidence.  The question is what  weight  she
    placed  on  their  evidence.  The  judge  stated  that  there  evidence
    attracted 'careful consideration' [61].   At  [62]  in  particular  the
    judge states that although it is recorded in the country evidence it is
    difficult to obtain a copy arrest warrant, Mr Marsook's  letter  of  28
    November "expects to be able to do so".  She did  state  there  was  no
    explanation as to why a copy had not been  forthcoming.   Thus  on  the
    evidence of  the  lawyer  himself  the  arrest  warrant  was  expected.
    Clearly the judge anticipated that such evidence would be  expected  on
    the strength of the lawyer's representations. It was not produced.

25. The judge clearly had reservations about how  the  Sri  Lankan  lawyers
    were found [62] because an  email  to  the  Bar  Association  from  the
    appellant's representatives rejected the request to find a  lawyer  and
    further she found that they  were  both  initially  instructed  by  the
    appellant's mother, on whose evidence she placed  little  weight.   The
    judge also makes reference to Mr Marsook's letter where  he  states  he
    was given the case [65].  She quite rightly states that she would  have
    expected copies of the papers if not the warrant, and if Mr Marsook had
    spoken to the police she would have expected information  as  to  under
    what circumstances they had received the arrest warrant.   She  further
    questioned if he had been instructed from the start why he was  not  at
    the court hearing.  The explanation for this was  not  forthcoming  and
    the judge was entitled to place weight on this.

26. Also at [66] the judge stated that once the lawyers had access  to  the
    case papers as they claimed they had she would have  expected  them  to
    give details of when the appellant was put on the escapee list. No date
    was given and three was no explanation as to why if the  appellant  had
    escaped from detention in April 2010 had the police waited  until  June
    2011 to apply for a warrant. Once again the explanation  for  this  was
    not forthcoming and the judge was entitled to place weight on this.

27. The judge also disbelieved the evidence of Mr Marsook because  at  [67]
    she stated that he had cited the original warrant at  the  Magistrates'
    Court of Colombo whereas according to the  country  evidence  the  copy
    remains with the court and the original is given to the police.

28. Not least, although there was minimal reference to Mr  Seneviralna  the
    judge stated at [68] that although  they  both  had  appeared  to  have
    access to the court papers she would have expected  information  as  to
    how the case came to be listed on 10th June 2011 and whether there were
    any court proceedings prior to June 2011 and why a warrant  was  issued
    on 10th June 2011 and whether any summonses had been issued previously,
    and she would have expected evidence as to the nature of the warrant.

29. Clearly the judge rejected the evidence that  the  lawyers  had  indeed
    been  instructed because of the little  detail  submitted  despite  the
    fact that it was clear that their evidence was going to be scrutinised.

30. Indeed at [69] the judge states that she was not even certain that  the
    lawyers had the correct appellant.

31. Finally the judge applied Tanveer Ahmed IAT [2002]  UKIAT  00439  which
    states that "in asylum and human rights cases it is for  an  individual
    claimant to show that a document on which  he  seeks  to  rely  can  be
    relied on" and further "a document should not be viewed  in  isolation.
    The decision maker should look at the evidence as a  whole  or  in  the
    round (which is the same thing)".  In view of the judge's  findings  on
    credibility and bearing in mind that she had rejected the  evidence  of
    the appellant and rejected the evidence of the mother, and  found  that
    as it was the mother who instructed lawyers in November 2013 and  2014,
    the judge found that the consequence was that the lawyers' evidence was
    undermined.  She did not accept that the appellant was on a wanted list
    or there was a warrant for his arrest and her findings in this  respect
    are clear.

32. The judge gave reasons for rejecting the appellant's evidence and  that
    of the lawyer's and set this out in her  determination.    It  was  not
    speculation on the part of the judge to expect lawyer's to give details
    of their instructions which  would  have  added  credibility  to  their
    evidence.

33. Overall I find that the challenge is a disagreement  with  the  judge's
    finding and the determination  addressed  the  issue  of  the  lawyer's
    evidence in full, contains no error of law and the determination  shall
    stand.



Signed                                  Date 24th October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

