
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10597/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 February 2015                           |On 2 March 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                    [a s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the decision made  by
    the Secretary of State while the appellant  was  a  fast  track  system
    detainee to  refuse  to  recognise  her  as  a  refugee,  as  otherwise
    requiring international or human  rights  protection.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not  consider
    there should be any derogation from the open justice principle in these
    proceedings before the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of the Philippines, whose date of birth  is
    [ ] 1989.  She entered the United Kingdom with her mother on  14  April
    2005 with valid entry clearance as a visitor.  Her leave to enter as  a
    visitor expired on 21 September 2005.  In an interview which took place
    on 21 March 2005, the  appellant's  mother  represented  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer that the intention to stay in the United Kingdom  for
    two weeks; and that her husband was working in Singapore.  In fact, her
    husband (the appellant's father) was in the UK.  He had entered the  UK
    as a visitor on 13 March 2004, and  had  overstayed.   As  subsequently
    found by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox in a decision of 18  June  2014,
    the appellant's parents conspired to deceive the  UK  authorities  with
    regard to their true intentions, which was to settle illegally  in  the
    UK in order to gain access to socio-economic advantages.

The application for ILR in June 2012

 3. The appellant's father sought to regularise his status, and that of his
    dependants, through an application for leave to remain made on  7  June
    2012.  He included in his  application  the  appellant  and  a  younger
    daughter, to whom his wife had given birth in the United Kingdom  on  6
    March  2008.   The  application  was  made  by  legal   representatives
    instructed by the appellant's  father.   The  application  was  refused
    without a right of appeal on 20 June 2013.

 4. On 7 October 2013 the appellant was served with a Form IS151A informing
    her of her immigration status and  her  liability  to  be  detained  or
    removed from the UK.  The appellant joined with her father  in  lodging
    an application for judicial review, arguing inter alia that they should
    be given an in-country right of appeal.

 5. On 16 December 2013 the Home  Office  wrote  to  the  appellant's  then
    solicitors, acknowledging their letter dated 18 November 2013 in  which
    they had asked that the appellant be granted  an  in-country  right  of
    appeal.  She had spent the vast majority of  her  life,  including  her
    formative years, in the Philippines and it was expected that she  would
    have family members or cultural ties there.  Both her parents  and  her
    siblings were also liable for removal from the UK and could  return  to
    the Philippines with her.  Careful consideration had been given  as  to
    whether the appellant should qualify for discretionary leave in the UK,
    but the appellant had not raised any issues which gave rise to  such  a
    grant of leave.  The appellant was  issued  with  a  One-Stop  Warning,
    whereby she was required to make a formal statement about  any  reasons
    why she thought she would be allowed to stay in this country, including
    any grounds why she should not be removed or required to leave.

The appeal against the decision made on 16 December 2013

 6. The appeals of the appellant and  her  father  came  before  Judge  Fox
    sitting at Richmond in the First-tier Tribunal on 18 June 2014.   Their
    appeal was determined on the papers, because they had not requested  an
    oral hearing.  In his subsequent decision, Judge Fox found there was no
    reliable evidence to demonstrate it  was  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant, and  her  father,  mother  and  sibling  to  return  to  the
    Philippines.  He further found that the decision did not interfere with
    family life as they would be expected to return to the  Philippines  as
    one family unit.  If they chose the path of continued  resistance,  any
    decision to separate the family unit would be the result of  a  private
    decision outside the  respondent's  control.   The  appellant  and  her
    father were not entitled to make a unilateral decision to settle in the
    UK and demand that the respondent acquiesce. The appeal  was  dismissed
    on 7 July 2014, and applications for permission to appeal were  refused
    on 4 August and 10 November 2014.

The application for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds outside  the  rules
following detention

 7. The appellant, who was by this time subject  to  reporting  conditions,
    was detained when reporting on 13 October 2014.   While  in  detention,
    she made another application for leave to remain on  24  October  2014.
    This application was made  with  the  assistance  of  Paul  John  &  Co
    Solicitors who wrote a lengthy letter on her  behalf.   She  wished  to
    regularise her stay in the UK so she could have stability and  security
    in her  life.   She  requested  the  Secretary  of  State  to  exercise
    discretion in her favour, and to grant her leave to remain  considering
    her compassionate circumstances.  She had family and friends in the UK,
    who supported her emotionally and she was very attached to them and she
    spent a lot of time with  them.   She  was  unable  to  return  to  the
    Philippines, as she had become accustomed to the way of life here.  The
    Secretary of State gave detailed reasons for refusing  the  application
    on 4 November 2014.

The application for asylum following the refusal of  the  application  under
Article 8 ECHR

 8. On 6 November 2014 Paul John & Co Solicitors informed the  Home  Office
    in writing that their client, the appellant, wished to claim asylum.  A
    statement from her was attached for consideration.

 9. In the statement, the appellant said she  had  been  in  Yarlswood  for
    almost a month.  She and her parents had  been  the  victims  of  human
    trafficking.  They had not paid back any of the money  that  they  owed
    the traffickers, so they had threatened them with violence.   Secondly,
    her father and her aunty had had a secret relationship, and  had  given
    birth to a child who was now almost 3 years old.  Her  uncle's  family,
    who had a military background, had found out and they had given them  a
    threatening message.  They had threatened to  kill  whoever  came  home
    back  to  the  Philippines.   So  they  all  feared  for  their  lives,
    especially her.

10. The appellant was given a screening interview in respect of her  asylum
    claim five days later on 11 November 2014.  At the screening interview,
    she indicated that she was not claiming asylum in her own right, but as
    a dependant of her father's asylum claim.

11. The substantive asylum interview took place on  25  November  2014.   A
    family friend was present at the interview.   The  appellant  said  the
    reason for her parents migrating to the UK was they owed  money  to  an
    agency, and they threatened them if they did not  pay  them.   Her  dad
    went first to the UK, and it was really scary (Q&A15).  She  could  not
    remember the details. She only knew what her dad had  told  her.   They
    did not want her to get involved, as she was only aged 15 at the  time.
    Her dad had been beaten by the people to whom they  owed  money.   This
    was around 2003.  She could not recall  when  her  dad  had  last  been
    threatened, it was a long time ago (Q&A61).

12. Her mum's  sister  had  come  to  the  UK  in  2012.   She  had  had  a
    relationship with her father in the Philippines, and they renewed their
    relationship after her arrival here.  Her aunt had  given  birth  to  a
    child by her  father.   Her  aunt  had  a  long  term  partner  in  the
    Philippines named Ryan.  He had said that  whoever  came  home  to  the
    Philippines he would kill.  Ryan had threatened her personally  through
    Facebook and texts.  This was on her old Facebook account, and  on  her
    old telephone number.  So she no longer had these messages  to  produce
    as evidence.

13. On 26 November 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her  reasons  for
    refusing to recognise the appellant as a refugee.  She considered  that
    the appellant had embellished, if not outright manufactured, an account
    of persecution, following the failure of her numerous LTR applications,
    in order to thwart her removal from the UK.

The Hearing Before, the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

14. The appellant's appeal against the refusal of asylum was heard by Judge
    Petherbridge sitting at Yarlswood on 10 December 2014.   The  appellant
    appeared in person, and the respondent was represented by a Home Office
    Presenting  Officer.   The  judge  received  oral  evidence  from   the
    appellant, her father, her aunt, and from the friend of the family  who
    had attended the substantive asylum interview.  The appellant's  mother
    was also in court, but did not give evidence.

15. In his subsequent decision,  the  judge  recorded  that  the  appellant
    confirmed that she was fit and well and able to proceed with the formal
    hearing of her appeal.

16. The judge set out the  appellant's  claim  in  considerable  detail  in
    paragraphs 15 to  42.   He  summarised  the  respondent's  reasons  for
    refusal in paragraphs 43 to 60.  His findings of fact were set  out  at
    paragraphs  62  onwards.   He  was  in  no  doubt  there  had  been   a
    relationship between the appellant's father and her aunt out of which a
    child had been born.  But he did not accept that the  relationship  had
    caused such concern to Ryan.  For  if  it  had,  there  would  be  more
    evidence of his hostile reaction.  There  was  no  photograph  of  Ryan
    holding a gun to his head.  The judge  found  that  the  appellant  had
    received no threats  from  Ryan,  and  there  was  no  reason  why  the
    appellant should be of any adverse interest to Ryan.  The evidence with
    regard to Ryan's family and siblings being involved in the  police  and
    the military was vague and was not substantiated by any other  evidence
    in support of Ryan's family having the ability to cause  the  appellant
    any problems if she was returned to the Philippines.

17. The other aspect of her claim was that she feared members of the agency
    from whom her father was said to have borrowed money for her  schooling
    and to facilitate him and her and her  mother's  entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant's father had had no contact  with  the  alleged
    agency since 2006.  Her knowledge of the agency lacked any  substantial
    weight, and her father was unable to give any detail of what the agency
    organisation consisted of.  There was also no documentary  evidence  of
    any threat having been received by  the  appellant's  father  from  the
    agency.

18. Judge Petherbridge considered that, if such a threat existed  from  the
    agency, the threat did not lie against the appellant, but  against  her
    father.  Further, the objective evidence showed that there  was  not  a
    systematic or institutionalised unwillingness to afford  protection  to
    the victims of persecution by non-State agents.

19. The judge continued in paragraph 75:

         "Overarching these two main strands of the appellant's asylum claim
         is the fact that she sought to regularise her stay  in  the  United
         Kingdom since 2012 by virtue of various applications, all of  which
         have been refused such that her appeal rights  are  exhausted.   In
         those applications, the appellant never made any mention whatsoever
         of the difficulties she now claims she would have if she were to be
         returned to the Philippines.  The appellant was unable  to  provide
         any plausible explanation as to why, if the threats to her  as  she
         claims exist if she were to be returned to the Philippines  are  so
         great, she did not mention those aspects which form  the  basis  of
         her asylum claim at a much earlier date than she did and were  only
         made when removal directions had been set."

The Application for Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

20. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In her application notice, she said she continued to be represented  by
    Paul John & Co Solicitors.  But there were  no  grounds  of  appeal  as
    such.  Instead there was a lengthy statement apparently written by  the
    appellant running over a  number  of  pages.   In  the  statement,  the
    appellant insisted that she and her family had a well-founded  fear  of
    persecution for the reasons which she had given before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  She said that they had mentioned their bad situation to  the
    female solicitor who had assisted them in the  application  which  they
    had made in 2012.  But she had said there was  no  need  to  "add"  the
    asylum claim to their ILR application.  She had made her  asylum  claim
    on the advice of her current solicitor.   The  previous  solicitor  had
    prevented them from mentioning the  threat,  as  it  might  ruin  their
    application for leave  to  remain.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was biased and discriminatory.  The decision did not show  any
    solid grounds for believing that she would not be in  danger  when  she
    returned to her country of origin.

The Initial Refusal of Permission

21. On 19 December  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bird  gave  detailed
    reasons for refusing the application for  permission  to  appeal.   She
    characterised the appellant's grounds  of  appeal  as  being  merely  a
    disagreement with the respondent's decision  as  well  as  the  judge's
    findings.  The findings of the judge were adequately reasoned, and  the
    conclusions that the judge arrived at were open to him on the evidence.
     No arguable error of law arose.

The Renewed Application to the Upper Tribunal

22. On a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal, the appellant indicated
    that she was no longer legally represented.  Ground 1  of  her  renewed
    application was that she  was  not  able  to  defend  herself  properly
    because she had no legal aid.  She felt she had  been  judged  unfairly
    and the decision had been unlawful.  She had been accused of deception,
    and her evidence and her witnesses had not been heard  or  investigated
    properly.  The court's decision had not proved that she  was  in  grave
    danger due to her father and aunt's situation.  The court  had  refused
    to consider her case, which she believed was unfair.

The Eventual Grant of Permission

23. On 21 December 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul granted permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         "Given that the lawfulness and fairness of the detained fast  track
         process is challenged in the renewed grounds, and in light  of  the
         decision in Detention  Action  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1634,  I
         considered the submission at the hearing was  unfair  is  arguable.
         While there may be less merit in the other  grounds  of  challenge,
         permission is granted on all grounds."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

24. By letter dated 18 February 2015, Kinas Solicitors informed  the  Upper
    Tribunal that they were no longer instructed to act for  the  appellant
    in her appeal.

25. The appellant appeared before me in person.  She was accompanied by all
    the family members who  had  attended  the  hearing  at  Yarlswood.   I
    received representations from both the appellant and her  father.   The
    appellant informed me that she had been released from  detention  on  2
    January 2015.  The  decision  she  was  appealing  against  was  "quite
    biased".  They had told everything in full, and it was  how  they  were
    judged.  I asked her if there was any evidence that she  had  not  been
    able to present in support of her appeal,  and  she  answered  she  had
    already said her evidence.  When asked about her asylum statement,  she
    said she had written this to get out of  detention.   Her  parents  had
    been hiding the facts from her.  Her father  had  told  her  the  whole
    story while she was in detention.

26. The appellant's father said that the solicitors already knew the  whole
    story.  He had told them the whole story, maybe  in  March  2014.   But
    they said there was no need for the Home Office to know this.  He  also
    told the whole story to the previous solicitors who had acted for  them
    in the application made in June 2012.  They had advised them that there
    was no need to claim asylum.

Discussion

27. The case of  Detention  Action  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1634 concerned a challenge to the  Secretary
    of State's policy, practice and procedure in respect for  detention  of
    applicants for asylum in the fast  track  system  ("the  DFT  process")
    after the refusal of asylum by the Secretary of State  and  pending  an
    appeal against that decision.  As stated by Beatson  LJ  at  paragraphs
    [1]-[2], the DFT process is  designed  to  facilitate  the  expeditious
    determination of applications for asylum and of appeals.   It  involves
    the detention of all applicants for asylum whose claims  the  Secretary
    of State considers can be determined quickly, and a tight timetable for
    decisions on applications, and appeals against the refusal of asylum to
    the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.

28. In the proceedings, Detention Action, a charity, challenged a number of
    aspects of the  DFT  process.   Before  Ouseley  J  its  challenge  was
    partially successful.  The first instance judge held that the  way  the
    Secretary of State operated the DFT process in  the  period  until  she
    determined an application for asylum  was  unlawful.   The  very  tight
    timetable created, "an unacceptably high risk of unfairness  for  those
    who are or may be vulnerable applicants who  did  not  have  access  to
    lawyers sufficiently soon after detention in the DFT to  enable  advice
    to be given to them before their substantive asylum interview".

29. There are two matters on which Detention  Action's  challenge  did  not
    succeed and on which it appealed to the Court  of  Appeal  against  the
    judge's order.  These matters do not appear to me to have  any  bearing
    on this case, and so I say nothing about them.

30. It is the finding by  Ouseley  J  (supra  at  paragraph  28)  which  is
    potentially relevant to the arguable ground  of  appeal  identified  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul.

31. However, having carefully examined the  procedural  history  (supra  at
    paragraphs 2 to 15),  I  am  wholly  unpersuaded  that  there  was  any
    procedural unfairness in the disposal of the appellant's asylum  appeal
    by the First-tier Tribunal.  In so far as it is material, the appellant
    was not detained after she had made an asylum claim.  She  was  already
    in detention pending administrative removal when she  made  her  asylum
    claim.  She had access to legal advice for this purpose, and indeed she
    says that it was her then solicitors who advised her to  claim  asylum.
    She was not a vulnerable applicant, and she had had unrestricted access
    to legal advice on the question of her status in the UK  prior  to  her
    detention  on  13  October  2014.  She  had  had  ample  occasion   and
    opportunity to discuss a putative asylum claim with both the solicitors
    who acted for her in  2012,  and  the  solicitors  who  acted  for  her
    subsequently.  I accept that the absence of legal representation at the
    appeals heard by Judge Fox and Judge  Petherbridge  (and  also  at  the
    hearing before me) may have been due to lack of funding, but there  was
    clearly enough funding available to the appellant to take legal  advice
    and to pay representatives to make extensive written representations on
    her behalf.

32. Before me, she claimed that it was only while she was in detention that
    she had first learned from her father the threat  which  she  faced  on
    return to the Philippines.  But this claim is  wholly  contradicted  by
    the information which I received from  her  father,  and  also  by  the
    content of her substantive asylum interview.

33. All the witnesses whom the appellant wished to call in support  of  her
    asylum appeal gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal,  and  there
    was no additional evidence bearing on her appeal that the appellant was
    unable to deploy because she was in the DFT process.

34. Judge Petherbridge gave anxious  scrutiny  to  the  appellant's  asylum
    claim, and he gave adequate reasons for rejecting it.  The  allegations
    of bias and unfairness which permeate the appellant's grounds of appeal
    to the Upper  Tribunal  are  wholly  without  merit.  In  reality,  the
    appellant's real complaint is that the judge did not believe  her.   As
    held by Judge Bird when initially refusing permission  to  appeal,  the
    judge's conclusions were reasonably open to him on the evidence for the
    reasons which he gave.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and the decision stands.  Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to  the  Upper
Tribunal is dismissed.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.



Signed        Date 2 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 2 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

