








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10410/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 13 October 2014                           |On:  27 October 2014         |
|Prepared: 16 October  2014                    |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                     Mr Mohammed Harees Mohammed Thambi
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, counsel (instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 17th May  1981.  His
      appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse to  grant  him
      asylum and to remove him was  dismissed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge in a determination promulgated on 26th February 2014.


   2. On 16th April 2014, Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun granted  the  appellant
      permission to appeal. The grounds contended that the Judge  failed  to
      consider the four arrest warrants, certain court documents as well  as
      a detailed witness statement from the appellant's father and his wife,
      which had been submitted by the appellant in support of his appeal.


   3. The grounds also submitted  that  the  Judge  failed  to  address  the
      timeliness of the submission of the Sri Lankan  lawyer's  letter,  the
      corroborating documents provided  therewith  and  the  fact  that  the
      respondent could have easily confirmed its veracity.


   4. Mr Spurling, relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal.  In  particular,  he
      contended that there had been a "lack of anxious scrutiny" to the four
      arrest warrants, the court documents produced as well as  the  witness
      statements.


   5. Amongst the documents that had been produced was a newspaper report of
      a bomb blast near the appellant's brother in law's  grocery  shop.  In
      addition there were documents proving his brother in  law's  ownership
      of that shop as well as the death certificate proving that his brother
      in law was shot dead. These  matters  are  said  to  have  'indirectly
      corroborated' the appellant's asserted persecution.


   6. More significantly, he submitted, was the fact that  the  four  arrest
      warrants were submitted in evidence including two  which  were  issued
      against the appellant for failing  to  sign  at  the  police  station;
      these had not been mentioned at any point in the  determination,  even
      though the Judge  had  in  fact  listed  the  appellant's  documentary
      evidence. Mr Spurling submitted that the determination  suggests  that
      no warrants had been submitted in evidence. Court  documents  did  not
      include the four arrest warrants as they did not relate to  the  court
      proceedings, but  the  appellant's  failure  to  sign  at  the  police
      station.


   7. In any event, the  documents  were  not  considered  as  part  of  any
      analysis in the determination other than to state at  paragraphs  9-10
      that the documentary evidence as a whole was rejected.


   8. The arrest warrants  he  submitted  are  of  particular  significance,
      having regard to paragraph 7(d) of the headnote in the recent  country
      guidance decision in GJ and Others (Post  Civil  War:  Returnees)  Sri
      Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319. The names of individuals who have an  extant
      arrest warrant against them will appear on a computerised "stop"  list
      at the airport which places them in a current category of  persons  at
      real risk of persecution or serious harm.


   9. He accepted that not all documents submitted had to  be  mentioned  or
      analysed.  However these were fundamental documents which had not even
      been mentioned by the judge:  this  demonstrates  a  failure  to  have
      proper regard to relevant and material facts.


  10. Further, the detailed letter from the appellant's  Sri  Lankan  lawyer
      was accompanied by his practising certificate and a letter from the UK
      solicitors on record. The letter related to the issue of  whether  the
      appellant had been formally charged. The Judge had noted that  it  was
      detailed and supported his account.


  11. The letter as well as the practising certificate had been submitted to
      the respondent prior to the adjourned appeal hearing in December 2013,
      namely seven weeks prior to the effective appeal hearing date  on  the
      7th February 2014.


  12. The full details, including the name, address, telephone  number,  the
      email  address,  the  practising  certificate  and  reference   number
      relating to the appellant's court case  in  Sri  Lanka  had  all  been
      submitted to the respondent prior to 20th December 2013.


  13. At the hearing, Counsel for the appellant drew the  Judge's  attention
      to that fact, contending that  reliance  could  be  placed  upon  that
      letter as a result. However, the Judge  did  not  address  this  issue
      anywhere in his determination;  this  was  a  crucial  document  whose
      relevance and importance was obvious. The respondent could easily have
      confirmed its veracity. There was again a lack of anxious scrutiny.


  14. Mr Spurling referred to BJ (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1011 and
      in particular at paragraphs 30-32. There, the Court of  Appeal  stated
      that simply because a relevant  document  is  potentially  capable  of
      being verified does not mean that the  national  authorities  have  an
      obligation to take that step. Instead, it may be necessary to make  an
      inquiry in order to verify  the  authenticity  and  reliability  of  a
      document - depending always on the particular facts of the case - when
      it is at the centre of the request for protection, and when  a  simple
      process of enquiry will  conclusively  resolve  its  authenticity  and
      reliability.


  15. In consequence of the decision that the national  authorities  are  in
      breach  of  their  obligations  to  undertake  a  proper  process   of
      verification, the secretary of state is unable thereafter to mount  an
      argument challenging the authenticity of the relevant document  unless
      and until the breach is rectified by a proper enquiry. In  that  case,
      the decision of the respondent was overturned on appeal on  the  basis
      that, absent a suitable investigation, it would not be open to her  to
      suggest that the document or documents are forged or otherwise are not
      authentic.


  16. I have also had regard to paragraph 41 of that judgment. Whilst it  is
      undoubtedly the case that false documents are available in Sri  Lanka,
      once it was established that the documents in question originated from
      a Sri Lankan court, a sufficient justification was  required  for  the
      conclusion that the appellant does not have a  well  founded  fear  of
      persecution.


  17. Mr Spurling therefore submitted that  in  this  case,  the  respondent
      could have undertaken a proper enquiry relating  to  the  verification
      and authentication of all these documents. This had not been done.


  18. Moreover, the Judge stated at paragraph 10 that he was satisfied  that
      in the light of his overall assessment of the appellant's credibility,
      he could not attach weight to the contents  of  the  letter  from  the
      appellant's lawyer, the court documents and newspaper articles  sought
      to be relied on.


  19. During the course of his submissions, Mr Duffy  originally  sought  to
      rely on the Rule 24 response, where it had been contended with respect
      to the documents that it was 'not for the respondent to make  out  the
      appellant's case for him' and it is entirely a matter for  her  as  to
      whether  she  makes  checks  on  documents.  The  Judge  it  had  been
      contended, did have proper regard to those  documents  when  assessing
      credibility.


  20. However, Mr Duffy eventually accepted that the  Judge  had  failed  to
      assess the evidence, and in particular the  lawyer's  letter  and  the
      alleged court documents.


  21. In the circumstances I found for all these reasons  the  the  decision
      contained material errors on a point of law.  Both parties agreed that
      the determination should be set aside.  A 'complete re-hearing'  would
      have to take place requiring substantial fact finding.   Both  parties
      submitted that this was an appropriate  case  for  the  appeal  to  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


  22. I find, having regard to the Senior  President's  guidelines  in  this
      respect, that this is an  appropriate  case  for  this  appeal  to  be
      remitted. There will be substantial fact  finding  involved.  Further,
      the appellant did not have a proper opportunity  of  having  his  case
      fully considered on the basis of the documentary evidence which he has
      sought to rely on.


     Decision


     Having found that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  material  errors
of law, the   determination is set aside.


     The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for  a
fresh decision    to be made before another Judge. The date arranged is  for
30th October 2014.





                               Signed                     Date 16/10/2014


                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer




