
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10363/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd November 2016                 |On 27th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                     T Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Martin, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Eritrea born on  12th  March  1990.   The
    Appellant claims to have left Eritrea at the age of  12  (alternatively
    13), travelled to Sudan which she claims to have left on  20th  January
    2012, and travelled to Libya.  Thereafter she claims to have stayed  in
    Libya for two years before travelling  to  Italy  by  boat,  onward  to
    France  and  then  to  the  UK,  where  she  arrived  undocumented  and
    clandestinely on 28th January 2015.  The Appellant  claimed  asylum  on
    29th January 2015.

 2. The Appellant's  application  was  based  on  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Eritrea on the basis of her religion, namely that she is
    a Pentecostal Christian.  The Appellant's application  for  asylum  was
    refused by Notice of Refusal dated 3rd July 2015.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Hunter at Hatton Cross on 28th April 2016.  In a decision
    and reasons promulgated on 24th June 2016 the  Appellant's  appeal  was
    allowed on asylum grounds.

 4. On 7th July 2016 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds note that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    found the Appellant was Eritrean by applying the incorrect standard  of
    proof.  At paragraph 45 the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  applied  the
    lower  standard,  however  it  is  submitted  that  this  is  not   the
    appropriate standard of proof for  establishing  nationality  when  the
    finding is not borne from the claim itself (i.e. the Appellant  is  not
    claiming persecution because of their nationality but  because  of  the
    real risk of persecution in the claimed home country).  As such, it was
    contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  materially  wrong  to
    conclude on the lower threshold that the  Appellant  was  Eritrean  and
    that that is consistent with the finding of the Court of Appeal  in  MA
    (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ 289.

 5. On 1st August 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer granted  permission
    to appeal.  Judge Saffer noted that it was arguable that the judge  had
    applied the wrong standard of proof  regarding  the  nationality  issue
    given in MA and that he should  have  dealt  with  that  issue  on  the
    balance of probabilities.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law.  I note that  this  is
    an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For  the  purpose  of  continuity
    throughout the  appeal  process,  TZ  is  referred  to  herein  as  the
    Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.   There  is  no
    Rule 24 response filed on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.   The  Appellant
    appears by her instructed Counsel, Mr Martin.  The Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr McVeety.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr McVeety starts by taking me to the  Grounds  of  Appeal  and  cross-
    referencing them with the judge's decision.  He points out at paragraph
    45 the judge  concludes  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof  that  the
    Appellant is an Eritrean national.  He then takes me  to  paragraph  37
    which cites the extract from the Notice  of  Refusal  setting  out  the
    expansion of the  law  from  MA  (Ethiopia)  in  the  country  guidance
    authority of ST (ethnic Eritrean - nationality -  return)  Ethiopia  CG
    [2011] UKUT 00252 (IAC).  Mr McVeety indicates that in setting out that
    paragraph, the judge has actually acknowledged what needs to be done to
    show nationality, then has not shown thereafter that those  tests  have
    been applied.  All the judge does is make a note  at  paragraph  41  to
    note that the Appellant gave evidence that she attended  the  Ethiopian
    Embassy but that it  was  unclear  from  her  evidence  precisely  what
    happened there and what information was provided by the Appellant other
    than a photograph.  Mr McVeety points out that is  not  sufficient  and
    consequently an error of law has arisen.  Further, he indicates that it
    is appropriate to remit the matter for rehearing, particularly  bearing
    in mind the recent country guidance authority given  in  Eritrea  which
    has  not  been  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.    He
    acknowledges the  issue  will  be  straightforward,  namely  if  it  is
    accepted that the Appellant is Eritrean she will succeed but if she  is
    Ethiopian she will not.

 8. Mr Martin contends that although the judge refers to the lower standard
    of proof at paragraph 45, it would be open to  the  judge  to  apply  a
    balance of probabilities test if the case is being  looked  at  at  the
    level of a criminal standard.  He advised that if I am against  him  on
    that, it is necessary to consider the country guidance authorities  and
    that if the Appellant went back to Ethiopia because she was of Eritrean
    origin she would be mistreated.  He notes  that  the  Appellant  states
    that she says she was born in Eritrea although  she  acknowledges  that
    from a relatively young age she was brought up in Ethiopia.  He submits
    that the judge can look at many factors  in  deciding  nationality  and
    submits that all other factors, e.g. the way  in  which  the  Appellant
    gave evidence, can be taken into account.  He asked me to find there is
    no material error of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. The issue herein is a relatively straightforward one, namely whether or
    not the judge has applied the correct  burden  of  proof.   It  is  not
    appropriate to recite the paragraphs of MA (Ethiopia) or ST  (Ethiopia)
    recited in the Grounds of Appeal and at paragraph 37  of  the  decision
    (this being transcribed from the Notice of Refusal).  What is clear  is
    that they set out the test to be applied and the standard of proof.  It
    is clear that that is not "the real risk" test and that it  is  a  test
    based on the balance of probabilities.

12. It is equally clear that this is not the test that has been applied  by
    the judge.  The judge has applied a test based on a lower  standard  of
    proof and I am not persuaded by Mr Martin's submission that the balance
    of probabilities test could be applied.  That submission seems to me is
    wrong in law and in any event, is contrary to the basic standard of the
    burden and standard of proof set out at paragraph 3 quite  properly  in
    the judge's decision.

13. In such circumstances there is a clear material error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and the correct  approach  is
    to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal with none  of  the
    findings of fact to stand and to remit the matter back  for  rehearing.
    It would also be of relevance for the court to  bear  in  mind  on  the
    rehearing the most recent country guidance case  on  Eritrea,  and  the
    quite appropriate concession made by Mr McVeety that in the event  that
    the Appellant is Eritrean she is  likely  to  succeed  but  if  she  is
    Ethiopian then she is not.



Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material  error  of
law and is set aside.  Directions for the rehearing of this  matter  are  as
follows:

 1) That the matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Stoke
    on the first available date 28 days hence with an ELH of three hours.

 2) That the appeal be before any Immigration Judge other than  Immigration
    Judge Hunter.

 3) None of the findings of fact to stand.

 4) That there be leave to  either  party  to  file  and  serve  additional
    subjective and/or objective evidence, particularly with regard  to  the
    issue of the Appellant's nationality, at least seven days prior to  the
    restored hearing.

 5) That an Amharic interpreter do attend the restored hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 26/06/2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed                              Date 26/06/2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
