
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10139/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 December 2016                           |On 19 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SA
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Ahmed Counsel, instructed by Rahman &
Company Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal that is SA  as  the  appellant
    and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ghaffar  who  allowed  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds against the decision of the Secretary of State of 8 July
    2015 which refused her asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights
    protection claim.

 3. The appellant is an Armenian national, born on 28  September  1944  and
    her husband passed away in 1983.  She has a  son  who  is  married  and
    lives with children in the UK and a daughter who also lives in the  UK.
    Her stepson from her husband's previous marriage is in Armenia whom she
    claimed mistreated her.  The appellant moved to stay  with  her  sister
    until her sister's death in 2012 and has since been visiting her son in
    the UK.

 4. The appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ghaffar to allow the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds
    asserted that:

    (i)    The judge failed to  consider  whether  the  appellant  met  the
         Immigration Rules and the availability of her  home  and  financial
         support form her son on return.  The judge's assessment was  not  a
         Razgar compliant balancing exercise but merely a list of factors in
         the appellant's favour.

    (ii)   Further the judge wrongly applied Section  117B  and  failed  to
         apply Rajendran (Section 117B -  family  life)  [2016]  UKUT  00138
         (IAC) which held that precariousness was also  relevant  to  family
         life:

             "That 'precariousness' is a criterion of relevance  to  family
             life as well as private life cases is an established  part  of
             Article 8 jurisprudence: see e.g. R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC
             720 (Admin) and Jeunesse v Netherlands, app.no.12738/10 (GC).

             The 'little weight' provisions of s.117B(4)(a) and (5) of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 are  confined  to
             'private life' established by a person at a  time  when  their
             immigration status is unlawful or  precarious.  However,  this
             does  not  mean  that  when  answering  the  'public  interest
             question' posed by s117A(2)-(3) a  court  or  tribunal  should
             disregard   'precarious  family  life'  criteria  set  out  in
             established Article  8  jurisprudence.  Given  that  ss.117A-D
             considerations are not exhaustive, in certain cases it may  be
             an error of law for a court or tribunal to disregard  relevant
             public interest considerations."

 5. The factors that the appellant could not speak English and that she was
    not financially independent were in fact held in the  recent  Court  of
    Appeal case of Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 803 to be either neutral or negative  factors  and  the
    judge erred in his approach.

 6. The judge made the finding that the appellant would  simply  prefer  to
    live in the UK with her son and his family and that the  appellant  has
    her home available to her  to  live  in  having  found  there  were  no
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in Armenia and her
    son would send her money there (paragraph 34).

 7. Despite Mr Ahmed's valiant efforts to help me uphold  the  decision  at
    the very least there is  a  stark  contradiction  between  the  judge's
    finding at paragraph 34 that there were no significant obstacles to the
    appellant's integration into Armenia and his findings in relation to  a
    proportionality exercise outside the Rules.  The judge at paragraph  34
    set out as follows:

         "34.     The Appellant raised issues of difficulties she would have
             in securing accommodation in  Armenia  and  her  inability  to
             carry out  every  day  tasks.   However,  her  daughter-in-law
             suggested that what would stop the family from getting someone
             to look after the Appellant in Armenia  would  be  a  cultural
             norm.  The Appellant has lived all her life in Armenia bar her
             visits to the UK.  I find that she has raised  children  there
             and worked there.  Her son confirmed that he  would  send  her
             money if she were returned to Armenia.  I  do  not  find  that
             there are significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration
             into Armenia.  Accordingly, I dismiss her Immigration appeal."

 8. The judge erred in the application of paragraph 276ADE which cites that
    there  should  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   the   appellant's
    integration into the country to which she would have to do if  required
    to leave the UK.  In fact the judge as can be seen from  above  applied
    the test of "significant obstacles".  Further it does not  appear  that
    the  judge  approached  his  Article  8  assessment  correctly  because
    although he referred  to  paragraph  276ADE,  he  did  not  follow  the
    guidance in  SS  Congo  v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  317   and  use  the
    Immigration Rules as a starting point or a factor when considering  the
    proportionality assessment.

 9. There also appeared to be a sharp  contradiction  between  the  judge's
    finding that there were no significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    integration in Armenia as found at paragraph [34] and her inability  to
    return under Article 8.   As  Mr  Tufan  submitted,  if  there  are  no
    significant obstacles to her return to Armenia it is difficult  to  see
    how there are compelling circumstances for the judge  to  consider  the
    case outside the Immigration Rules as he stated at paragraph  36.   The
    appellant was identified as being elderly and vulnerable  but,  bearing
    in mind his findings at paragraph 34, compelling circumstances  do  not
    appear to have been made out or  adequately  reasoned.   Certainly  the
    findings in relation to the Immigration Rules were  not  factored  into
    the proportionality exercise in relation to Article 8 outside the Rules
    and I therefore do find that there is an error of law,  set  aside  the
    decision and proceed to re-make the decision.

10. I note that there was no challenge to the  findings  of  the  judge  in
    relation to the appellant's circumstances in relation to Article 8  and
    I preserve those findings as follows.

11. As identified the  appellant  is  an  elderly  widow  and  her  medical
    condition was set out by the judge at paragraphs 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 29
    and 30:

         "23.     I had the opportunity to hear and see the Appellant giving
             evidence.  There is medical evidence before me which  confirms
             that the Appellant and her family  in  the  UK  have  reported
             memory loss particularly associated to times when she  suffers
             from high blood pressure.  There is a letter dated 19 May 2016
             from a Consultant  Psychiatrist  which  sets  out  the  issues
             raised by the family  and  recommends  a  care  plan  for  the
             Appellant.  The diagnosis is stated  to  be  'Observation  for
             suspected mental and behavioural disorders'.   A  letter  from
             her GP stated that the Appellant has a  'longstanding  history
             of post traumatic  stress  disorder  resulting  in  persistent
             depression with high levels of anxiety and stress.   A  letter
             from a Clinical Psychologist dated 12 April 2016 confirms that
             she has undergone some therapy and her depression and  anxiety
             scales have reduced as a result.  This does not appear to have
             been seen or taken into account by the Consultant Psychiatrist
             in the May 2016 letter.

         24.      I note that the first mention of any issue with her  step-
             son was at her screening interview on 28 March 2015  when  she
             stated that her step-son beats her up as he does not want  her
             to live in the house.  She stated in that interview  that  her
             high blood pressure affects her hearing and eyesight.  At  her
             substantive asylum interview, the Appellant  stated  that  she
             was feeling better with her blood pressure.  The Appellant did
             make errors in relation to how old her step-son  was  and  how
             old he was when she got married.  She attributes these  errors
             to her memory loss.

         25.      The other witnesses, her son and daughter-in-law  maintain
             that she does have memory loss but also state that  they  were
             not aware of any issues with the step-son until February  2015
             when the Appellant became distressed with the  possibility  of
             being refused entry to the United Kingdom.

         26.      I find that the Appellant has been living in Armenia  with
             her step-son and his wife more recently.  I find that this  is
             as a result of her sister passing away and  her  returning  to
             her matrimonial home.  However, I reject her account that  she
             has been ill-treated by the couple.  Her initial reaction when
             faced with the possibility  of  being  refused  entry  was  to
             maintain that all her family are in the UK and  that  she  did
             not want to die alone in Armenia.  There was no mention of the
             step-son and ill-treatment.   Further,  the  Appellant  stated
             that she did not report the matter to the police as her  step-
             son stated  that  everyone  knew  him  (Substantive  interview
             questions 141 and 143).  She could not say  why  she  did  not
             sell her house which would essentially remove the  problem  of
             the step-son.

         27.      The Appellant maintained in her interview that  her  step-
             son was a lieutenant in the police force and worked there  for
             6-7  years  (Substantive  interview  question  215).   In  her
             statement,  she  maintained  that  he  is  a  police  officer.
             However, in oral evidence, she said that she was unaware as to
             what her step-son did for a living now  but  he  worked  on  a
             building site previously.  I do not  find  that  the  step-son
             works as a police officer.  I find that if he did, there would
             be consensus from all witnesses and from the Appellant  as  to
             this issue.  The Appellant had simply failed  to  explore  the
             alternatives available to her if she is having  problems  with
             her step-son such as selling the house or simply  moving  away
             to another part of the city.  Her daughter-in-law stated  that
             the reason why the Appellant  cannot  be  looked  after  in  a
             nursing home in Armenia was that it was not the cultural norm.

         28.      I find that the Appellant would simply prefer to  live  in
             the UK with  her  son  and  his  family.   She  has  her  only
             grandchildren in the UK and it is natural for her to  want  to
             live with them instead of away from them  in  Armenia.   Since
             her sister's passing, she is likely very lonely  and  isolated
             in Armenia.

         29.      I find that the Appellant  is  anxious  and  depressed  on
             account of the  prospect  of  being  removed  to  Armenia  and
             possibly not being allowed to  come  to  visit  thereafter  on
             account of her Immigration history.

         30.      I  reject  the  Appellant's  account  that  she  is  being
             mistreated by her step-son  for  the  house  for  the  reasons
             provided above.   However,  I  accept  that  the  relationship
             between her and her step-son may be strained and she may  find
             it difficult to live in and  share  the  same  house.   Having
             considered the evidence, I find that the Appellant  does  have
             her home available to her to live in.  Accordingly, I have not
             considered whether the reason for her claimed ill-treatment is
             a Refugee Convention reason as this is now rendered academic."

12. The above are the factors accepted  by  the  judge  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and specifically noted that the appellant would simply  prefer
    to live in the United Kingdom with her son and his family. It  was  not
    accepted  that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    integration in Armenia in  accordance  with  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules which set out the Secretary of  State's  position  in
    relation to Article 8.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that to  be
    the case and I preserve that finding.  It  is  accepted  that  she  was
    lonely and isolated in Armenia  but  the  judge  specifically  did  not
    accept that she was mistreated by her stepson  and  indeed  was  living
    with him.

13. I noted and confirmed at the hearing before me that the  appellant  had
    travelled to and from the UK between October 2013 and February 2015 and
    that her key medical conditions appear to be that she suffers from high
    blood pressure and some mental health difficulties.   The  letter  from
    the clinical psychologist dated 12 April  2016  as  identified  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge confirmed that she had undergone some therapy
    and her depression and anxiety had reduced as a result.  She also has a
    significant  history  of  osteoarthritis   and   some   mental   health
    difficulties.  An updated mental health report was produced  before  me
    but the report from Dr Akpan dated 7 December 2016 and that of 19 April
    2016 both relied on and proceeded on the basis that the  appellant  had
    suffered abuse from her stepson and that was specifically  rejected  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge. I  therefore  place  limited  weight  on
    those reports particularly as to her circumstances in Armenia.

14. I note that she is on some medication but there is no  indication  that
    these could not be administered in Armenia  and  no  evidence  produced
    that she could not obtain support  with  respect  to  her  memory  loss
    whilst in Armenia.

15. As the reasons for refusal letter decision from the Secretary of  State
    set out the primary healthcare in  Armenia  is  traditionally  provided
    through a network of health facilities  and  these  facilities  include
    urban polyclinics, rural ambulatories,  families'  doctor  offices  and
    there are specialised services delivered through secondary and tertiary
    healthcare institutions.

16. As pointed out in the reasons for  refusal  letter  the  appellant  had
    previously received medical treatment in Armenia  and  her  high  blood
    pressure was initially diagnosed there and she  obtained  medicines  in
    Armenia  to  treat  her  condition   including   blood   pressure   and
    painkillers.  It was not accepted that  her  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom reached the high threshold of severity to breach Article  3  of
    the European Convention on  Human  Rights  and  at  no  point  did  the
    appellant produce evidence to that effect.  As set out in MM Zimbabwe v
    SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279
      "17. The essential principle is that the  ECHR  does  not  impose  any
      obligation on the  contracting  states  to  provide  those  liable  to
      deportation with medical treatment lacking in their 'home  countries'.
      This principle applies even where the consequence  will  be  that  the
      deportee's life will be significantly shortened (see Lord Nicholls  in
      N v Home Secretary [2005] 2 AC 296, 304 [15] and N v UK [2008] 47 EHRR
      885 (paragraph 44)).
      18. Although that principle was expressed in those cases  in  relation
      to Article 3, it is a principle which must  apply  to  Article  8.  It
      makes no sense to refuse to recognise a 'medical care'  obligation  in
      relation to Article 3, but to acknowledge it in  relation  to  Article
      8."

17. She has lived in the UK for a very short period and bearing in mind her
    travels as recently as 2015 and bearing in mind she  appeared  to  have
    family in Armenia and accommodation  as  indicated  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal I am not  persuaded  that  the  matter  should  be  considered
    outside the  Immigration  Rules  or  that  there  were  any  compelling
    circumstances.  Even if all the relevant information had not been taken
    into account by the application of the Immigration Rules, in accordance
    with Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74, (and for the avoidance of doubt I
    find that it would have been),  and I proceed  to  analyse  the  matter
    outside the Immigration Rules in line with the five  stage  test  under
    Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27, I would not be persuaded that her removal
    would be disproportionate further to Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11.

18. This appeal was dismissed with respect to the asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection claims and no  challenge  was  made  therein.  There  is  no
    significant obstacle to her return in that respect.

19. In relation to the best interests of the children, they are in fact the
    appellant's grandchildren and they have their own parents to  care  for
    them.  Although I can accept that  she  has  developed  ties  with  her
    family in the UK in the recent period that she has been here, I do  not
    accept that they cannot continue to have contact through modern methods
    whilst she is abroad and with the assistance of her stepson or that her
    family cannot visit her in Armenia.

20. There was no indication that her family who have supported  her  family
    in the UK would not continue to do so.

21. Section 117 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 sets out
    various factors to be applied when considering proportionality and  the
    public interest under Article 8, as follows


    117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases
    (1)    The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest.
    (2)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
         English, because persons who can speak English-
         (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.
    (3)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
         independent, because such persons-
         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.
    (4)    Little weight should be given to-
         (a) a private life, or
         (b) a relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
         established by a person at a time when the person is in the  United
         Kingdom unlawfully.
    (5)    Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
         person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

22. When applying Section 117 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 as I am obliged to do, I note that the appellant speaks no English
    and is only integrated in life within her  family.   She  has  had  the
    advantages of some  considerable  access  to  NHS  services  and  these
    indicate that the appellant is neither financially  nor  linguistically
    independent and those factors, I take into account.  The appellant  has
    established her life, including her family life, in the UK in the  full
    knowledge that her immigration status has always been precarious and  I
    therefore place little weight on her family and private life here,  and
    see Rajendran.  Both  she  and  her  family  have  been  aware  of  her
    immigration status from the outset. She has only ever been to the UK as
    a visitor.  She has lived all of her life in Armenia save for the  last
    year and a half and I find it difficult to accept that  she  lacks  the
    ties that she claims.

23. It is open to the appellant to make an entry clearance  application  to
    return as an adult dependent relative and I  see  no  reason  why  this
    could not be the appropriate course for the appellant.  I have factored
    in the issue raised by the children that what  would  stop  the  family
    from getting someone to look after the appellant in Armenia would be  a
    cultural norm but I also note that the  family  all  departed  Armenia,
    leaving the appellant there and I do not accept that she does not  have
    family and/or friends in Armenia.  She  has  medical  conditions  which
    appear to have been longstanding and I note that in the assessment of 7
    December 2016 that she said she was "feeling drugged".

24. Return to Armenia is clearly something that the appellant is not  happy
    to contemplate but hearing in mind that she is now being treated on  an
    antidepressant regime and having psychological interventions  there  is
    no reason why she could not continue undertake this on her return where
    as explained by the Secretary of State there are medical facilities and
    she still has family.

25. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007) and remake the decision  under  section
    12(2) (b) (ii) of the TCE 2007 and I dismiss the appeal of Mrs SA.

Order

Appeal of SA dismissed under the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  Human  Rights
grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Helen Rimington
Signed                                             Date 17th January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

 Helen Rimington
Signed                                             Date 17th January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


