
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10133/2008


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 April 2014                              |On 1 May 2014                |
|Oral determination given following the hearing|                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                zazai kuchiey

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr A Bandegani, Counsel, instructed by Sultan Lloyd
Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr P Nath, Home office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Afghanistan  whose  date  of  birth  was
    uncertain but it has been accepted by an Immigration Tribunal  that  at
    relevant times he was a minor.

 2. It is not necessary for me to record in any detail the history of  this
    appeal, save to  say  that  the  appellant  applied  for  asylum,  that
    application was refused by the respondent and the  appellant  appealed.
    Following various hearings, by order of the Court of Appeal, made on or
    about 30 June 2010, the Court of Appeal ordered  that  the  appellant's
    appeal be allowed.

 3. For reasons which are not at all clear, the appeal nonetheless remained
    pending before this Tribunal, although nothing was done by any party or
    by this Tribunal  to  ensure  that  it  came  for  hearing  until  very
    recently, as a result of which the appeal was listed before me today.

 4. It is now common ground that subsequent to the decision of the Court of
    Appeal, this appellant has been granted refugee status and I have  been
    provided with a document confirming that this is the position.

 5. I am very grateful to Mr Bandegani, Counsel representing the  appellant
    today, for obtaining this document so that this appeal can  finally  be
    disposed of.

 6. It is apparent from this document that the grant of refugee status  was
    backdated by the respondent to cover  the  relevant  period  when  this
    application was still pending.

 7. By virtue of Section 104(4A) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002, it is provided that an appeal under Section 82(1) of that Act
    [which this appeal is] brought by a person while he is  in  the  United
    Kingdom "shall be treated as abandoned  if  the  appellant  is  granted
    leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom" (subject to other  sub-
    Sections which do not apply in this case).

 8. As this appeal is still  technically  before  the  Court,  and  as  the
    appellant has been granted leave to remain (which accompanied the grant
    of refugee status), it follows that this appeal now must be treated as,
    technically, abandoned and I so find.



Signed:                                 Date: 22 April 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


