
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10056/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd November 2017                  |On 29th November 2017                |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     HAM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq.

 2. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

 3. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 4. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who in a determination promulgated on the 10th May
    2016 dismissed his claim for asylum and on human rights  grounds.   The
    Appellant's immigration history and the basis of his claim is  set  out
    within the determination at paragraphs [11-27] and includes summary  of
    the decision letter issued by the Secretary of State.

 5. The Appellant is from  Makhmur  and  is  a  Kurdish-Sunni  Muslim.  The
    Appellant arrived in the UK after having travelled through a number  of
    European countries and arrived on the 25th February 2015.

 6. The  Appellant  underwent  a  screening  interview  and  a  substantive
    interview took place on the 16th June 2015. In a detailed  reasons  for
    refusal  letter  dated  7th  July  2015  the  Respondent  refused  that
    application for asylum. In that decision, the Respondent  accepted  the
    evidence of his nationality, identity and ethnicity  but  rejected  his
    account of having had problems in Iraq due  to  threats.  The  decision
    letter rejected his account of  risk  from  ISIS  and  that  there  was
    sufficiency of protection in Iraq (see paragraphs 21 -29). It was  also
    considered that he could internally relocate to  Baghdad,  Suleimaniyah
    or Dohuk (see pargraphs 29-47). It  was  further  considered  that  the
    Appellant was not entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection making
    reference to the decision of QD and AH (Iraq) EWCA [2009] Civ  620  and
    also HM and others (Article 15 c) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409.

 7. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 27th of  April  2016.
    The Appellant was not represented before the  First-tier  Tribunal  nor
    had he provided a witness statement in support of his  appeal.  He  had
    produced some documentary evidence upon which he  placed  reliance  but
    that it was not properly translated (see paragraph 19).

 8. The judge set out  his  findings  at  paragraphs  [30]  to  [44].  When
    considering the  circumstances  in  Iraq  before  he  left,  the  judge
    rejected his account and gave a summary of those reasons  at  paragraph
    [30-41]. Having rejected his core account, the judge having found  that
    he had never encountered any difficulty with  Daesh  in  Iraq.  In  the
    alternative he found that even if he had encountered Daesh,  the  Iraqi
    authorities either in Kurdistan or  in  southern  Iraq  around  Baghdad
    would be able to afford him with  effective  protection.  In  terms  of
    internal relocation the only finding of fact made was that at paragraph
    namely, 45 "I would find it not  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  him  to
    relocate to another part of  Iraq  where  he  would  be  able  to  live
    safely." Thus he dismissed his appeal. He  made  no  separate  findings
    upon Article 15c and dismissed the appeal in this respect also.

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and the grounds
    are set out in the papers. It is plain from the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal who refused permission that the Appellant had applied out
    of time. The judge did not find there was a  credible  explanation  for
    the delay and therefore refused permission. The Appellant, still acting
    in person, applied for permission to the Upper Tribunal and did  so  in
    time. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal judge O'Connor
    on 26 July 2017.

10. The grant of permission set out the following:

         "Grounds 1 to 5 are not arguable and  amount  to  no  more  than  a
         disagreement with the First-tier Tribunal's conclusions as  to  the
         truth of aspects of the Appellant's account. Those conclusions  are
         founded on unarguably sound reasoning and they are conclusions that
         the First-tier Tribunal was unarguably entitled to make.

         The Appellant is not legally represented. This being  a  protection
         claim  I  have  considered  for  myself  whether   the   First-tier
         Tribunal's decision discloses any obvious errors  of  law  Although
         not pleaded in the grounds of challenge, I  consider  each  of  the
         following points to be Robinson obvious.

         It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  failing  to
         come to a conclusion as to whether the Appellant's home area  is  a
         "contested area"  such  that  return  there  would,  following  the
         decision in AA(Iraq) (both prior, and subsequent, to the amendments
         made thereto in [2017] EWCA Civ 944), lead to a breach  of  Article
         15 (c).

         It is further arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
         lawfully apply the guidance given in AA (Iraq)  to  its  conclusion
         that it would not be unduly harsh to the Appellant to live  in  the
         IKR  (which  ought  to  have  included  consideration  of  how  the
         Appellant would travel to, and gain entry into, this region). As to
         the potential internal relocation alternative to Baghdad, the first-
         tier Tribunal arguably failed to come to conclusion as  to  whether
         the Appellant could obtain a CSID prior to, or upon, return."

11. At the hearing before this Tribunal the Appellant was unrepresented.  I
    ensured that both the  Appellant  and  the  interpreter  were  able  to
    understand each other and I confirm that  there  were  no  difficulties
    raised by either party  during  the  hearing.  In  consequence  to  the
    directions  made  he  provided   documentation   which   upon   further
    clarification consisted of the documents which he had sought to rely on
    before the First-tier Tribunal but which the judge had found not to  be
    properly certified. He had obtained translation  and  certification  of
    those documents.  In  addition,  he  made  reference  to  the  changing
    circumstances in relation to his home area in Iraq and Iraq  generally.
    He had also provided video clips which could not  be  accessed  by  the
    Tribunal and the letter had been sent to him in this respect  from  the
    Tribunal.

12. The Respondent had also provided a further  documentation  relating  to
    the Appellant's home area in Iraq and a copy of an unreported  decision
    of a Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  promulgated  on  3  March  2016.  In
    addition there was a Human Rights Watch report in the bundle along with
    a map.

13. When asked about the "out of time" point that appears to be  raised  on
    the face of the  decision,  Mr  Clarke  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent
    submitted that he did not pursue the out  of  time  point  taking  into
    account that the Appellant has at all material times been unrepresented
    and that this was a protection claim and the gravity of the  situation.
    He further  submitted  that  the  judge's  findings  on  the  issue  of
    sufficiency of protection, relocation and humanitarian protection  were
    lacking and that this was an error but  at the time of the decision his
    home area was in a "disputed area" rather than a "contested  area"  and
    therefore was not material. He  made  reference  to  the  map  and  the
    decision of the deputy Upper Tribunal Judge. I indicated  to  him  that
    the provision of this determination did not meet  the  requirements  of
    the practice  direction  and  that  there  had  not  been  any  further
    submission  of  determinations  which  may  have   a   contrary   view.
    Nonetheless, it was in evidence before me. He also made reference to  a
    Human  Rights  Watch  report  of  2015  which  made  reference  to  the
    Appellant's home area in the Erbil province. In terms of the  error  of
    law, he accepted that it required a reassessment  and  it  was  further
    clear that the First-tier Tribunal judge did not deal with  the  issues
    identified in the grant of permission as to sufficiency of  protection,
    internal relocation and humanitarian protection  by  reference  to  the
    country guidance decision of AA (Article 15 (c)  [2015]  UKUT  544(IAC)
    and which had been heard by the Court of Appeal.

14. I am satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    demonstrate an error of approach in dealing with issues of  sufficiency
    of protection,  internal  relocation  and  the  issue  of  humanitarian
    protection. The decision of AA (Iraq) (as cited)  was  published  on  3
    November 2015 and was a country guidance decision but was not  referred
    to in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal which heard the appeal on
    27 April 2016. The Tribunal therefore erred in law in failing  to  have
    regard to that decision. As the  grant  of  permission  sets  out,  the
    Tribunal failed to come to conclusion as  to  whether  the  Appellant's
    home area was in a "contested area". As Mr Clarke accepted  there  were
    no findings of fact whatsoever concerning this issue. Even if it  could
    be said on the evidence that might have been available  then  that  his
    home area was in a "disputed area" rather than a "contested  area",  it
    does not mean that the decision should stand. The  Tribunal  failed  to
    apply the guidance given in AA (Iraq) as to return to the  IKR  and  no
    consideration had been given as to how the Appellant  will  travel  to,
    gain entry into that region. Furthermore as to any  potential  internal
    relocation alternative, no consideration was given  as  to  whether  he
    could obtain a CSID. I therefore set aside the decision to dismiss  the
    appeal.

15. As to the remaking of the decision I have concluded  that  the  correct
    course to adopt in a case of this nature would be for the appeal to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal because it would enable  the  judge
    to consider the Appellant's evidence and also the  issues  relating  to
    return to Iraq and internal relocation. Mr Clarke made reference to the
    recent changes in the area surrounding the Appellant's  home  area  and
    this would require further consideration  and  reference  to  objective
    material provided by the Secretary of  State  and  the  Appellant.  The
    Appellant has also provided further evidence which the Tribunal has not
    been able to access via video clips and the provision of evidence  from
    Facebook. This will also give the Appellant the opportunity  to  access
    legal representation.

16. The Tribunal's findings of fact at paragraphs 31-43 are  preserved  and
    the First-tier Tribunal will consider any further evidence relating  to
    risk on return and the issue of  humanitarian  protection  (Article  15
    c).

     I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  it  will  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for further hearing.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making of an  error
    point of law. It is set aside and it  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a further hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   The  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed[pic]                             Date: 28/11/2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

