
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
AA/10836/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                     |Determination Promulgated           |
|On 14 April 2016                   |On 18 April 2016                    |
|                                   |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                    [A I]
                         No Anonymity Direction Made


                                  Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant: Mr A Jafar, instructed by JK Solicitors
For the respondent: Ms C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The appellant, a national  of  Sri  Lanka,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal against a decision by the respondent dated 21 November  2014  to
   refuse his application for asylum.   Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   Mulvenna dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals with  permission
   to this Tribunal.

2.  The appellant claims that he fears persecution in Sri Lanka  because  of
   his activities as a journalist, in television and in print  and  internet
   media, and that he was targeted  by  government  forces  because  of  his
   perceived anti-government views. He claims to have been targeted in April
   and May 2008 and again when  he  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  in  2012.  The
   appellant first came to the UK in September  2008  with  a  student  visa
   valid from 15 September 2008 until 10 October 2011 and  was  subsequently
   granted leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  from  14
   February 2012 until 14  February  2014.  He  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  in
   February 2012 to visit his sick father and,  whilst  there,  married  his
   wife. He claims that he was subjected to threats during this visit and he
   re-entered the UK on 5 May 2012. Following the refusal of his application
   for leave to remain as a Tier 1 entrepreneur on 28 March 2014, he claimed
   asylum on 23 June 2014.

3.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  had   not
   established that he had a well-founded fear of persecution in Sri  Lanka.
   The judge considered a number of factors including the appellant's  delay
   in claiming asylum and his previous appeal against  the  refusal  of  his
   application for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant  at
   which there was no reference to his fear of  return  to  Sri  Lanka.  The
   judge  also  considered  the  documentary  evidence  submitted   by   the
   appellant.

Error of law

4. In his grounds of appeal the appellant contends that the judge  erred  in
   his treatment  of  the  documentary  evidence  at  paragraph  51  of  the
   decision. It is further contended that at paragraph 50  of  the  decision
   the judge came to a clear conclusion on  credibility  before  considering
   the documentary evidence.

5. The newspaper and internet articles were submitted to the  respondent  in
   the course of the application for asylum along with translations prepared
   by the appellant himself. At paragraph 20  of  the  reasons  for  refusal
   letter the respondent said that no weight was attached to these documents
   because the appellant's name did not appear on the articles and there was
   no evidence to suggest that the translations had  been  completed  by  an
   objective translation service.

6. The appellant submitted certified translations of  the  articles  to  the
   First-tier  Tribunal.  The  judge  found  that  the   translations   were
   unreliable in the absence of evidence as to  the  provenance  as  to  the
   translators  independent  objectivity.   The   judge   found   that   the
   translations are 'in many respects'  identical  to  the  appellant's  own
   translations and that 'there are all the hallmarks  of  collusion'  [51].
   The judge concluded that the documents are unreliable and  gave  them  no
   weight.

7. I deal firstly with the submission that the judge dealt with  credibility
   before going on to consider the documentary evidence. At paragraph 50 the
   judge said that the shortcomings in the appellant's evidence led  him  to
   'the inevitable conclusion that his  account  is  unreliable'.  This  was
   before considering the documentary  evidence  at  paragraph  51.  Despite
   going on to state at paragraph 54 that  he  had  considered  all  of  the
   evidence in the round before reaching the ultimate  conclusion  that  the
   appellant had failed to discharge  the  burden  of  proof,  paragraph  50
   indicates that the judge  may  already  have  made  up  his  mind  as  to
   credibility in advance of his consideration of the  documentary  evidence
   which was a central aspect of the appellant's claim.

8. The other ground of appeal is that the judge erred in  objecting  to  the
   translation of the documents in circumstances where  the  respondent  had
   not objected to the translation, and that  the  judge  had  breached  the
   requirements of fairness in failing to indicate to the  parties  that  he
   objected to the translations. It is contended that the  translations  are
   almost identical because they are of the same  documents  and  that  this
   finding  is  perverse.  It  is  contended  that  the  finding  that   the
   translation  has  the  'hallmarks  of  collusion'   is   unreasoned   and
   irrational.

9. At the hearing before me Mr Jafar submitted that  the  translations  were
   not challenged by the Secretary of State at the hearing in the First-tier
   Tribunal and that the judge's reasons for rejecting this evidence,  which
   went to the central part of the appellant's claim,  were  inadequate.  Mr
   Jafar submitted that there were  further  errors  in  the  judge's  other
   reasons for finding the appellant's account not to be  credible;  however
   these were not pleaded in the grounds of appeal.

10. Ms Johnstone submitted that it was clear from the  reasons  for  refusal
   letter that the documents were in dispute and that the findings were open
   to the judge.

11. The assessment of the documentary  evidence,  as  part  of  the  overall
   assessment of the credibility of the appellant's claim and the assessment
   of risk on return, was a central  issue  in  the  determination  of  this
   appeal. The judge's findings on this material matter should therefore  be
   clearly reasoned. In my view the judge has not given adequate reasons for
   finding that the translator was not independent or for his  finding  that
   there had been 'collusion' between the appellant and the translator.  The
   bare assertion that the translations are in many  respects  identical  to
   the  translations  prepared  by  the  appellant  is  not,  without  more,
   sufficient to identify why the judge was unable to place any reliance  on
   the translations.

12. Accordingly I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  in  failing
   to given adequate reasons for his findings on a material matter.

13. The failure to give adequate reasons along with the appearance that  the
   judge  reached  a  conclusion  on  credibility  before  considering   the
   documentary evidence amount to material errors of law in this case.

14. Ms Johnstone submitted that I should preserve the unchallenged  findings
   of the judge in relation to other aspects of credibility. However  in  my
   view it is not appropriate to separate credibility  findings  here  where
   the judge is tasked with considering all of the evidence in the round  to
   reach  an  assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  claim.
   Accordingly, in light of the errors identified I set the decision of  the
   First-tier Tribunal aside in its entirety.

15. I am satisfied that  the  appellant  has  not  therefore  had  his  case
   properly considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  parties  were  in
   agreement with my view that the nature and extent of  the  judicial  fact
   finding which is necessary in order for the decision to be remade is such
   that (having regard to the overriding objective in Rule 2  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008) it is appropriate to remit the case to the
   First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

The Judge made an error on a point of  law  and  the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.



Signed
       Date:  14 April 2016


A Grimes

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



