
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/10467/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 October 2015                   |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Viktor Nesterovskyi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Middleton, Kirklees Law Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Victor Nesterovskyi, was born on  28  August
    1973 and is a male citizen of Ukraine.  He claimed asylum in the United
    Kingdom on arrival in August 2014.  His claim for asylum  was  rejected
    and a decision was made to remove him from  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appellant appealed against that decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Thornton) which, in a decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  6
    March 2015, allowed the appeal.  The Secretary of  State  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Archer, found that  it
    was "probably open to the judge on the available evidence to find  that
    there was a reasonable likelihood or real  risk  of  the  appellant  be
    called up [to the military] if  returned  to  Ukraine."   Deputy  Judge
    Archer noted that the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Thornton)  found  that
    the appellant was thereafter at real risk of imprisonment but  observed
    that the judge had not made any  finding  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant would undertake military service or choose to go  to  prison.
    He considered that admission to be an arguable material error  of  law.
    Deputy Judge Archer considered that, if the appellant was  prepared  to
    undertake further military service, then it  was  arguable  that  there
    would be no risk of imprisonment and,  in  consequence,  no  breach  of
    Article 3 ECHR.

 3.  Judge  Thornton  has  produced  an  extremely  detailed  and  thorough
    decision.  I find that Deputy Judge Archer, in granting permission, has
    failed to understand the crux of the appellant's  argument  as  regards
    military  service/risk  on  return.   Quite  rightly,  the  judge   has
    concerned herself with the likelihood of future risk to  the  appellant
    upon return to the Ukraine.  She did find that part of his account  was
    lacking in credibility [27].  However, crucially, the judge found  that
    it was credible "that the appellant left Ukraine on 7 August 2014,  two
    weeks after the third wave mobilisation bill  was  signed  on  23  July
    2014, in order  to  evade  mobilisation  after  he  became  liable  for
    mobilisation when the upper age limit was extended."  That is a finding
    which is properly reasoned  by  reference  to  the  relevant  evidence.
    Further,  at  [25],  the  judge  rejected  the   Presenting   Officer's
    submission that  the  appellant  would  not  be  held  responsible  for
    avoiding military service because call up papers had not been served on
    him in person.  The judge has  made  a  very  clear  finding  that  the
    appellant will have been summoned for military service and also that he
    has not answered to that summons.  In consequence, the  appellant  will
    not escape punishment under Article 336 of the Ukrainian Criminal  Code
    because which records that, "if a man does not live at the place of his
    permanent residence, we will not look for him.  Nevertheless  he  shall
    answer in law."  That "answer in law" would expose  the  appellant,  in
    the judge's reasoned analysis, to the real risk of imprisonment for two
    - five years in conditions which would breach Article 3  ECHR  (see  PS
    (prison conditions: military service) Ukraine CG  [2006]  UKAIT  00016,
    upon which the appellant relied at the hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  There will be no question  of  the  appellant  choosing  to
    undertake military service in  order  to  avoid  being  imprisoned;  he
    already faces imprisonment for  the  historic  misdemeanour  of  having
    already evaded military service.

 4. Judge Thornton made the additional finding at [30] that "the  appellant
    would be at real risk  of  persecution  as  a  result  of  his  imputed
    political opinion as he would be viewed  as  a  pro-Russian  separatist
    because he had evaded mobilisation."  In effect, the judge  found  that
    the appellant faced  a  double  risk,  namely  imprisonment  under  the
    Criminal  Code  for  having  evaded  mobilisation  and,   additionally,
    persecution by reason of imputed political opinion because his  evasion
    of military service would lead those in authority and having the  power
    to persecute him to believe that he was a pro-Russian separatist.   The
    judge has supported both of those conclusions by a  very  detailed  and
    carefully reasoned analysis of the evidence.  The  question  of  choice
    and/or the appellant's reasons for evading military service which  form
    the basis of the Secretary of State's  grounds  of  appeal  are  of  no
    relevance in the light of the judge's findings.  The  judge  has  found
    that risk to the appellant has crystallised whilst he has been  in  the
    United Kingdom and that there is nothing he can do to alter  that  risk
    should he now return to Ukraine.  In the circumstances,  the  Secretary
    of State's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 20 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

