
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Aa/10779/2014

                                                           AA/10780/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 23 February 2016                      |On 18 April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between


                                    M S M
                                     M G
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Gayle, Elder Rahmi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The Appellants are mother and daughter and are  nationals  of  Iran.  The
   first Appellant applied for asylum on the United Kingdom on the basis  of
   her political activities. The Respondent refused to recognise  her  as  a
   refugee as her account was not believed. Her application was also refused
   under paragraphs 276ADE and under the adult dependent relative provisions
   of the Immigration  Rules  in  a  letter  dated  21  November  2014.  The
   Respondent made a decision to refuse to vary their leave to remain.


2. The Appellants appealed against that  decision  and  their  appeals  were
   dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Higgins in a decision  promulgated
   on 6 May 2015.   He found that  the  first  Appellant  had  not  given  a
   credible account and dismissed her appeal against the refusal of  asylum.
   He also found that the first Appellant did not qualify  for  a  grant  of
   humanitarian protection and that her rights under Articles 3 and 8 of the
   European Convention on Human Rights would not be breached on return.


3.  The  Appellants  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  the  decision.
   Permission was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chambers  on  16
   December 2015 on the basis that the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  give
   clear reasons for his findings on the evidence.




   The Grounds


4. The grounds assert that  there  was  a  failure  to  provide  sustainable
   reasons for adverse credibility findings. At  paragraph  52  and  54  the
   First-tier Tribunal found that it was "highly unlikely"  that  the  first
   Appellant would have been chosen to distribute  anti-regime  leaflets  by
   her colleagues. The first Appellant maintained that as a  pregnant  woman
   or mother with  a  young  child  she  would  be  less  likely  to  arouse
   suspicion. The grounds argue that it should  have  been  obvious  that  a
   pregnant woman or woman with a young child did not fit the  stereotypical
   profile  of  an  anti-regime  activists  and  that  this   core   adverse
   credibility finding did not bear scrutiny.


5. It is further submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  based  an  adverse
   credibility finding on a discrepancy concerning whether or not the  first
   Appellant's husband knew about her anti-regime  activities.  The  grounds
   argue that this was in fact a minor  discrepancy  and  that  it  did  not
   undermine the core of her account. The first Appellant had  provided,  it
   is asserted, a consistent account of her husband's non-involvement in her
   anti-regime activities and his knowledge of them was a peripheral matter.
   The First-tier Tribunal had been deflected by  minor  inconsistencies  in
   her evidence.

6. The First-tier Tribunal, it is argued, had made  an  adverse  credibility
   finding on the absence of any explanation for how the  first  Appellant's
   family obtained an official document issued on 3 June 2012. However,  the
   first Appellant, it is said, was not asked how her family  obtained  this
   document. It is submitted that the finding was unreasonable.

7. It is also argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  in
   suggesting that a document was a forgery as some of  the  words  were  in
   English which, it is submitted, is an international  language  and  often
   appeared in official documents. In the absence of compelling evidence  it
   is said that the finding is flawed. It is also asserted that  in  finding
   that the fabricated allegations contained in the  "verdict"  also  raised
   concerns about its authenticity the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  take
   account of the objective  evidence  that  charges  are  often  vague  and
   consequently open to fabrication and exaggeration. The  Judge's  decision
   to place no weight on the documents is said to be  a  material  error  of
   law.

8. It is also asserted that the Judge's rejection of the  first  Appellant's
   aunt's evidence on the basis that it was "untested" was in error as there
   was no requirement for corroboration  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
   still obliged to give reasons for rejecting it. It is also submitted that
   the fact that no weight was placed on the witness evidence  who  attended
   the hearing to say that he forwarded the corroborative  evidence  was  an
   error of law.




   The Rule 24 Response


9. It is submitted on behalf of the Respondent that the First-tier  Tribunal
   gave detailed reasons on the core of the first  Appellant's  claim.  With
   regard to the findings in relation to a pregnant  woman  attracting  more
   attention it is said that the grounds are a  disagreement  with  rational
   findings. It is said that it is unarguable  that  the  first  Appellant's
   husband not knowing about her activities was minor discrepancy. The Judge
   was entitled to make  findings  as  to  how  a  document  came  into  the
   possession of the first Appellant. Further, the  Judge  gave  reasons  in
   relation to the court document having English written on  it.  The  Judge
   was aware that  corroborative  evidence  was  not  required  and  he  was
   entitled to state that the aunt's evidence was untested as  she  did  not
   give evidence. He accepted that the witness was honest but this  did  not
   mean that the Appellant's account was  true  nor  did  it  undo  the  key
   discrepancies. The decision was fair and balanced. The grounds  are  said
   not to disclose an error of law.




   The Hearing


10. Mr Gayle submitted that  it  was  arguable  that  the  Judge  failed  to
   provide sustainable reasons at paragraphs 52 and 54 of the determination.
   The Judge found it highly unlikely that a pregnant woman would be used to
   distribute anti-regime leaflets. It was a  perverse  finding.  The  Judge
   used the term "highly unlikely" which took it to the threshold  of  being
   perverse. With regard to the knowledge her husband had of her activities,
   the first Appellant clarified her evidence and said that her husband  did
   know and even without that clarification it was a minor  discrepancy  and
   the Judge materially erred by placing undue weight upon on  it.  In  2015
   she had been separated from him for over two years and  only  had  become
   separated because she had to come here and he had been  targeted  in  her
   absence. It was not surprising that she made a mistake  in  her  evidence
   concerning her knowledge and she did clarify  it  in  re-examination.  At
   paragraph 54 the Judge said that a woman with a child would not  be  less
   likely to arise suspicion. It would be unreasonable to  base  an  adverse
   credibility finding on the absence of an explanation  with  regard  to  a
   document. At paragraph  57  the  Judge  dealt  with  the  verdict  having
   incorrect charges on it and the Judge did not accept that the  background
   evidence showed that the authorities were not always consistent with  the
   charges that they put to people.  The  description  of  the  offence  was
   markedly different but the background evidence did show  at  A11  of  the
   Appellant's bundle  that  quite  often  people  were  charged  with  non-
   political offences. The Judge was referred to this at  paragraph  57.  If
   the Appellant relied on a false document it was probable that  she  would
   have put the same charges in it. The Judge dismissed the aunt's  evidence
   on the basis that it was not tested but there was no basis for  requiring
   corroboration  and  the  aunt  was  in  Iran.   The   determination   was
   unsustainable.


11. Mr Jarvis produced two decisions from  Court  of  Appeal  and  submitted
   that plausibility could be pursued as long as it was viewed  through  the
   spectacles of context. As long as reasons were given  why  something  was
   implausible then it was a lawful approach to make. First-tier Judges  had
   busy work schedules and maybe points occurred to them after the  hearing.
   The question of fairness was an intuitive matter for the  judge  himself.
   It was not for the judge to make the case for the other side and a  judge
   would properly have erred if they he  entered  the  forensic  arena.  The
   grounds were perversity challenges which  did  not  meet  the  very  high
   threshold to meet illogicality. Paragraph 5 of the grounds did  not  show
   an unfair approach by the Judge and it was open to the Judge to  consider
   that separately and make  one  in  the  round  conclusion.   It  was  not
   perverse or illogical to conclude that a child would bring  attention  to
   oneself.  There was no background evidence to show that this was done  in
   Iran. At paragraph 53 of the decision, the essential point was that there
   was a contradiction in  the  evidence  and  the  Judge  dealt  with  this
   sensitively and had taken into account that giving evidence was stressful
   and it could not be said that this was a perverse finding. With regard to
   the reference to the verdict document, the Judge was entitled to conclude
   that the document was not in Farsi and there was no error of fact or law.
   The finding with regard to the untested evidence was not a strong finding
   by the Judge. He was pointing out the evidence and he was focussing  upon
   what could be tested and that was where the thrust of his  attention  lay
   and there was nothing unlawful in that approach. The Judge's approach  to
   the escalation of the offence was lawful. This was a political crime  and
   the Judge rightly and lawfully said  that  this  was  a  person  who  was
   arrested on the basis of a political claim and it was  difficult  to  see
   why the authorities would have to escalate that in terms of the  evidence
   produced. The Judge noted the lack of independence. It was another  issue
   along the way. The background evidence did not support a suggestion  that
   there was a material error of fact and was not  perverse  or  irrational.
   The final point with regard to the false document  was  that  there  were
   many cases where documents were not given weight because  claimants  made
   bad claims and produced bad evidence and there was nothing in  that  that
   caused this judgment to be unlawful.


12. Mr Gayle replied that he agreed  it  was  important  that  evidence  was
   considered in the context of the country in issue but the Judge had  done
   that here. It was wholly likely that a pregnant  woman  would  carry  out
   these activities. There had to be fairness. It was  impossible  to  raise
   every potential issue but the Judge must put forward  concerns.  Fairness
   was not demonstrated by raising the issue  after  the  hearing.   It  was
   likely that documents were printed on machines that  had  English  as  an
   origin and it was likely that they would  have  English  at  the  bottom.
   There was no logic to the behaviour of the Iranian  authorities  and  the
   Appellant's claim was not undermined by the fact that she  was  convicted
   of offences that she did not commit. The determination was unsustainable.






   Discussion and Findings


13. The grounds allege  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  provide
   sustainable reasons for adverse credibility findings. The first  impugned
   finding is at paragraph 52 of the decision, namely that  it  was  "highly
   unlikely" that out of a  group  of  women,  the  First  Appellant,  as  a
   pregnant woman or a woman with a young child would be the  best  equipped
   distributing leaflets critical of the Iranian authorities.


14. The First-tier Tribunal gave reasons for this conclusion.  According  to
   the first Appellant's evidence she had distributed leaflets on  a  number
   of occasions. Firstly, when she was pregnant and secondly when  her  baby
   (the second Appellant) was 4 months old. At paragraph 52 the  Judge  said
   that he did not understand why the other women would have thought that  a
   pregnant woman would be less likely to attract attention in a library  or
   at a news stand than one  who  was  not.  He  also  considered  that  the
   behaviour of a 4 month old baby would be difficult to predict at the best
   of times. The Judge considered that were the second Appellant to  cry  at
   an inopportune moment, the effect  would  have  been  likely  to  attract
   attention to the First Appellant rather than deflect it. At paragraph  54
   the Judge considered  the  fifth  and  final  time  the  First  Appellant
   distributed leaflets when her daughter would have  been  2  years  and  7
   months and said she inserted 50 leaflets into books on the shelves  of  a
   library. The Judge again concluded that a child of this age might at  any
   time have drawn attention to her mother.


15. It is common ground that there was no background  evidence  in  relation
   to the question of the likelihood of pregnant women or women  with  young
   children distributing leaflets. Although the First-tier Tribunal does not
   use the word "plausible" it is clear that the Judge found  it  inherently
   implausible that out of a group of women capable of  distributing  women,
   the only one chosen to do so was the first Appellant when she was  chosen
   on the basis that she was pregnant  or  had  a  young  child.  Mr  Jarvis
   referred to the case of In Y v SSHD [2006] EWHC 1223 in which  the  court
   said, at paragraphs 26 and 27, that  a  decision  maker  is  entitled  to
   regard a claimant's account as incredible by drawing on  his  own  common
   sense and his ability as a practical and informed person to identify what
   was and was not plausible, albeit that he had to take care not to  reject
   an account as implausible because it would  not  seem  reasonable  if  it
   happened in the UK. In essence the decision maker must look  through  the
   spectacles provided by the information he has  about  conditions  in  the
   country in question.


16. I consider that the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to take  the  view,
   and gave sustainable reasons for finding that  it  was  unlikely  out  of
   group of women the appellant would be chosen because she was pregnant  or
   had a child and that this was less likely to bring suspicion onto her. He
   gave rational reasons for concluding that a  woman  with  a  young  child
   would be more likely to attract attention if the child were to  cry  out.
   Further, this was not the only point in respect of  which  he  found  the
   Appellant's account to be lacking in credibility.


17. The grounds also assert that the discrepancy in  the  first  Appellant's
   evidence in relation to whether her husband knew about the fact that  she
   was  distributing  leaflets  was  a  peripheral  matter.  The  First-tier
   Tribunal found, at paragraph  53  of  the  decision,  that  there  was  a
   contradiction in the first Appellant's account "which went to  the  heart
   of her evidence". The first  Appellant  had  stated  in  her  substantive
   interview at question 11 when asked whether her husband had been involved
   in the distribution of the leaflets that he had known about  it  but  had
   not participated. When cross-examined, she said that her husband had been
   unaware that she was involved in  distribution  of  leaflets.  The  Judge
   directed himself appropriately in  relation  to  this  inconsistency.  He
   recognised that honest witnesses make mistakes. However,  he  found  that
   there was no obvious reason why her answer might have been  different  in
   2012 (the date of the interview) and 2015 (the date of the hearing).


18. I find that the First-tier Tribunal did not fall into error  in  finding
   that this was a discrepancy that went to the heart of her claim.  It  was
   her account that she stored the  leaflets  in  their  bedroom  which  she
   shared with her husband. Her account was not a factually complex one  and
   the Judge was entitled to find that this was a significant discrepancy in
   her evidence and he gave adequate reasons for that finding.


19. The grounds also impugn the First-tier  Tribunal's  adverse  credibility
   finding, at paragraph 55 of the decision,  in  relation  to  the  alleged
   absence of any explanation for how the first Appellant's family  obtained
   an official document issued on 3 June 2012. The grounds assert  that  the
   finding was unfair because the first Appellant  was  not  asked  how  the
   family obtained the document.  The grounds also allege further errors  of
   law in the Judge's treatment of documents and making an  adverse  finding
   on the basis that there was English in the document. It is said that  the
   Judge's findings that the fabricated nature of the allegations  contained
   in the verdict led to concerns about its authenticity were flawed.


20. The First-tier Tribunal did not, as the grounds  assert,  conclude  that
   the document which recorded the first Appellant's conviction and sentence
   was a forgery. At paragraphs 55 to 63 the Judge considers  each  document
   individually and then concludes at paragraph 64 that having regard to the
   totality of the evidence and in particular  to  the  concerns  about  the
   authenticity of the document purporting  to  record  the  conviction  and
   sentence and his reservations about the credibility of the claim to  have
   distributed leaflets that no weight is to be attached to  the  documents.
   He therefore directed himself in accordance with Tanveer Ahmed  (Starred)
   2002 UKIAT 00439  in  assessing  what  weight  should  be  given  to  the
   documents in assessing the evidence in the round.


21. In assessing what weight to be placed on the documents he  was  entitled
   to consider how they were acquired. The burden of proving the reliability
   of the documents was on the first  Appellant,  including  provenance.  At
   paragraph 55 the First-tier Tribunal stated that there was no explanation
   as to how the document apparently issued on 3 June  2012  came  into  the
   possession of the first Appellant. That statement was factually  correct.
   The provenance of the document  had  not  been  demonstrated.  I  do  not
   consider that this was a matter that was required to be put to the  first
   Appellant in in order for the requirements of fairness to be  served.  As
   Schiemann LJ in the Court of Appeal stated in SSHD v  Maheshwaran  [2002]
   EWCA Civ 173 at paragraph [2] and [3] fairness  does  not  require  every
   matter on which an adverse finding is subsequently made  to  be  put  and
   judges will in general be "rightly cautious about intervening lest it  be
   said that they have leaped into the forensic arena and lest an appearance
   of bias is given."


22. At paragraph 56 the First-tier Tribunal concluded that since there  were
   English words at the foot of the court document this  indicated  that  it
   was not a document obtained directly from the court on  the  day  it  was
   prepared as was indicated in  an  email  from  relied  on  by  the  first
   Appellant. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that it was more  likely  to
   have been created in some other context. The  first  Appellant  had  been
   able to offer no explanation as to  why  the  references  in  English  to
   "judge", "sign" and "print" appeared on  the  document.  The  matter  was
   raised at paragraph 45 of the Reasons for Refusal Letter as a ground  for
   refusal. The First-tier Tribunal was not referred by the first  Appellant
   or her representatives  to  any  evidence  to  show  that  Iranian  court
   documents could or did include English words. The burden of  proving  the
   genuineness of the document relied on was on the first Appellant  and  in
   the absence of evidence on this point the Judge was entitled to find that
   the presence of words in the English language was anomalous.  The  First-
   tier Tribunal took the  first  Appellant's  explanation  as  to  why  the
   document could contain English into account but rejected it with adequate
   reasons.


23. The Judge's findings at paragraph 57 are also criticised.  There  was  a
   mismatch between the first Appellant's  conviction  as  recorded  in  the
   "court verdict" at page 17 of her bundle and  her  claimed  offence.  She
   claimed to have distributed leaflets  critical  of  the  regime  and  the
   verdict recorded that she had  participated  in  rioting  and  disturbing
   public order and national security of the Islamic Republic  of  Iran  and
   promoted Western ideas  and  culture.  She  sought  to  explain  this  by
   reference to the tendency of judicial authorities in Iran  to  exaggerate
   the gravity of misconduct attributed to the opponents of government.  The
   First-tier Tribunal notes that he read the  materials  to  which  he  was
   referred by Mr Gayle and  accepted  that  the  Iranian  judiciary  lacked
   independence  so  might  well  have  convicted  her  notwithstanding  the
   deficiencies in the evidence. However, he found that the distribution  of
   leaflets critical of the regime would, without  more,  have  justified  a
   substantial sentence. He therefore found it unclear what the  authorities
   stood to gain by convicting her of offences she  had  not  committed  and
   that the fact that the description of the offences  of  which  the  first
   Appellant was allegedly  found  guilty  was  markedly  different  to  the
   offences  she  allegedly  committed  fuelled   his   doubts   about   the
   authenticity of the document.


24. The evidence to which I was referred by Mr  Gayle  at  the  hearing  was
   page A11 of the Appellant's bundle. The US State Department  Report  2013
   describes  there  how  the  government  arrested  students,  journalists,
   lawyers, political activists, women's activists and artists  and  charged
   them with crimes such as "propaganda against the system"  and  "insulting
   the supreme leader". Also, it is reported that the  government  arrested,
   convicted and executed persons on  criminal  charges  when  their  actual
   offence was political.


25. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal had regard  to  the  background
   evidence and gave rational and adequate reasons for finding that  as  the
   authorities had incontrovertible evidence that she had been involved in a
   political crime which would  attract  a  substantial  custodial  sentence
   there was  nothing  to  gain  from  convicting  her  of  other  political
   offences. His finding is not at odds with the background evidence. It  is
   neither perverse nor inadequately reasoned.


26. The grounds  also  criticize  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  statement  at
   paragraph 48 that the first Appellant's aunt's evidence was untested. She
   had submitted an email. The First-tier Tribunal did not, however,  as  is
   asserted in the grounds, reject the evidence because it was untested. The
   First-tier Tribunal's reasons for not attaching weight to  that  document
   are given at paragraph 64 and involved an assessment of the  evidence  in
   the round and are fully reasoned and rational. Further, it is clear  from
   paragraph 65 of the decision that the First-tier Tribunal was fully aware
   that there is no requirement for an  asylum  seeker  to  corroborate  his
   account. He says so in terms.


27. The final criticism of the First-tier  Tribunal's  credibility  findings
   is that at paragraph 62 of the decision the evidence  of  a  witness  was
   accepted but that no weight was placed on it. At paragraph 62 the  First-
   tier Tribunal accepted  the  witness'  evidence  that  he  was  given  an
   envelope to pass to  the  first  Appellant's  brother.  In  contrast,  in
   paragraph 61 he found the first Appellant an unimpressive witness who was
   vague and evasive. The  fact  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  the
   witness to be telling the truth about being given an  envelope  does  not
   mean that he had to accept that first Appellant's account was a  truthful
   one. He gave clear and sustainable reasons as to why he  did  not  accept
   the core of the first Appellant's case.


28. I therefore find that there was no error of law in the decision  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal.    The grounds amount to no more than a disagreement
   with the findings of fact.




Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                             Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

