


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      AA/10235/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 5th December 2016                         |On 7th December 2016         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                               Kani Zyad Saleh
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:      Mr Harrison,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


For the Respondent:    Ms Mottershaw, Counsel instructed by GMIAU


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Iraq. On the 8th June 2016  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Smith)  allowed  her  human  rights  appeal.   The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department now has permission to appeal
    against that decision.


 2. The matter in issue is whether Judge Smith gave sufficient reasons  for
    finding the Respondent's (the appellant before him)  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom to be a disproportionate interference with her Article 8
    rights. At paragraphs 39-42 of the determination he had  dismissed  the
    appeal with reference to the applicable 'Article 8'  rules  (ie  276ADE
    and Appendix FM), but he had gone on to identify two factors  which  he
    found rendered her removal  unlawful  with  reference  to  s6(1)  Human
    Rights Act 1998. First, the Respondent was in a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with an Iranian national who  had  been  recognised  as  a
    refugee and who now had  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom. He  would  not  be  going  to  live  in  Iraq.  Secondly,  the
    Respondent was seven months' pregnant with this gentleman's child.   It
    is the Secretary of State's case that these reasons were in  themselves
    not sufficient to merit a grant of leave on Article 8 grounds.


    My Findings

 3. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is commendable for its clarity.
    Succinct, reasoned findings are found in respect of each element of the
    case, conveniently highlighted by the use of  sub-headings.  Under  the
    heading 'Article 8 outside of the rules' the Tribunal directs itself to
    the dicta in SS (Congo) v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  and  makes  the
    following findings:


        . Article 8 is engaged. Although the Respondent  had  been  in  the
          United Kingdom a relatively short  time  she  had  established  a
          private life and a family life with her partner
        . The Tribunal was bound to give due weight to the  fact  that  she
          did not meet the requirements of the Rules, and  to  the  factors
          set out at s117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
          2002
        . This included the fact that the parties  had  embarked  on  their
          relationship when the Respondent's status was precarious
        . If the Respondent was to return to Iraqi  Kurdistan  her  partner
          would be able to visit her there even if he has no  intention  of
          living there with her
        . It was not open to the Respondent to rely on s55 of the  Borders,
          Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 because her  child  was  not
          yet born. The fact of her pregnancy was nonetheless relevant.


 4. Placing particular weight on the latter matter, the appeal was allowed.



 5. I can find no fault with the reasoning. Although the determination does
    not go into any great detail about  the  difficulties  that  a  heavily
    pregnant woman might endure trying to relocate to  Iraqi  Kurdistan  on
    her own, it was evident from the facts that her removal would be likely
    to cause substantial hardships to this young  family.  I  do  not  find
    there to be an error as alleged in the grounds.

 6. If I am wrong and the Tribunal's reasoning was not sufficient, any such
    error can hardly be material today.   That is because at  the  date  of
    today's hearing the Respondent is mother to a British  national  child,
    born in August of this year.  Mr Harrison was unable to persuade me, in
    light of that fact,  that the decision would be any different were I to
    remake it.  There are a  number  of  factors  that  weigh  against  the
    Respondent. She does not, as  far  as  I  am  aware,  have  an  English
    language test certificate;  she is not technically speaking financially
    independent since she is supported by her partner; she  does  not  meet
    the requirements of the rules and so a  substantial  weight  is  to  be
    attached to the public interest in removing her. As Judge Smith  noted,
    she formed her relationship with her partner when she had no  leave  to
    remain. These were, and are, all relevant factors. Regard must also  be
    had to the clear terms of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act:

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, and


         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom."


 7. It is not in dispute that the Respondent has a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with her daughter.


 8. As to the question of reasonableness, I may need to  do  no  more  than
    point to Judge Smith's finding that the child's father has no intention
    of leaving his secure position of international  protection,  home  and
    job in the United Kingdom.  If the baby were to return to Iraq with her
    Mum she would be deprived of a relationship with her father.    If  her
    father went with them he would lose his job and home and with them  any
    prospect that the family would be in a position for the  Respondent  to
    re-enter the United Kingdom either as  mother  or  partner.  The  child
    would in those circumstances be required to give up the  benefits  that
    her nationality entitles her to.    I have further had  regard  to  the
    published guidance of the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department:
    Immigration Directorates' Instructions, Family  Migration  Appendix  FM
    Section 1.9.  That guidance reads, at 11.2.3:


         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.


         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine subsisting parental relationship.


         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or the EU"


 9. This guidance echoes the concession made in Sanade v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2012] UKUT 48 (IAC).   Even if it were  to  be
    accepted that nursing mother and child could  be  separated  and  child
    left with father, I find  there  is  nothing  in  the  conduct  of  the
    Respondent which would justify such a separation from her daughter.




      Decisions


10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    of law such that it should be set aside.


11. There is no order for anonymity.








                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             5th December
                                    2016




