

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10032/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford Phoenix House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 11 April 2016                           |On 15 April 2016               |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                     AS
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bonavero of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Peterson a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

    1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order preserving that already
       in force. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no
       report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
       directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant.  This  direction
       applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with
       this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


    2. The Respondent notified the Appellant on 1 July 2015 of her decision
       to refuse to  grant  asylum  or  ancillary  protection.  The  appeal
       against that decision was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Shimmin ("the Judge") following a hearing on 19 October  2015.  This
       is an appeal against that decision.

    3. It is not necessary for me to provide significant factual detail  of
       the claim except to say that  the  key  preliminary  issue  was  the
       Appellant's nationality as, if she was not Albanian,  there  was  no
       real risk of the events she claimed to have happened having occurred
       and no real risk or her being trafficked from there.

    4. Designated Judge Lewis granted permission to appeal on  18  November
       2015 as it was arguable that the Judge had failed  to  consider  the
       passport produced by the Appellant when considering her  nationality
       which stated that she was an Albanian national.

The hearing before me

    5. Mrs Peterson relied on the rule 24 notice, that the  Judge  had  not
       materially erred in failing to  specifically  mention  the  Albanian
       passport this or explain why he was placing no reliance upon it.


    6. I did not need to hear from Mr Bonavero.

    7. It was plain that the  reference  the  Judge  made  to  having  been
       provided with the Appellant's documents [12] did not suffice to show
       he had considered the Albanian  passport  as  it  is  not  mentioned
       anywhere else and there is no finding as to whether  reliance  could
       be placed on and if not why not. The adverse findings  made  against
       her did not deal with this at all. Whilst a Judge does not  have  to
       recite every piece of evidence, this was obviously a major  part  of
       the Appellant's case and the failure to deal with this crucial piece
       of evidence was plainly a material error and had it been  considered
       there was a realistic prospect there would  have  been  a  different
       result.

    8. I therefore set the decision aside.

    9. Both representatives agreed that given this was  a  key  preliminary
       finding, the entire decision needed to be set aside and  the  matter
       remitted for a de novo hearing.

Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

    The matter shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo
    hearing before a Judge other than Judge Shimmin. The time estimate is 3
    hours and an Albanian speaking interpreter is required.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
12 April 2016
