
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa109352014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Hatton Cross                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 March 2016                              |On 16 June  2016              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                    [F M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wilkins, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, [FM], was born on [ ] 1980 and is a male citizen of  the
    Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).  He arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    in November 2004 when he claimed asylum.  His claim was rejected and  a
    subsequent appeal was dismissed in April 2005.  Some  time  later,  the
    appellant was arrested and imprisoned in 2009 for attempting  to  leave
    the country with a false document.  His appeal against deportation  was
    dismissed.  However, attempts to remove the  appellant  in  April  2010
    proved impossible when the appellant resisted removal.   The  appellant
    was eventually removed the same year but returned by the authorities of
    DRC because he told them that he was a citizen  of  Mozambique.   There
    were subsequent judicial review proceedings which were  compromised  on
    the basis that the appellant had made a further  application  on  human
    rights grounds to the Secretary of State.  His application was  refused
    on 27 November 2014  and  the  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Robson) which, in a decision  promulgated  on  27  July
    2015 dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appeal hearing in the Upper  Tribunal  (20  May  2015)  took  place
    immediately before the promulgation by the Upper  Tribunal  of  country
    guidance in BM and Others (returnees - criminal  non-criminal)  DRC  CG
    [2015] 00293 (IAC).  Quite properly, following the promulgation  of  BM
    (which took place before the promulgation  of  his  own  decision)  the
    judge reconvened the hearing for the parties to make their  submissions
    as regards the effect of the new country guidance  in  this  particular
    appellant's  case.   However,  the  judge  limited   the   hearing   to
    submissions only recording at [57]:

         "However, Ms Wilkins then asked me for permission to  call  further
         evidence, this time  from  APERICO  (UK).   I  declined  to  accept
         further evidence since I considered that was inappropriate.   There
         was no proof of evidence and as I directed,  this  present  hearing
         should proceed solely on submissions.  I note  that  there  was  in
         fact a representative from APERICO (UK) present in court."

 3. The judge acted in  accordance  with  procedure  but  it  is  certainly
    arguable that he failed to act fairly.  He was not obliged to hear  the
    oral evidence of an individual who had not supplied a witness statement
    in advance but, had the judge considered  this  the  only  problem,  it
    could no doubt have been overcome by a very brief  adjournment  on  the
    day of the second hearing so that a written statement might be prepared
    in manuscript, if necessary.  Further, the judge appears to  have  been
    unnecessarily rigid by, in  the  first  instance,  listing  the  second
    hearing for submissions only (when he did not know in what ways the new
    country guidance might impact upon the  appellant's  appeal)  and  then
    maintaining that position when an application was made on the  day  for
    further evidence to be adduced.  The judge does no  more  than  to  say
    that he considered accepting further  evidence  to  be  "inappropriate"
    relying on the fact that there was no written  proof  of  evidence  and
    that he had directed that there should  be  submissions  only.   It  is
    quite right for judges to require representatives to  comply  with  the
    relevant Procedure Rules but a judge should always be  mindful  of  the
    need, above all else, to conduct a hearing fairly.  The respondent  had
    accepted that the appellant was a member of APERICO (UK)  but  at  [85]
    the judge criticised  the  appellant  for  failing  to  arrange  for  a
    representative of the organisation to attend the (first) hearing before
    the First-tier Tribunal and did not accept the explanation given by the
    appellant for his non-attendance.  That  criticism  seems  harsh  given
    that a representative duly attended  at  the  second  hearing  and  was
    available to give evidence; if the failure of the appellant  to  adduce
    evidence from a representative of APERICO was of such  concern  to  the
    judge then it is surprising that he did not allow the representative to
    give his testimony.  Had the judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    having heard evidence from the representative then, on this  particular
    point, the appellant could have had no complaint.   I  hesitate  before
    interfering with the decision of a First-tier Tribunal Judge as regards
    the conduct of the proceedings  before  him  but,  in  this  particular
    instance, I find that the judge did fall into error.  The  judge  could
    have met the overriding objective (there was, for example, no reason to
    suppose that hearing oral evidence would  have  greatly  inconvenienced
    other court users on the day of the second hearing) had he conceded  to
    the request for further evidence to be adduced.

 4. There is a further problem with the judge's  decision.   At  [106(iii)]
    the judge wrote:

         "Neither that the appellant's name nor her photographic image  have
         been published on the APERICO (UK) website at any time  [the  judge
         is here quoting from BM).  Whilst I have seen  photographs  of  the
         appellant attending a demonstration at a meeting it  has  not  been
         submitted to me that a photographic  image  of  the  appellant  was
         published on the APERICO (UK) website at any time"

    I am satisfied that that,  as  submitted  by  Ms  Wilkins,  is  not  an
    accurate statement of the facts.  The judge  was  told  at  the  second
    hearing that the photographs of the appellant participating in  APERICO
    events in the United Kingdom have been published on  line  and  he  had
    been provided with the URL of the website where the  photographs  might
    be accessed.

 5. The grounds also complain that a drug (risperidone) which the Secretary
    of State in her refusal letter had asserted was available  in  DRC  had
    not been properly evidenced.  The appellant suffers from mental  health
    difficulties for which he takes this drug.  I am not satisfied that the
    judge erred in this treatment of this aspect of the case.  The  refusal
    letter does refer to a "March 2010 revision of the  national  lists  of
    essential medicines for DRC" as the source of her assertion as  regards
    this drug; if the appellant  disagreed  with  the  assertion,  that  he
    should have put in evidence to rebut the assertion.

 6. However, for the reasons I have given above, I am  satisfied  that  the
    decision of the judge should be set aside and the  matter  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal where a new fact-finding exercise may  best  be
    undertaken.  This appellant has had a  regrettably  lengthy  litigation
    history and it is to be hoped that on the next occasion in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal a definitive determination of his appeal may be achieved.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 24 July 2015  is  set
aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The  appeal  is  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Robson) for that  Tribunal  to  remake
the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
