
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10814/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 January 2016                   |On 2 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                            RASUL KHAN MARUFKHAIL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Read counsel instructed by Middlesex Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as  they  were
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom as  a  14  year  old  claiming
    asylum on 29 May 2009. His application was refused on 6 August 2009 but
    he was granted discretionary leave until 21 February 2013. He  appealed
    the refusal of asylum. His appeal was dismissed in a decision dated  19
    December 2009 after a hearing before Immigration Judge Martineau on  27
    November 2009. He was refused permission to appeal that decision. On 25
    February 2013 the Appellant applied for further leave  to  remain.  The
    Secretary of State refused the Appellant's application and set out  the
    reasons in a letter dated 13 November 2014. The Appellant appealed that
    decision and his appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge De  Haney
    on 19 January 2015. The Judge dismissed his appeal on all grounds.  The
    Appellant was granted permission to appeal  that  decision  and  on  30
    November 2015 the matter came before me for an error of law hearing.  I
    found errors of law in respect of the assessment  under  paragraph  276
    ADE(1) and Article 8 and a I adjourned the hearing for those matters to
    be reheard before me.

Legal Framework

 4. The burden of proof in this case is upon the Appellant and the standard
    of proof is upon the balance of probability.

 5. As the Appellant is in the United Kingdom,  I  can  take  into  account
    evidence that concerns a matter arising after the date of the  decision
    in accordance with Section 85(4) Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.

 6. In relation to claims under Article 8 these are addressed  by  Appendix
    FM and paragraph 276ADE of the  Rules  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
    Guidance. If an applicant does not meet the criteria  set  out  in  the
    Rules then guidance issued by the Secretary of State  in  the  form  of
    instructions provides in effect, that leave to remain outside the rules
    could be granted in the exercise of residual discretion in 'exceptional
    circumstances' which are defined in the guidance and must be  exercised
    on the basis of Article 8 considerations, in particular  assessing  all
    relevant factors in determining whether  a  decision  is  proportionate
    under Article 8.2.

 7. The provision that is of relevance in this appeal  ,  paragraph  276ADE
    (vi), provides:
         "(vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above,  has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than  20  years  (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to  which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK."

 8. It is now generally accepted that the  new  Rules  do  not  provide  in
    advance for every nuance in the application of Article 8 in  individual
    cases. At para 30 of Nagre, Sales J said:
         "30.     ... if, after the process of applying the  new  rules  and
             finding that the claim for leave to remain under  them  fails,
             the relevant official or tribunal judge considers it is  clear
             that the consideration under the Rules has fully addressed any
             family life or private life issues arising under Article 8, it
             would be sufficient simply to say that; they would not have to
             go on, in addition, to consider the case separately  from  the
             Rules. If there is no arguable case that  there  may  be  good
             grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside  the  Rules  by
             reference to Article 8, there would be no point in introducing
             full separate consideration of Article 8  again  after  having
             reached a decision on application of the Rules."

 9. This was also endorsed by the Court of Appeal in Singh and Khalid where
    Underhill LJ said (at para 64):
         "64.      ...  there  is  no  need  to  conduct  a  full   separate
             examination of article 8  outside  the  Rules  where,  in  the
             circumstances of a particular case, all the issues  have  been
             addressed in the consideration under the Rules."

10. More recently the Court of Appeal in  SS  Congo  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387
    stated in paragraph 33:
         "In our judgment, even though a test  of  exceptionality  does  not
         apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
         accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of
         special contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances
         would need to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of  LTR
         outside the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  In  our  view,  that  is  a
         formulation which is not as strict as a test of exceptionality or a
         requirement of "very compelling reasons"  (as  referred  to  in  MF
         (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
         criminals), but which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
         consideration of public interest factors as finds expression in the
         Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in  Appendix  FM.
         It also reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which  has
         been tested and has survived scrutiny in  this  court:  see,  e.g.,
         Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson LJ. "

11. Section 117A (2) of the 2002 Act provides  that  where  a  Tribunal  is
    required to determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
    Acts would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  it
    must, in considering 'the public interest question', have regard in all
    cases to the considerations listed in section117B of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as  amended  by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014). Section 117 (3) provides that  the  'public  interest  question'
    means the question of whether an interference with a person's right  to
    respect for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).

12. The S117B considerations are as follows:
         "(1)     The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.
         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-
             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-
             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (4)      Little weight should be given to-
             (a) a private life, or
             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.
         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.
         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-
             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and
             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

Evidence

13. On the file I had the Respondents bundle. I had a copy  of  the  reason
    for refusal letter. The Appellant put in an  appeal  before  the  first
    tier which was numbered 1-47 and a second bundle of documents before me
    numbered 1-20.

14. I heard evidence from the Appellant and Naveed Khan and there is a full
    note of their evidence in the record of proceedings.

Final Submissions

15. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Harrison made the following submissions:
          a) He relied on the reason for  refusal  letter  of  13  November
             2014.
          b) The refusal letter addressed paragraph 276ADE(1)
          c) In relation to Article 8  he  argued  that  there  was  little
             evidence of private life  that  could  not  be  replicated  in
             Afghanistan: the Appellant had friends and acquaintances.
          d) In relation to family life there was no family life in the UK.
             The Appellant had a relationship with his foster  family  that
             was a short term arrangement. The family took on this role  on
             the understanding that this would be a short term arrangement.
          e)  The  Appellant  had  been  refused  asylum  and  was  granted
             discretionary leave for a limited period  with  no  legitimate
             expectation that it would be extended at maturity.
          f) The relationship between adult non  blood  relatives  required
             evidence of more than emotional ties if it was  to  amount  to
             family life for the purpose of Article 8.
          g) The  evidence  that  he  had  no  family  in  Afghanistan  was
             unreliable as it was not credible that given he  made  friends
             with an Afghan male from the same village  he  was  unable  to
             secure  continued  contact  with  his  mother.  There  was  no
             sustained or ardent attempt to re engage with his family.
          h) It was notable that social services had a  different  view  of
             the circumstances in which he came to  move  from  the  foster
             family.
          i) There were no compelling circumstances to warrant a  grant  of
             leave outside the Rules.

16. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Read made the following submissions:
          a) The Appellant was vulnerable as a former  looked  after  child
             and he relied on JS  (Former  unaccompanied  child  -  durable
             solution) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00568 (IAC).This  he  argued
             was relevant to whether the Appellant met the requirements  of
             paragraph 276ADE(vi) and whether he was capable of  overcoming
             the obstacles.
          b) To  the  suggestion  that  the  Appellant  had  not  tried  to
             establish contact with family in Afghanistan the Appellant had
             stated that he had succeeded until 18 months ago when  he  was
             unable to contact his  mother,  something  had  happened.  The
             Appellant would not have support in his country of origin  and
             therefore the test under paragraph 276ADE(vi) was met.
          c) In relation to Article 8 and paragraph 117B he argued that  in
             relation to private life while the provision  required  little
             weight to be attached to  private  life  it  did  not  say  no
             weight.
          d) The Appellant did have a family life in the UK with his foster
             family and he suggested that it was more than normal emotional
             ties even  though  he  was  an  adult  given  that  the  local
             authority had corporate responsibility for the Appellant until
             he was 21.

Findings

17. On balance and taking the evidence as  a  whole,  I  have  reached  the
    following findings.

18. The Appellant is a 20 year old citizen of Afghanistan who has lived  in
    the UK since his arrival on 29 May 2009 when he was 14.

19. The starting point for all my considerations in this case must be  that
    the Appellant's claim for asylum was  dismissed  by  Immigration  Judge
    Martineau after a hearing on 27 November 2009.  That  decision  remains
    unchallenged and a number of the factual findings are relevant  to  the
    issues that I have to determine. Among the findings made by  the  Judge
    were that the Appellant had an uncle who had funded his flight  to  the
    UK which he specified as  the  destination  (paragraph  36);  that  the
    Appellant  gave  false  details  to  British  Immigration  officers  in
    France(paragraph 36); there were serious discrepancies in  his  account
    of circumstances in Afghanistan specifically in relation to what family
    members he had  (paragraph  37);  there  was  a  tradition  of  general
    closeness in family relationships among the Pashtun (paragraph 38); the
    Appellant had concealed the existence of  his  paternal  uncle  in  the
    asylum interview saying that  he  only  had  paternal  cousins  but  he
    accepted in oral evidence that his father had  a  brother;  there  were
    discrepancies in his account in relation to  how  he  lived  in  hiding
    (paragraph 39); the paternal uncle could offer him refuge(paragraph 40)

276ADE(vi)

20. I remind myself that the only private life provision of the Rules  that
    the Appellant could meet is paragraph 276ADE1(vi) given that  he  lived
    for the first 14 years of his life in Afghanistan and has only lived in
    the UK for 6 years.

21.  In  assessing  whether  the  Appellant  would  face  very  significant
    obstacles in integrating into the country to which he would have to  go
    if required to leave the UK.   I  have  taken  into  account  that  the
    Appellant is a former relevant child who was in the care of  the  local
    authority and that they continue to  have  duties  in  respect  of  his
    welfare. However, that does not mean that he cannot be  removed.  I  am
    satisfied that, as was said in FS on which Mr Read relies :
         "It was not argued on behalf of the appellant that the fact that he
         is a former relevant child  receiving  assistance  from  the  local
         authority meant for that reason alone that he could not be removed.
         In our judgment any such a contention would be unsustainable.   The
         resolution of the appellant's immigration  status  depends  not  on
         whether he is in  receipt  of  care  under  the  provision  of  the
         Children Acts but on whether he is able to show an  entitlement  to
         remain in accordance with the law or the immigration rules. "

22. I take into account that he was resilient enough to come to the UK when
    he was 14 and was 'mature and motivated' enough when he  was  16  years
    old to not only choose to move out of his foster home but  indeed  move
    far from his foster parents who live in Southall to live in  Liverpool.
    He has maintained an independent life and household since then.

23. I take into account that the  Appellant  still  speaks  Pashtu  and  to
    whatever extent he has integrated into the UK he  nevertheless  appears
    to have many friends among the Afghan community some of  whom  attended
    in support of his case before me including one who originates from  his
    own village. He has of course matured since  he  left  Afghanistan  and
    acquired valuable skills as a result of the education he  has  received
    in the UK.

24. I have of course assessed whether the Appellant  would  receive  family
    support in integrating  back  into  Afghanistan.  The  Appellants  case
    before me was that he would have no such support as he had lost contact
    with his mother and had no contact with  anyone  else.  In  determining
    whether I found his evidence to be credible on this important  issue  I
    have taken into account the adverse credibility findings made by  Judge
    Martineau which remain unchallenged. I  note  with  particular  concern
    that the Judge found that the Appellant specifically  lied  about  what
    family he had in Afghanistan failing to make any  mention  of  paternal
    uncle who culturally was more likely to assist him and when asked by Mr
    Harrison in cross examination about  family  in  Afghanistan  he  again
    stated that he only had maternal uncles. I am therefore satisfied  that
    the Appellant has not been truthful about what family  he  has  in  his
    home country and I do not find it credible that the uncle who  went  to
    the no doubt considerable  expense  of  funding  his  flight  would  be
    untraceable or uninterested in his welfare.

25. I also note that while he claims to have lost contact with  his  mother
    he accepted that he had not asked for the assistance of social services
    in contacting her and no evidence was produced before me to  show  what
    efforts if any he had made since he became  an  adult  to  contact  his
    family through the Red  Cross.  I  note  that  he  also  accepted  that
    although one of his friends  in  Liverpool  originates  from  his  home
    village he has not sought to make enquiries through him to trace family
    members. I am satisfied that he has made  no  such  effort  because  he
    knows it does not assist his desire to remain in the UK.

26. I take  into  account  the  letter  dated  14  January  2016  from  the
    Appellants Social Services Advisor Va'a Mulipola whose  description  of
    the Appellant as mature and motivated I have used. While I note that Mr
    Mulipola suggests that a return to Afghanistan would have a detrimental
    effect on his physical and emotional well being  there  is  no  medical
    evidence of this. I also note that Mr Mulipola's assessment is  largely
    based on the benefits the Appellant has received from living in the  UK
    and the support of his friends and foster family. Mr Mulipola makes  no
    reference to his family in Afghanistan and is of course  not  privy  to
    the concerns that I have expressed  about  how  he  has  described  his
    family circumstances. Mr Mulipola also  expresses  concerns  about  the
    general country situation apparently based on a BBC documentary  but  I
    am of course bound by caselaw.

27. Taking all of the above into  account  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant would face very significant obstacles in  reintegrating  into
    Afghanistan.

28. Mr Read has submitted that the Appellant's rights under  Article  8  of
    the Convention are engaged although there was no  articulation  of  any
    compelling circumstances that prevailed in his case. I have  determined
    the issue on the basis of the questions posed by Lord Bingham in Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 also taking into  account  s  117B  of  the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?

29. It is argued before me that the Appellant has a family  life  with  his
    foster family. I have considered that argument very carefully.  I  take
    into account that at a time when the Appellant had his  own  family  in
    Afghanistan he came to live with Mr Khan and his  family  as  a  foster
    child where he lived under the auspices of social services for 2  years
    and 3 months from when  he  was  14  until  he  was  16.  However  well
    motivated Mr Khan is that was a contractual relationship for which  the
    Khan family would have been paid by the local authority.

30. The circumstances in which he came to leave this foster  placement  are
    the subject of very contradictory evidence. Mr Mulipola is  very  clear
    in his letter that the Appellant made an independent decision  when  he
    was 16 to not only move out of Mr Khan's home but moved far from him to
    settle with a friend in Liverpool. M Khan by contrast suggests  in  his
    witness statement that
         "... it was social services who forced him to move out as he was no
         longer a minor. I assert that my family and myself  were  perfectly
         happy to have him continue staying with us as part of  our  family,
         but circumstances made him move ..."

31. I note that the Appellant in evidence in chief also suggested that  the
    decision to move out was not made by him although he accepted in  cross
    examination when faced with Mr Mulipola's comments that in fact it  was
    his decision to move out.

32. I am therefore satisfied that both Mr Khan and the Appellant  attempted
    to present an untruthful picture of  the  circumstances  in  which  the
    Appellant moved out after 2  years  as  it  they  perceived  it  to  be
    unhelpful to his claim of having a family life with Mr Khan.

33. The exact nature of the Appellants relationship with Mr Khan's wife are
    also unclear as she not only did not attend any of the hearings of  his
    appeal, unlike Mr Khan, but she also produced no witness  statement.  I
    note that the daughters although not at  court  produced  a  supporting
    letter. The explanation for her absence before me was that she  had  to
    assist her teenage daughters getting ready for school. I did  not  find
    this a credible explanation for her absence given  the  assertion  that
    this was a relationship akin to a family one and the importance of  the
    decision being made to the Appellants future.

34. While I do not  exclude  the  possibility  of  a  long  term  fostering
    relationship amounting in a fact specific case to a family life,  given
    the relatively brief period of the Appellants relationship with Mr Khan
    and his family and the fact that the Appellant  clearly  chose  not  to
    live with them anymore and simply visits them twice a month  I  do  not
    accept that this amounts to family life for the purpose of  Article  8.
    Moreover even if I accepted that theirs was a family life,  given  that
    the Appellant is now 20 years old and is in law an  adult  there  would
    need to be some evidence of a  relationship  that  went  beyond  normal
    emotional ties between an adult and their closest  family  members.  In
    the light of all of my findings I am not satisfied that the  Appellants
    relationship with Mr Khan goes beyond a close friendship. I accept that
    support a claim of private life.

If  so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

35. I am satisfied that removal would have consequences of such gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.

If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

36. I am satisfied that there is in place the legislative framework for the
    decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights which is
    precise and accessible enough for the Appellant to regulate his conduct
    by reference to it.

If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
others?

37. The interference does have legitimate aims since it is  in  pursuit  of
    one of the legitimate aims set  out  in  Article  8  (2)  necessary  in
    pursuit  of  the  economic  well  being  of  the  country  through  the
    maintenance of the requirements of a policy of immigration control. The
    state has the right to control the entry  of  non  nationals  into  its
    territory and Article 8 does not mean that  an  individual  can  choose
    where she wishes to enjoy his private and family life.

If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?

38. It is unnecessary for me to set out again all  the  circumstances  that
    the Appellant relies on in his plea to be permitted to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom. I take into  account  all  of  the  factors  that  were
    relevant to my consideration of paragraph 276ADE (1). All that  I  have
    said about those circumstances is applicable  here  and  I  have  taken
    account of it in the context of considering proportionality.

39. Consideration of the issue of proportionality is 'consideration of "the
    public interest question" as defined by section  117A(3)  of  the  2002
    Act. I am therefore required by section 117A(2)(a) to  have  regard  to
    the considerations listed in section 117B.

40. I therefore note that the Appellant does not meet the  requirements  of
    the Rules that address family and private life and  they  underpin  the
    system of immigration control in the UK. The maintenance of immigration
    control is in the public interest

41. I accept that the Appellant speaks English.

42. The Appellant is not of course financially independent and is a  burden
    on the UK economy as his care whether it  be  social,  educational  and
    health care have been funded by the UK.

43. I have determined that this is a private life appeal.  I  am  satisfied
    that little weight should be given to the Appellants private life as it
    was established at a time when the Appellant's status  in  the  UK  was
    precarious. I note that he has a  number  of  supporting  letters  from
    friends but friendships can  be  maintained  by  other  means  and  new
    friendships forged. He was granted discretionary leave which was always
    subject to review when he became an adult.

44. In determining whether  the  removal  would  be  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim of immigration control I find that  none  of  the  facts
    underpinning the Appellants life in the  United  Kingdom  taken  either
    singularly or cumulatively  outweigh  the  legitimate  purpose  of  the
    Appellants removal.

45. I have considered the issue  of  anonymity  in  the  present  instance.
    Neither party has sought a direction. The Appellant is an adult and not
    a vulnerable person. I see no reason to  make  any  direction  in  this
    regard.

Conclusion

46. I find that the Appellant has failed to discharge discharged the burden
    of proof on her to show that the terms of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of
    the Rules are met.

47. On the facts as established in this appeal, there are  no  grounds  for
    believing that the Appellant's removal would  result  in  treatment  in
    breach of ECHR.

48. I therefore find that the decision of the Respondent  appealed  against
    is in accordance with the law and the applicable Immigration Rules.

DECISION

49. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 31.1.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

