
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/10599/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 20 November 2015                  |On  15 December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                                     hg
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Grace Capel, Counsel, instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant  is  a  young
    asylum seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 10 November  2014  refusing  to  grant  him
    leave to remain and to remove him to Yemen.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Yemen born in 1983.

 4. The appellant originally claimed asylum because of  his  son's  medical
    condition, after arriving in the UK on 19 July 2014 with his wife  (DS)
    and their three children (A, Ma and Ml), all with  valid  visit  visas.
    The reason for coming to the UK  was  to  attend  a  medical  event  in
    Exeter. In his screening interview  on  25  July  2015,  the  appellant
    stated that he realised that Ma could not go back to Yemen on  21  July
    2014 after Ma received intensive medical treatment in Exeter University
    and he was told that Ma was receiving  insulin  incorrectly  in  Yemen.
    They were prescribed treatment that does not exist in Yemen. Ma has  an
    insulin gene mutation and type 1 diabetes.

 5. At his asylum interview on 9 October 2014 the appellant stated that new
    things had happened in Yemen after the screening  interview.  A  person
    known as BN was involved in a car accident with the appellant near  the
    President's palace. A guard witnessed  the  accidence  and  caught  BN.
    However, BN was released  because  he  had  contacts  and  powers.  The
    appellant won a subsequent court case in May 2013. The appellant worked
    for the Danish Red Cross and was threatened by  BN's  friends  and  his
    cousin. BN went to Sadah and  was  a  Houthi  militant.  The  appellant
    resigned from the Danish Red Cross on 31  December  2012.  It  was  the
    Houthi group who threatened him. The appellant relocated from Safiya to
    Sana'a in July 2013. The court case was finalised on 14 August 2014 and
    the appellant's house was raided on 3 September 2014.  His  brother  in
    law was shot and taken to hospital. The appellant's brother  was  in  a
    car that was stopped on 6 February 2015 and  he  was  kidnapped  on  24
    February 2015. He is still missing.

 6. The respondent accepted that the Houthi have been in control of  Sana'a
    since 21 September 2014 but the appellant's claim that the Houthi  were
    still targeting him was  not  accepted.  There  was  a  sufficiency  of
    protection in Yemen; the appellant stated  that  there  was  an  arrest
    warrant for BN and the Houthi members who helped him; dated 8 September
    2014. Ma's medical condition did not reach the Article 3 standard.

The Appeal

 7. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  attended  a
    hearing at Newport on 5 March 2015. The judge found that the  appellant
    came to the UK for free medical treatment for Ma and  had  known  since
    2011 that Ma required an insulin pump. The medical evidence was that Ma
    would survive without the insulin pump. After the  screening  interview
    the appellant became aware that the application was unlikely to succeed
    on the basis of Ma's medical condition and so  he  fabricated  the  car
    accident story. There was no evidence that BN was a member of Al Houthi
    and even if he was the judge did not  accept  that  he  threatened  the
    appellant. If the serious threats had happened then the appellant would
    have mentioned them at the screening interview.  If  he  had  left  the
    Danish Red Cross because of threats then he would have  moved  home  at
    the same time and much further away than just another area of the city.
    There was no medical evidence that the brother in law  was  injured  as
    claimed. The judge did not accept that the family home was attacked  on
    3 September 2014.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on 29 April 2015 on the basis
    that the judge failed to consider the medical evidence that the brother
    in law had been shot  (O25  in  the  respondent's  bundle),  failed  to
    substantively consider humanitarian protection (ground 2) and erred  in
    law by making adverse credibility findings when the evidence  was  that
    the appellant did not have a well-founded fear based upon fear  of  the
    Houthi and the security situation in Yemen until after he  had  claimed
    asylum and attended the screening interview (ground 3).

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Coker  on  3
    June 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the  judge  failed  to
    take account of the medical evidence and the arrest warrant relating to
    the brother in law. It was also  arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider and make findings on paragraph 339C (iii) of  the  Immigration
    Rules. All grounds were arguable.

10. In a rule 24 response dated 9  June  2015,  the  respondent  sought  to
    uphold the judge's decision on the basis that the findings were open to
    the judge and that the appellant's  case  for  humanitarian  protection
    hinged on the same issues, there was no need for the judge  to  recount
    the arguments advanced by the appellant again.

11. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

12. Ms Capel submitted that the medical evidence was before the  judge  and
    was not weighed at all in the credibility assessment. That was material
    because the judge took  into  account  the  absence  of  evidence.  The
    evaluation of the situation after the appellant left Yemen  was  a  key
    factor in the appeal. In relation  to  ground  2,  paragraph  339C  was
    raised by the appellant but there was no consideration of  the  general
    security situation in Yemen, despite the substantial objective evidence
    submitted by the appellant. In relation to ground 3, the findings  were
    infected by error because the  sur  place  claim  was  made  after  the
    screening interview.

13. Mr Richards conceded that there were difficulties with paragraph 65  of
    the decision and accepted that there was a material error of  law.  The
    judge did not consider one important piece of evidence.

14. I find that the judge clearly stated at paragraph 65  of  the  decision
    that the appellant had not produced any medical  evidence  stating  his
    brother in law's injuries. That is not correct;  the  medical  evidence
    appears in the respondent's bundle. Mr Richards' concession was correct
    and I find that the judge has materially erred in  law  by  failing  to
    consider relevant and important evidence. I have not found it necessary
    to make findings on the remaining grounds although it is clear that the
    humanitarian protection claim will require anxious scrutiny at  the  de
    novo hearing.

15. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law and its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

16. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

17. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.


Signed   [pic]    Date 3 December 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
