

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/10055/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 July 2016                          | On 20 July 2016                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                                 EVAN GRANT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born on 14  May  1974.
       He is now aged 42. He appeals against the  determination  of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Keane promulgated on 7  August  2015  dismissing
       the appellant's appeal against the decision made by the Secretary of
       State on 31 October 2014 to make a deportation order against him  as
       a result of his criminal offending.


    2. The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  11  October  1981,
       having been granted indefinite leave to enter in order to  join  his
       mother. Over the years, the appellant has  acquired  10  convictions
       for 26 offences stretching  over  the  period  October  1989  to  20
       November 2013.

    3. The conviction that triggered his appeal consisted of seven breaches
       of a non-molestation order prohibiting  him  contacting  his  former
       partner, N. He was sentenced to 26 weeks imprisonment. It followed a
       long history of offending including  a  conviction  at  the  Central
       Criminal Court on 26 September 1997 where  he  was  sentenced  to  4
       years imprisonment for armed robbery committed  in  June  1996.  The
       offence  involved  stealing  cash  from  a  female   victim   having
       threatened her with a sawn-off shotgun.  Concurrent  sentences  were
       imposed for possession of a firearm. On 23 May 2009 he was  involved
       in the attempted murder and robbery of two elderly females.


    4. The appellant did not attend the hearing of  his  appeal  at  Taylor
       House on 22 July 2015, nor  did  he  instruct  a  representative  to
       appear on his behalf. The Judge had before him information  relating
       to his history of  offending.  He  also  had  information  that  the
       appellant has six children in the United Kingdom  whose  ages  range
       from 6 to 18. He claimed that he was bisexual by orientation.

    5.  In  the  course  of  the  hearing,   Detective   Constable   Burton
       characterised the appellant as an exceptionally dangerous individual
       prepared to act violently and to prey upon the weak and  vulnerable.
       He gave graphic details of offending which took place in the  course
       of  a  single  day  in  which  he  and  an  accomplice  robbed  four
       individuals in four separate incidents.


    6. Unsurprisingly, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  concluded  that  the
       appellant was a particularly dangerous criminal and likely to commit
       serious crimes given the liberty to do so. No evidence was  provided
       as to be circumstances of his relationship with his  many  children,
       nor any attendant risk by reason of his unsubstantiated clam  to  be
       bisexual.. There was an overwhelming public  interest  in  deporting
       the appellant and that has not diminished by anything that has since
       intervened.   Indeed, his cynical attempts to play the system  as  I
       shall later describe render it even more expedient to remove him.

    7. The appellant instructed Ansah Solicitors  to  act  for  him  in  an
       appeal to the Upper Tribunal. It is hardly  conceivable  that  there
       might be a viable appeal  against  the  merits  of  his  deportation
       because the history of offending could only result in  his  removal.
       However, it was asserted in the grounds of appeal that the applicant
       was not aware of the hearing date and that he did  not  receive  any
       notification from the  Tribunal  in  respect  of  hearing  from  his
       representative, JCWI. His fresh  solicitors  relied  upon  a  letter
       written by  JCWI  which  appeared  to  support  the  assertion.  The
       appellant had provided no personal address  for  service.  Documents
       were served on his representative, JCWI. They had  sent  letters  to
       the appellant  including  the  notice  of  hearing  which  had  been
       returned by Royal Mail marked 'not called for'. It was claimed  that
       the appellant had provided the immigration  services  with  his  new
       address as he was reporting regularly.  It is also said he forwarded
       his new address  to  the  previous  representatives   and  they  did
       nothing with it. The allegations contained in the grounds of  appeal
       were that the  appellant  was  the  unfortunate  victim  of  serious
       dereliction of duty both on the part of the Home Office and JCWI.
    8. Lawful service of a notice of hearing upon an  appellant  who  faces
       deportation is fundamental to the rule of law. The right to attend a
       hearing is so basic that, even if  it  appears  the  appeal  has  no
       merit, a  determination  made  unlawfully  in  the  absence  of  the
       appellant will be, or is likely to be, set aside.


    9. I therefore gave directions that JCWI were to answer the allegations
       that have been made against them.

   10. Three witness statements have been provided to  explain  events.  Ms
       Nicola Burgess, employed  as  the  supervising  Solicitor  of  JCWI,
       described how  she  attended  on  the  appellant  at  his  place  of
       detention in October 2014 at which time the appellant  was  eligible
       for legal aid. He was then granted bail and was requested to provide
       proof of means in order to confirm his financial eligibility of  the
       legal aid.  An appointment was made which the  appellant  failed  to
       attend. Following the decision to deport him, however,  he  attended
       their offices and instructed that an appeal was launched without, at
       that time, the appellant having confirmed his means. JCWI attended a
       hearing on 15 December 2014 on the appellant's promise that he would
       provide proof of means. There  then  followed  a  series  of  missed
       appointments such that by 20 May 2015 on the  hearing  of  the  case
       management review,  JCWI  felt  compelled  to  attend  in  order  to
       safeguard the appellant's position. There then followed other failed
       appointments. The appellant failed to provide the requested proof of
       means.

   11. The matter was  set  down  for  hearing  on  22-23  July  2015.  The
       appellant was contacted at an address  some  six  weeks  before  the
       hearing but the appellant failed to  respond  or  provide  proof  of
       means. Understandably, JCWI were unable to continue to represent the
       appellant. Furthermore, he failed to notify JCWI that his uncle  was
       no longer supporting him and that he had changed address.  JCWI  did
       as best as they could by seeking to  notify  the  appellant  at  the
       latest address provided to them by the respondent. As there  was  no
       response, JCWI  could  do  no  other  than  cease  to  act  for  the
       appellant. They wrote to that effect to the appellant  in  the  most
       emphatic terms set out  in  paragraph  14  of  Ms  Burgess'  witness
       statement. JCWI notified the  Tribunal  that  they  were  no  longer
       acting. An attempt was made to deliver a letter by special  delivery
       prior to the hearing.

   12. On 12 February 2016 JCWI wrote to Ansah Solicitors:


         While we do have a file  of  your  client's  papers,  he  was  not
         formally a client of ours as he did  not  provide  us  with  either
         proof of means or instructions. We forwarded all  documentation  to
         the address he provided by recorded delivery. This was returned  to
         us by Royal Mail marked 'not called for'.


   13.  Thereafter  Ms  Burgess  explains  that  notwithstanding   numerous
       attempts to seek from the appellant proof of  means,  the  appellant
       failed to comply. The  two  attendances  before  the  Tribunal  were
       conducted without payment but in order to safeguard the  appellant's
       position. Until they had secured legal aid, they were not and  could
       not formally act on his behalf.  I  had  thought  that  the  special
       delivery package sent to the appellant in time for  him  to  respond
       had been returned 'not called for' prior to the hearing. Ms  Burgess
       however tells me that  this  was  not  until  5  September  2015  as
       confirmed by markings on  the  envelope.  Hence,  JCWI  were  in  no
       position to inform the Tribunal prior to the hearing that there  had
       been no effective service. I am quite satisfied that the  blame  for
       the appellant's failure to attend the hearing was not the result  of
       improper conduct on the part of JCWI.


   14. I caused a copy of  the  witness  statements  from  JCWI  and  their
       attachments to be  sent  to  the  appellant  and  Ansah  Solicitors.
       Neither has responded to their contents.  The grounds of appeal  are
       without any foundation.  I directed that a letter be  sent  to  JCWI
       indicating that  I  no  longer  required  their  attendance  at  the
       hearing.

   15. The hearing on 11 July 2016, was, unusually, to be an  oral  hearing
       to determine the application in the Upper Tribunal for permission to
       appeal and (if granted) the substantive hearing of the  appeal  -  a
       'rolled-up' hearing. I was satisfied that the appellant's solicitors
       were served by first class post  on  10  June  2016.  They  did  not
       attend. I am also satisfied that the appellant himself was  notified
       of the hearing by first class post on the same day.

   16. The grounds of appeal are simply untrue.  There  was  no  procedural
       unfairness. This is the only ground of appeal relied upon. There was
       not, and there could not be, a viable challenge to the substance  of
       the appeal.


    DECISION


     a) I refuse permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
     b) Had I decided to grant  permission,  I  would  have  dismissed  the
        appeal for the reasons given. The Judge made no error on a point of
        law and the original determination of the appeal shall stand.








                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                15 July 2016



