
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10257/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 December 2015                   |On 14 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                mohammed nabi
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Samra, Harbans Singh Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The dispute at the heart of this appeal is whether First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge A Green  made  relevant  findings  about  the  appellant's  fears
    relating to the Home Office's allegation  that  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect him to relocate to Kabul.

 2. To put this  question  in  context,  Judge  Green  made  the  following
    findings in paragraphs 36 and 37 of his decision and reasons  statement
    that was promulgated on 23 January 2015.

         "36. In summary for  the  reasons  give  above,  I  find  that  the
         Appellant has been subjected to past persecution at  the  hands  of
         the Taliban.  He was threatened with forcible recruitment.  He  has
         been threatened with death or serious injury because of his refusal
         to co-operate with the Taliban.  The Taliban  killed  his  brother.
         In reaching this conclusion, I am mindful of paragraph 339K of  the
         Immigration  Rules.   I  must  now  consider  whether  there  is  a
         reasonable likelihood of persecution in the future.

         37.  Given the Taliban's strength  in  Helmand,  it  is  reasonably
         likely that were the Appellant to return to his  home  village,  he
         would be persecuted in the future.  The Appellant has not, however,
         provided any recent evidence of the threat of persecution  that  he
         could face on his return.  His brother  was  tragically  killed  in
         July 2011, 3 years and six months before this hearing.  He has  not
         provided any more recent evidence to suggest that the  Taliban  are
         actively looking for him.  Given the significance of the  death  of
         his brother, I am prepared to  accept  that  there  is  a  risk  of
         persecution on his return.  However, is his life in danger wherever
         he lives in Afghanistan?  This leads to the  question  of  internal
         relocation and,  in  particular,  to  Kabul  (as  proposed  by  the
         Respondent)."

 3. Of course, it is well established in law that a person is not a refugee
    or otherwise in need of  international  protection  if  their  fear  of
    persecution does not extend to all parts of their  country  of  origin.
    This  is  enshrined  in  article  8  of  the  Qualification   Directive
    (2004/83/EC) as discussed by the House of Lords in Januzi and others  v
    SSHD [2006] UKHL 5.  There is no challenge to  the  legal  authorities;
    the challenge is to whether Judge Green applied the law correctly.

 4. Article  8  of  the  Qualification  Directive  contains  the  following
    provisions:

         'Internal protection

         1.   As part of the assessment of the application for international
         protection, Member States may determine that an applicant is not in
         need of international protection if in a part  of  the  country  of
         origin there is no well-founded fear of being persecuted or no real
         risk of suffering serious harm and the applicant can reasonably  be
         expected to stay in that part of the country.

         2.   In examining whether a part of the country  of  origin  is  in
         accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall  at  the  time  of
         taking the decision on the application have regard to  the  general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the applicant.'

 5. The principal argument is that Judge Green did not properly assess  the
    reasonableness of expecting the appellant to relocate to Kabul  because
    he did not have full regard to the general circumstances in Kabul or to
    the appellant's own circumstances.  As argued in the grounds of  appeal
    and as amplified by Mr Samra during the  hearing,  although  the  judge
    accurately recorded the appellant's fears  relating  to  relocation  to
    Kabul in paragraphs 40 and 43, the judge made no findings  about  those
    fears.

 6. In response, Mr Mills reminded me that although  Judge  Green  accepted
    the appellant's account of what happened  to  him  and  his  family  in
    Afghanistan,  those  events  happened  a  relatively  long  time   ago.
    Although it was open to the judge to find that the appellant  continued
    to have a well-founded fear of  persecution  in  Helmand,  the  country
    information current at the date of hearing (and which remains  current)
    indicated that the did not face a real risk  of  persecution  or  other
    serious harm in Kabul.

 7. Mr Mills submitted that the appellant's profile was not such  that  the
    Taliban would look for him in that city.  There  was  no  reason  other
    than speculation that the Taliban would devote resources  to  look  for
    him in Kabul and therefore the appellant could not draw any  beneficial
    inference from  RQ  (Afghan  National  Army  -  Hizb-i-Islami  -  risk)
    Afghanistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00013.

 8. Mr Mills also criticised the grant of permission  which  seemed  to  be
    based on Judge P J G White's  personal  knowledge  and  assumptions  of
    changes in the country situation relating to  safety  in  Kabul  and  a
    pending  country  guideline  case.   Mr  Mills  and   Mr   Samra   both
    acknowledged that these were not factors which  raised  arguable  legal
    error in the decision  and  reasons  statement  appealed  against.   In
    addition, it is clear that TG  and  others  (Afghan  Sikhs  persecuted)
    Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 595 (IAC)  provides  no  useful  information
    about the general situation in Kabul.

 9. Turning to the question of whether it was unduly harsh  to  expect  the
    appellant to relocate to Kabul, Mr Mills reminded me that  Judge  Green
    had considered the appellant's abilities and circumstances at paragraph
    51 and upon that analysis had  concluded  that  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant to live in Kabul bearing in mind the evidence that
    there was sufficient protection available from the State authorities in
    that city (see paragraph 52).

10. In reply, Mr Samra focused on the fact that Judge Green had  failed  to
    consider the possibility of what might happen to the  appellant  should
    his presence in Kabul be discovered by the Taliban.

11. I reserved my decision and reasons which I now give.

12. As expressed by Mr Samra,  two  issues  arise  in  this  case.   First,
    whether Judge Green properly assessed the fears the  appellant  has  in
    Kabul.  Secondly, whether Judge Green dealt properly with the  evidence
    when he found it was reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate  to
    Kabul.

13. In relation to the first issue, as Mr Samra submits, the  decision  and
    reasons statement reveals that  Judge  Green  was  well  aware  of  the
    appellant's fears on return including  those  relating  to  Kabul  (see
    paragraphs 40 and 43).  I am satisfied that it is with these claims  in
    mind that Judge Green assessed the subjective and objective evidence to
    decide if the appellant had a well founded fear of persecution not only
    in Helmand but also in Kabul.  Key to that issue was  the  question  of
    whether there was adequate state protection available in Kabul.   I  am
    satisfied Judge Green addressed that issue in paragraphs 46 to 49.   In
    so doing, he gave clear reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim  to
    have a well founded fear of persecution in Kabul.

14. Judge Green then addressed the alternative issue about whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate to Kabul.  He did  this,
    drawing on his earlier findings, at paragraphs 50 to 52.   I  can  find
    nothing  in  those  paragraphs  to  suggest  he  was  unaware  of   the
    appellant's circumstances or to suggest that  he  did  not  pay  proper
    attention to the relevant statutory and case law.

15. For these reasons I find that  the  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal fails because I am satisfied that Judge Green's assessment  of
    the evidence and arguments and his application of the law  are  without
    error.  The arguments now presented relate to mere possibility which of
    course falls below the real risk  threshold.   Therefore,  I  find  the
    grounds of appeal are ones that amount to mere  disagreement  with  the
    judicial findings properly made.

Decision

The appellant's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed  because  the
decision and reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge Green  does  not
contain legal error.




                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
