
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Number: AA/10186/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Date Sent                    |
|On 12 June 2013                               |On 28 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL  JUDGE MARTIN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                 USMAN GHANI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                               Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant: Ms K Chandrasingh, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the respondent: Ms H Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is Usman Ghani, a national of Afghanistan. He  appealed  to
 the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State
 dated 1 November 2012 to refuse his application for asylum. Judge  of  the
 First-tier Tribunal Telford dismissed his  appeal.  He  now  appeals  with
 permission to this Tribunal.

2. On 14 May  2013  the  decision  of  Judge  Telford  in  relation  to  the
 appellant's asylum appeal was set aside. The reasons are set out fully  in
 the decision issued on that date, in summary the decision  was  set  aside
 because the Judge gave inadequate reasons for his findings as to the  core
 of the appellant's account.

3. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Telford  accepted  the  age  assessment
 carried out by Barnet Children's Services which assessed  the  appellant's
 date of birth as being 1 January 1993, 4 years earlier than  that  claimed
 by him, which made him 18 years old when he entered the UK in  July  2011.
 The appellant did not challenge the Judge's findings in  relation  to  the
 age assessment. The reasoning for the  age  assessment  was  found  to  be
 adequate and that part of the decision as set out at paragraphs 40-46  was
 preserved.

4. At the resumed hearing Ms Chandrasingh applied for an adjournment as  the
 appellant was not present in court. She  said  that  he  is  currently  in
 Birmingham and claimed  that  he  did  not  receive  notification  of  the
 hearing. She said  that  the  interpreter  she  spoke  to  said  that  the
 appellant may not have understood when the hearing was to take place.

5. The panel refused the request for an adjournment. We were satisfied  that
 the appellant and his solicitors had been notified of the decision to  set
 aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and had received a Notice of
 the resumed hearing at the addresses given on the Notice of Appeal to  the
 Upper Tribunal. Further, the date for the resumed hearing had been set  at
 the hearing on 14 May 2013 when the First-tier Tribunal decision  was  set
 aside. We also considered that the appellant's solicitors must  have  been
 in contact with him about the resumed hearing in order to comply with  the
 directions and to prepare for the hearing.

6. We were therefore satisfied that the appellant was properly  informed  of
 the date and time of the resumed hearing and that it was fair and just  to
 proceed with the hearing in the absence of the appellant in  keeping  with
 the overriding objective of the Upper Tribunal set out in Rule  2  of  the
 Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. We indicated that we would
 remake the decision on the evidence before the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
 Tribunal including the oral evidence recorded at paragraphs  8-27  of  the
 First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision. Ms Chandrasingh  accepted  that  the
 recording of the evidence was not challenged. We heard submissions from Ms
 Horsley and Ms Chandrasingh.

Assessment

7. The appellant's account is  set  out  in  the  record  of  the  screening
 interview of 2 August 2011, the Statement of Evidence Form (SEF) interview
 of 1 September 2011, the witness statements  of  15  August  2011  and  30
 November 2012 and the record of oral evidence set out in the Judge of  the
 First-tier Tribunal's decision.

8. In summary the appellant claims that he is  from  Nangarhar  province  in
 Afghanistan. He claims that when he was around two years  old  his  father
 and paternal uncle were killed by the Taliban for refusing to  join  them.
 When he was around 5 years old the Taliban  came  to  his  home,  hit  his
 mother and took him away in a car. He was taken to a base where many other
 children were being held and trained to be  suicide  bombers.  He  escaped
 after two or three days and stopped a lorry  on  the  main  road  and  the
 driver took him to a place near his village, he then  walked  for  two  or
 three hours before he reached his house. When he was around  9  years  old
 the Taliban visited the house but he was at  the  mosque,  they  beat  his
 mother. When he was around 13 years old the Taliban came to his house  for
 the third and final time and again he was at  the  mosque.  The  appellant
 claims that his mother decided to send him to Pakistan and she  sold  land
 to finance his journey. He claims that he left Afghanistan about eight and
 a half months before his asylum interview and stayed  with  his  uncle  in
 Pakistan for 15 days and that he then travelled to the UK.

9. The Judge's findings in relation to the age assessment raise  fundamental
 issues in the appellant's case. Firstly the fact that he was  prepared  to
 lie about his age casts doubt over his credibility generally. Secondly the
 findings fundamentally affect the chronology of his account. The appellant
 did not put forward any evidence  to  deal  with  the  chronology  of  his
 account in light of the age  assessment.  There  was  no  further  witness
 statement prepared for the resumed hearing and he did not attend  to  give
 oral evidence.

10.  Further,  the  age  assessment  finding   fundamentally   damages   the
 credibility of the  appellant's  account  in  the  context  of  events  in
 Afghanistan. The Judge found that he was  born  on  1  January  1993.  The
 appellant claims that his  father  and  paternal  uncle  were  killed  for
 refusing to join the Taliban when he was 2 years old. This would have been
 in 1995. The background evidence Ms Chandrasingh relied on to support  her
 submission that the Taliban were forcibly recruiting men (at  pages  16-21
 of the appellant's bundle) was published in 2011 and  refers  to  evidence
 from 2001. She did not submit any  evidence  to  support  the  appellant's
 claim that the Taliban were forcibly recruiting adult men in  1995,  prior
 to the 2001 invasion. Ms Chandrasingh submitted  that  the  appellant  was
 told that he was 2 years old when this happened but that he may  not  have
 been. However all of the subsequent events in the appellant's account flow
 from this event and are timed in relation  to  this  event.  Further,  the
 appellant failed to take the opportunity to put forward  further  evidence
 to clarify this.

11. The appellant claims that he was taken by the  Taliban  when  he  was  5
 years old. This would have been in 1998. Again there is no evidence before
 us that the Taliban were forcibly recruiting children in 1998 prior to the
 2001 invasion. The evidence relied on by Ms Chandrasingh related to 2010.

12. The appellant claims that he left Afghanistan after the  last  visit  by
 the Taliban when he was 13 years old. According to the age assessment this
 would have been in 2006. The appellant said that he left his home two days
 after the Taliban visited and that he went to  Pakistan  where  he  stayed
 with his uncle for 15 days  before  travelling  on  to  the  UK.  This  is
 inconsistent with his claim to have arrived in the UK around July 2011.

13. There are further issues of credibility in relation to  the  appellant's
 account. The appellant claims that he had a maternal uncle in Pakistan. If
 the appellant's father and paternal uncle had been killed when  he  was  2
 years old, his mother had been beaten and the appellant taken when he  was
 5 years old and his mother was beaten when the appellant was 9  years  old
 it is not credible that his  mother  would  not  have  relocated  or  left
 Afghanistan for Pakistan to join  her  brother  after  any  one  of  these
 events. She clearly had the resources to do so, having been able  to  sell
 land after the death of her husband and  again  to  fund  the  appellant's
 journey abroad. The fact that she did not do so undermines the credibility
 of the appellant's account.

14. The appellant's account of his capture and escape at the  age  of  5  is
 not credible. It is not credible that any 5 year old child in any  country
 would be able to flag down a lorry, get a lift to his area  and  make  his
 way home from where he was dropped off without knowing his home address as
 described at paragraph 4 of his witness statement of 15 August  2011.  Had
 the Taliban wanted to find the appellant after his claimed escape when  he
 was 5 years old they could have found him immediately as  he  claims  that
 they had previously taken him from his home and when he returned he claims
 that he did not leave the house except for brief trips to the mosque.

15. According to the appellant's account the Taliban did not  look  for  him
 again until four years later when he was 9 years old. They came  once  and
 he was not there, they did not return for another four years when  he  was
 13 years old. If the Taliban had been interested  in  forcibly  recruiting
 the appellant during this period they could have easily found him and done
 so. It is not credible that they  would  have  left  such  long  intervals
 between looking for him and that on each occasion when they did  not  find
 him they did not return within a short period.  Even  if  the  appellant's
 account were credible we do not accept that the Taliban had  any  interest
 in him. Apart from three visits to his home over a period of 8  years  the
 Taliban have shown no interest in the appellant. They made no enquiries as
 to his whereabouts on the two occasions they came and he was not at  home.
 Had they done so they would have found him at the mosque.

16. According to the age assessment the appellant would have been  13  years
 old in 2006. He claims that he left Afghanistan two days after that visit.
 He has not given any explanation as to  where  he  was  between  then  and
 arriving in the UK in July 2011. This gap in his account for a period of 5
 years fundamentally damages the credibility of his account.

17. We have considered all of this evidence and do not accept  any  part  of
 the appellant's account. In these circumstances  we  do  not  accept  that
 there is a real risk that the appellant will face persecution upon  return
 to Afghanistan.

Asylum

18. The appellant has not demonstrated that he has a  well-founded  fear  of
 persecution in Afghanistan.

Humanitarian Protection

19. The appellant is not entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  as  he  can
 return to Afghanistan without fear of Article 15 (c) harm.

ECHR

20. The appellant has not shown that he faces a risk of death or inhuman  or
 degrading treatment in Afghanistan in breach of Article 2  and  3  of  the
 European Convention on Human Rights. We have also considered Article 8  of
 the ECHR. The appellant has not shown that he  has  established  a  family
 life in the UK. In his statement of 30 November  2012  he  referred  to  a
 distant relative with whom he stayed for a few months after his arrival in
 the UK but said that he no longer has contact with him. In that  statement
 he also referred to his distant relative's a friend, Sher Khan, with  whom
 he lives. However there is no evidence from Mr Khan as to his relationship
 with the appellant. In that statement the appellant also said that he  has
 not worked or studied in the UK since arriving here. He  has  provided  no
 evidence of any private life established in the UK since  coming  here  in
 July 2011. We are not satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  established  a
 family or private life in the UK such as  to  engage  Article  8.  He  has
 family in Afghanistan. The appellant has not demonstrated that  any  other
 provision of the ECHR would be breached by his removal to Afghanistan.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision and remake it.

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed
                    Date:  26 June 2013


A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




















