
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10351/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22nd May 2013                              |On 28th June 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                    MR VA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative  or attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior home Office Presenting officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 18th October 1989.   He
    sought to claim asylum or other protection in the United Kingdom, which
    application was refused  by  the  respondent  in  a  letter  dated  2nd
    November 2012.
2.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal on 17th December  2012.   The
    appeal was dismissed in all  respects.  Leave  to  appeal  was  however
    granted against that decision and the matter first came  before  me  in
    pursuance of that grant on 4th March 2012.

3.   On that occasion neither the appellant attended nor any  representative
    on his behalf.  A letter from  his  solicitors  dated  4th  March  2012
    indicated that they were without instructions.  Letters written to  the
    appellant at the stated address had received no response.  In  fairness
    to the appellant I adjourned the hearing in order that  attempts  might
    be made to secure his attendance at the hearing.

4.   The hearing was resumed on 22nd May 2013.   Once  again  the  appellant
    did not attend.  Notification of the hearing was sent to the  appellant
    at his stated address.

5.   Mr Tarlow, who represents the respondent, confirmed that  that  address
    was the one held in the respondent's file.  Seemingly the appellant has
    failed to sign on as required under his bail conditions  for  the  past
    three months.

6.   In those circumstances it seemed  to  me  to  be  in  the  interest  of
    justice not to further delay the hearing and to proceed in his absence.
     Mr Tarlow invited me to find that there was in fact no material  error
    of law in the decision and that the grounds of appeal were  in  essence
    an attempt to re-argue the merits of the case.

7.   Essentially it was the  appellant's  claim  that  he  had  towards  the
    concluding part of the struggle in Sri Lanka been required  to  undergo
    LTTE training.  He was not a fighter but worked in the kitchen.  He was
    caught up in the struggle in the closing days of the conflict  and  had
    surrendered to the Sri Lankan Army.

8.   It was his case that he was transferred to camp Joseph for many  months
    and tortured on a  regular  basis  being  kept  in  a  single  cell  in
    detention.

9.    Having  secured  his  release  from  detention  the  appellant  sought
    thereafter to leave Sri Lanka which he did  on  his  own  newly  issued
    national passport with a legitimate visa issued  by  the  British  High
    Commission.

10.  The Judge did not consider  that  the  appellant  could  be  reasonably
    viewed as "a very serious member" of the LTTE.  Though he may well have
    been detained, as were many others of the LTTE at the conclusion of the
    conflict, it was the finding of the Judge that the appellant was of  no
    further interest to the authorities.  In particular  his  claim  to  be
    detained at camp Joseph for so long and in solitary confinement was not
    found to be reasonably likely given the profile of the appellant.

11.  The grounds of appeal rely on  eight  grounds.  In  particular  it  was
    stressed in the grounds that the appellant had been recruited under the
    LTTE's policy of taking one person per household and he had  been  with
    the LTTE  for  one  and  a  half  years  until  January  2009  when  he
    surrendered to the Sri Lankan  Army.   It  was  contended  that  little
    weight had been placed upon  the  imputed  political  opinion  and  his
    perceived involvement rather than by his actual involvement.

12.  It is clear from the determination that the Judge  has  considered  the
    history  of  the  appellant.  The  Judge  recognised  that  many   LTTE
    supporters or activists in the appellant's situation  and  circumstance
    did indeed surrender to the authorities at the  end  of  the  conflict,
    most of whom have now been released and  allowed  to  return  to  their
    homes.  In that  connection  the  Judge  considered  TK  (Tamils  -  LP
    updated) Sri Lanka CG [2009] UKAIT 00049.

13.  Criticism is made of the Judge for the approach taken  in  relation  to
    the detention at Joseph camp, particularly why the appellant being held
    in a single cell was implausible.

14.  Given the profile of the appellant as found to be the case  and  indeed
    as admitted by the appellant it was  considered  by  the  Judge  to  be
    implausible that the appellant would have  been  singled  out  for  the
    treatment which he has described at camp Joseph having been held  in  a
    single cell detention for many months.  Such treatment would clearly be
    consistent with somebody regarded  by  the  authorities  as  a  serious
    member of the LTTE but not for the appellant.

15.  It seems to me that that reasoning is properly open to be made  in  the
    circumstances.  It is also said in the grounds that the Judge failed to
    acknowledge the  ease  by  which  passports  can  be  obtained  in  any
    identity.  In essence it is contended that the Judge placed too greater
    weight upon the fact that the appellant could leave Sri  Lanka  on  his
    own passport.

16.  Clearly if he had been wanted  by  the  authorities  it  is  surprising
    indeed that he would have been able to leave with such ease.

17.  The other matters contend that improper findings were made in  relation
    to the scarring and in the pursuit of points seemingly  not  raised  by
    the respondent.

18.  I find that the Judge had taken into proper account the profile of  the
    appellant and had assessed the risks of return in  the  light  of  such
    findings.  Accordingly I  find  that  the  decision  was  one  properly
    arrived at and detect no material error of law.

19.  It is to be recognised, however, that the situation as set  out  in  TK
    has now been reconsidered by the Tribunal  in  a  more  recent  country
    guidance case.  No doubt if it  is  said  by  the  appellant  that  his
    profile, as found by the Tribunal, was such that it would now create  a
    risk upon return, an application could be made on that basis with fresh
    evidence to the respondent.

20.  However for the present purposes I do not find there to be  a  material
    error of law.  In those circumstances the appeal is dismissed.
21.  The decisions of the first-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.

Signed                                  Date 27th June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
