

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/10667/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                        |Decision Promulgated                 |
|on 12 May 2017                        |on 23 May 2017                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    B A-A
                                  (AKA ISA)
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: not represented
For the Respondent: Mr Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Colyer ('the Judge') promulgated on 11 November  2016  following  a
        hearing at the Nottingham Justice Centre on  4  October  2016.  The
        Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on both protection and human
        rights grounds.
     2. The appellant appealed. Permission was refused by another judge  of
        the First-tier Tribunal but granted on  a  renewed  application  by
        Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy, on 14 January 2017 in the  following
        terms:


   1. The grounds of appeal, drafted by the appellant, refer to  the  rights
      of the appellant under Article 8 of the  ECHR  and  to  those  of  her
      children. She emphasises that one of  her  children  is  British.  She
      asserts that she would be the victim of an honour killing. She  states
      that her husband cannot return with her to Iraq as he is settled here.
   2. It is clear that the judge set out and applied the  relevant  standard
      of proof and gives clear and detailed reasons  for  finding  that  the
      appellant is not credible and that she would not suffer persecution on
      return to Iraq.
   3. With regard to the appellant's rights under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR
      while it is of note that her claimed husband did not give evidence  on
      her behalf and there is scant evidence of the  relationship  there  is
      evidence that the second child is British. The Judge  does  appear  to
      have been in error when stating that the second child is not  British.
      That may be a material error when considering then appellant's  rights
      under Article 8 and I will therefore grant permission on  that  ground
      only.




Discussion



     3. With the application for permission to appeal the appellant  refers
        to the status of  her  second  child  as  a  British  citizen.  The
        appellant contends in the  Grounds  that  she  is  married  to  her
        husband who has indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  and  is,
        therefore, settled.
     4.  The  difficulty  for  the  assertion  relating  to   the   child's
        nationality is that the Judge specifically refers to there being no
        evidence to support the contention the appellant's  youngest  child
        is a British citizen in the evidence that was made available to the
        Judge. Indeed, at [124] the Judge specifically finds:


        124.  As in the above case, I find the appellant's children are not
             British citizens. I find the children have no right to  future
             education and health care in this country. The children are of
             an age when the children's emotional needs can  be  fully  met
             within the immediate family unit. I find that any  integration
             that  has  occurred  into  United  Kingdom  society  has  been
             predominantly  in  the  context  of  that  family  unit.  Most
             significantly, I find that the children can be removed to Iraq
             in the care of the appellant without serious detriment to  the
             children's well-being.


     5. It now transpires, by the production of  documents  that  were  not
        before the Judge, that the child SY, born on 18 April  2016,  is  a
        British citizen.
     6. Mr Bates having now seen evidence in the form of the child's  birth
        certificate, passport, and father's status, which  he  has  checked
        with the Home Office records, accepts that SY is a British child.
     7. Had these documents been before the Judge a different decision  may
        have been made but, as the Judge  had  no  evidence  regarding  the
        child's status as a British citizen, it cannot be  shown  that  the
        Judge has made a mistake of facts sufficient to amount to an  error
        of law.  The hearing took place on 4 October 2016 and  it  has  not
        been shown that the birth certificate or documents relating to  the
        status of the father were not in existence at that time.  The  copy
        UK passport shows a date of issue of 26 May  2016  which  was  also
        therefore a document in existence at the date of the  hearing.   It
        has not been properly explained why these documents were  not  made
        available to the Judge which appears to be because of a failure  to
        produce the same by the appellant, for which she is responsible.
     8. The Upper Tribunal was able to engage in discussion with  both  the
        appellant and her husband who attended to look after the  children,
        to discuss how they wish to proceed  in  light  of  the  facts  now
        known.
     9. It is understood that the respondent's published policy regarding a
        British national child makes it likely that  SY  will  be  able  to
        remain in the United Kingdom, where  his  father  is  settled,  and
        where his mother is likely to be granted status  as  the  child  is
        only very  young.  The  appellant  indicated,  with  her  husband's
        consent, that she wished to make a fresh application for  leave  to
        remain on Article 8 grounds which it is anticipated will  be  given
        proper consideration by the decision-maker.
    10. In relation to the name appearing on any subsequent application, it
        was agreed that it will be the appellant's proper lawful name which
        should be that appearing on the  previous  visit  visa  application
        forms referred to in the refusal letter relating to this matter.
    11. As no arguable error of fact sufficient to amount to  an  error  of
        law has been made out,  and  considering  the  fact  the  appellant
        elected to make a fresh application rather than pursue  the  matter
        any further, the appeal shall be dismissed  and  the  determination
        stand.


Decision

    12. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    13. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 22 May 2017





