
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10875/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th December 2016                 |On 15th December 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR PATRICK PLATT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Trevelyan (instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co,
Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
      Secretary of State in relation to a Decision and Reasons of the First-
      tier Tribunal (Judge Cruthers) promulgated on 26th  January  2016.  In
      his Decision and Reasons Judge Cruthers  was  determining  the  asylum
      appeal of a Jamaican Appellant born  19  July  1970.  He  had  claimed
      asylum on the basis that he was targeted by a gang and  also  that  he
      would be perceived to be gay due to his association with  someone  who
      was.


   2. For the sake of continuity and clarity I shall continue  to  refer  to
      the Secretary of State as the Respondent and Mr Pratt as the Appellant
      in this judgment.


   3. The Secretary of State, in the letter of refusal assessed the claim on
      the basis that the material facts were accepted in their entirety.


   4. The Judge  found,  by  reference  to  AB  (protection-criminal  gangs-
      internal relocation) Jamaica CG [2007] UKAIT 0018  that  the  evidence
      overall fell well short of establishing a real risk of persecutory ill-
      treatment in relation to gang violence. That finding  is  unchallenged
      in the Upper Tribunal.


   5. The  Judge  considered  the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  would  face
      persecutory ill-treatment as a perceived  homosexual  and  found  also
      that the evidence fell well short of establishing a real risk that the
      Appellant would be perceived as a homosexual in Jamaica. He  therefore
      dismissed the asylum claim and on  the  same  basis  the  humanitarian
      protection claim.


   6. The Judge then went on to consider Article 8 and  noted  that  he  had
      before him a medical report prepared  by  Prof  Katona,  a  consultant
      psychiatrist from the Helen Bamber Foundation dated December 2014.  He
      discounted the risk  of  suicide  finding  that  the  report  did  not
      establish a real risk of the Appellant taking his own life,  on  being
      told of any decision that he is to be removed, or in transit, or  once
      back in Jamaica.


   7. So far as Article 8 is concerned the Judge noted the Appellant had  no
      family life in the  UK  and  was  relying  on  his  private  life,  in
      particular his physical and moral integrity.


   8. The Judge accepted that the removal of the Appellant from the UK might
      well provoke a significant deterioration in  his  mental  health.  The
      Appellant suffers from schizophrenia, at that time with  predominantly
      negative features, although  he  had  previously  exhibited  psychotic
      features. The medical evidence indicated that schizophrenia carries  a
      poor prognosis and is a lifelong illness with a  tendency  to  relapse
      under stress. Notwithstanding that, the Judge found that  there  would
      be no very significant obstacles to the Appellant  reintegrating  into
      Jamaican society.


   9. The Judge then considered the  requirements  of  section  117  of  the
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and found  that  did  not  assist  the
      Appellant.


  10. The Judge then referred himself to the  guidance  of  SS  (Congo)  and
      others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 indicating that there  must  be  compelling
      circumstances to consider the Appellant's case outside the Immigration
      Rules. At paragraph 72 the  Judge  found  that  this  case  was  about
      proportionality and in particular whether there was a disproportionate
      interference with the Appellant's physical and moral integrity.


  11. The Judge found the Appellant  was  terrified  of  return  to  Jamaica
      because of what he perceives to be a continuing threat related to  the
      past murder of members of his family. The Judge found  that  the  fear
      was real to the Appellant, irrespective of whether it had an objective
      basis or was the product of his mental illness.  That finding  accords
      with the opinion of the medial expert.


  12. The Judge found that a return to Jamaica would result in the Appellant
      experiencing chronic  fear  and  stress  which  would  make  him  very
      vulnerable to a full-blown relapse of  his  psychotic  illness,  again
      accepting the expert's opinion.


  13. The Judge found that the Appellant's  adverse  experiences  of  mental
      health  treatment  in  Jamaica  and  his  mistrust  of  the   Jamaican
      authorities would make it unlikely that he  would  voluntarily  accept
      treatment for his mental illness if offered to him  in  Jamaica.  That
      would result in gradual deterioration to  the  point  where  he  would
      require compulsory treatment  such  as  that  to  which  he  had  been
      subjected after his uncle's murder. That finding also accords with the
      expert evidence.


  14. The Judge clarified, in his Decision and Reasons that, before deciding
      to allow the appeal on account of the Appellant's mental state, he had
      taken into account the fact  that  this  case  could  not  succeed  by
      reference to the Immigration Rules that dealt with Article 8 or indeed
      any other Immigration Rule; most of the factors in Part 5 were against
      the Appellant as were those matters contained in section  117  of  the
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. However,  taking  all  of  that  into
      account and also what is said in GS India, he accepted the Appellant's
      counsel's argument that  it  did  not  fall  foul  of  the  principles
      explained in GS India because it was the putative  adverse  impact  on
      his mental health that flowed directly from the proposed action by the
      British state. He allowed the appeal on the basis of Article 8 private
      life.


  15. The Secretary of State's challenge to that is that the Judge failed to
      apply the guidance of GS  India  correctly.  Mr  McVeety,  before  me,
      argued that Article 8 does not have a lower threshold than  Article  3
      and the Appellant had not succeeded under Article 3.


  16. This I find to be a finely balanced case. It is correct that case  law
      including GS India, confirms the extremely  high  threshold  before  a
      medical case can succeed under Article 3 of the ECHR and that where an
      Article 3 claim failed, Article 8 cannot prosper without some separate
      or additional factual element which brings the case within the Article
      8 paradigm; the core value protected being the quality  of  life,  not
      its continuance. GS also indicated that Article 8 cases may require  a
      different approach to Article 3.


  17. MM Zimbabwe [2012] EWCA Civ 279 noted that the courts have declined to
      say that Article 8 could never be engaged by the  health  consequences
      of removal but they had never found such a breach  and  had  not  been
      able to postulate circumstances in which such a breach was  likely  to
      be established.


  18. The Judge however did not decide this appeal based on the availability
      or adequacy of medical treatment in Jamaica. This was not  as  such  a
      health case in that sense. What the Judge decided in  this  particular
      case was that the Appellant  had  an  enduring  and  relapsing  mental
      disorder, namely schizophrenia for which he received treatment in  the
      UK. However, his fear in Jamaica,  genuinely  and  subjectively  held,
      albeit not objectively justified, would mean that he would be unlikely
      to seek any treatment for his disorder in Jamaica  inevitably  leading
      to a relapse into psychotic symptoms and then to  a  deterioration  in
      his illness to such a degree that if he were to be treated at  all  it
      would have to be on  a  compulsory  basis.  He  had  experienced  that
      previously in Jamaica which had added to his fears. That was the  view
      of the expert. The Judge, for these reasons distinguished GS India and
      MM Zimbabwe and this, although perhaps not  a  conclusion  that  would
      have been reached by all Judges was not irrational or perverse and was
      based on the evidence before him and as such I find it is not  tainted
      by material error of law.


       Decision

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


    There having been no application for an anonymity order I do  not  make
    one.


Signed                              Date 15th December 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
