
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10123/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 November 2016                   |On 11 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ARFON-JONES DL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    Y S D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Hodgetts instructed by South West Law

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity  direction  made  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in its decision dated 9 September 2016.

 2. The claimant (YSD) is a citizen of Somalia who was born  on  1  January
    1969.  He left Somalia in 1997 and thereafter lived in Saudi Arabia and
    the Netherlands.  In 2010, he  came  to  the  UK  where  his  wife  and
    children were living and claimed asylum.  The basis of  his  claim  was
    that he was from the Shiidle  or  Bantu  clan  and  had  lived  in  the
    Shabelle region of Somalia.  He claimed that his bakery had been looted
    by members of the majority, Abgaal clan in 1992 and that  he  had  been
    shot in the leg.  Thereafter, he left his home area, eventually  moving
    to Mogadishu, before leaving Somalia in 1997.

 3. On 1 July 2015, the Secretary of State rejected  the  claimant's  claim
    for asylum including not accepting that he was a member of the minority
    Shiidle or Bantu clan.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    dated 1 May 2016, Judge Povey allowed the claimant's appeal under Art 3
    of the ECHR.  Judge Povey accepted that the appellant would be at  risk
    in his home area in Somalia and that,  if  returned  to  Mogadishu,  he
    would be without financial or other support and would be forced to live
    in an IDP camp in conditions which would breach Art 3 of the ECHR.

 5. With permission, the Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal.
     The appeal was heard by  UTJ  Grubb  on  6  September  2016.   It  was
    accepted by both parties that Judge Povey had found that the  appellant
    was at risk in his  home  area.   The  issue  was,  therefore,  one  of
    internal relocation to Mogadishu.  The Secretary of State  argued  that
    Judge Povey had erred in law in finding that the appellant would be  at
    risk of ill-treatment falling within Art 3 as a result of living in  an
    IDP camp if he returned to Mogadishu.

 6. In a decision dated 9 September 2016,  UTJ  Grubb  concluded  that  the
    judge had erred in law in allowing the appeal, in effect, under  Art  3
    on that basis.  The full reasons are set out in UTJ Grubb's decision of
    9 September 2016 and need not be repeated here.

 7. As a consequence, Judge Povey's decision to allow the  appeal  was  set
    aside and the appeal relisted for a resumed hearing solely to determine
    whether the claimant had the option of internal relocation to Mogadishu
    and whether his return there would breach Art 3 or, if  not,  would  in
    any event be unduly harsh or unreasonable.  A number of  Judge  Povey's
    findings were preserved in relation to the claimant's clan  membership,
    that he would not be able to obtain clan and family support on  return,
    that he had no real prospect of securing  access  to  a  livelihood  in
    Mogadishu and that his relatives in the UK would be unable  to  provide
    financial support (see para 45 of the UT's determination).

 8. The resumed hearing was listed before the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Grubb and
    DUTJ Arfon-Jones) on 8 November 2016.

 9. At the  outset  of  the  hearing,  Mr  Richards,  who  represented  the
    Secretary of State, indicated that the Secretary  of  State  no  longer
    sought to contest the claimant's appeal.  He invited  the  Tribunal  to
    allow the claimant's appeal on asylum grounds on the basis that,  given
    the preserved findings, it would be unduly  harsh  or  unreasonable  to
    expect the claimant to relocate to Mogadishu.

10. In the light of that concession, which was entirely appropriate in  the
    circumstances of this appeal, we allow the claimant's appeal on  asylum
    grounds.




                                 Signed


                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                                 Date
