
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10658/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 9 February 2016                       |              On 17 March 2016       |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                           JUDE KILBERT JEYASINGAM
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss. A. Seehra, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N M Paul, promulgated on 11 August  2015,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum and to remove the Appellant to Sri Lanka.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "It is arguable that First-tier Tribunal Judge N M Paul  erred  in  his
    assessment of the evidence of the Sri Lankan lawyer (see  paragraph  45
    of the determination), given his bona fides were accepted  and  he  had
    reported that the reason given by the authorities   for  arresting  the
    appellant's  father was the appellant."


 3. At the hearing I heard submissions from both representatives  following
    which I reserved my  decision.   I  set  out  my  decision  below  with
    reasons.

Submissions


 4. Miss. Seehra relied on the grounds of appeal.  She submitted  that  the
    findings of fact  were  limited,  in  particular  in  relation  to  the
    disapora activities.  In relation to the lawyer's letter,  it  had  not
    been submitted that the  lawyer  had  been  involved  in  discreditable
    conduct and he had not been challenged.  In  paragraph  [45]  his  bona
    fides were accepted.  However the judge then found that the lawyer  had
    lied and there was a lack of basis and reasoning for this finding.


 5. There was evidence before the  judge  that  the  authorities  had  been
    interested in the Appellant, which interest had intensified around  the
    date of the Appellant's sister's wedding as the authorities had thought
    he would return to Sri Lanka.  Following that  the  Appellant's  father
    was arrested.  There had been other corroborative evidence  as  to  why
    the Appellant's father had been arrested in 2012.


 6. In relation to the second ground, the Appellant's cousin  had  attended
    court in support.  There had been a detailed statement  given  by  him.
    He stated that after the Appellant's third arrest he saw  a  change  in
    the Appellant.  There had been no findings of  fact  made  as  to  this
    witness and his evidence had not been factored in.


 7. In relation to the third ground, there had been a detailed report  from
    Dr. Mason which had not been put  to  the  Appellant  at  all.   I  was
    referred to the case of RR (challenging evidence) Sri Lanka [2010] UKUT
    274 in paragraph 8 of the grounds of appeal.  No real reason  had  been
    given for not attaching weight to the reports  of  Dr.  Mason  and  Dr.
    Heller. The summary at paragraph [49] was not reflective of Dr. Mason's
    report.  I was referred to paragraphs 6.2 and 7 of Dr. Mason's  report.
    In his overall conclusion he had  found  that  the  scars  were  highly
    consistent with the Appellant's account.


 8. In relation to the fourth ground,  the  authorities  had  a  continuing
    interest in the Appellant.  Relevant evidence had been put forward from
    his lawyer and his mother.  From pages 100 to 144 there was evidence of
    several events where the Appellant had been identified on the internet.
     There was no detail in the decision of the fact that he was  a  member
    of proscribed organisations.  His statement explained the events  which
    were recorded in the evidence.  There had not been a proper analysis of
    GJ and Others [2013] UKUT 00319.   The  Appellant's  mother's  evidence
    where she stated that  the  authorities  were  aware  of  his  diaspora
    activities had not been mentioned.


 9. In summary she submitted that the findings did not address the core  of
    the claim or look at the evidence.


10. Mr. Avery submitted in relation to the first ground that he did not see
    anything wrong with the approach in paragraph [45].  There was no  onus
    on the judge to approach the evidence of a lawyer any other way  except
    to use the same principles as Tanveer Ahmed.   Paragraph  [45]  was  in
    accordance with the law and was sound.  Looking at it in the round  the
    judge had taken the correct  approach.   The  letter  from  the  lawyer
    merely detailed what he had been told by someone about the  Appellant's
    father's arrest.


11. In relation to the second ground, this was not  corroborative  evidence
    of ill-treatment. On a reading of the statement it was  just  that  the
    Appellant's cousin's view was that his mood and behaviour had  changed,
    but he had no direct knowledge of what had happened.


12. In relation to the third ground, the  judge  had  treated  the  medical
    evidence in accordance with the  law.   There  was  a  lack  of  proper
    evidence from the Appellant's GP.  The conclusion was not borne out  by
    the observations. I was referred to paragraph 6 onwards of  the  report
    of Dr. Mason.  He had stated that there was no way of telling that  the
    scarring had occurred when the Appellant said it did and it  could  not
    be attributed to any particular set of circumstances.  Dr. Mason  found
    that the Appellant  had  injuries  but  how  he  acquired  them  was  a
    difficulty.  His last arrest was not accepted by the Respondent and the
    observations in paragraph [46] onwards were perfectly proper.


13. In relation to the fourth ground, the Appellant's  activities  had  not
    started until 2014 which caused the  judge  to  doubt  his  motivation.
    This was perfectly proper.  Being at demonstrations did not  in  itself
    establish in and of itself that he would be at  risk.   The  judge  was
    entitled to find that he was not a threat to the Sri Lankan state.


14. In summary, the grounds were no more than disagreement and as  a  whole
    the judge had had careful regard to the evidence.


15. In response Miss. Seehra submitted that the bona fides  of  the  lawyer
    had been accepted.  I was  referred  to  page  22  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle.  The lawyer had direct knowledge of the Appellant's father.  In
    relation to the second ground, the judge gave no reasons  for  why  the
    witness's evidence was rejected.  Mr. Avery had given  reasons  why  he
    thought it had  been  rejected,  but  this  was  not  enough.   It  was
    incumbent on the judge to give reasons.  Neither had  the  judge  given
    reasons for why the letters from the  mother  and  the  aunt  had  been
    rejected.  The medical  evidence  was  quite  clear.   The  conclusions
    supported the Appellant's account.


Error of Law Decision


Ground 1

16. In paragraph [45] the judge states:


    "Hence it is that I find that the circumstances surrounding the  arrest
    of the appellant's father in October 2012 to be highly  suspicious.   I
    take on board the observations made by Ms Seehra  in  relation  to  the
    case of PJ, and in particular the reliability, or otherwise, of lawyers
    in Sri Lanka.  Whilst I accept that the letter from the Lawyer may well
    have been written by somebody whose bona fides cannot be criticised,  I
    am satisfied that the circumstances of the appellant's father's  arrest
    (for whatever reason it took place - indeed if it did take place)  does
    not, in my view, provide a credible account."


17. The judge accepts the bona fides of the lawyer but does not accept  the
    contents of his letter.  However, he gives no reasons as to why he does
    not accept the letter.  The letter sets out that the Appellant's father
    was detained as the authorities came looking  for  the  Appellant.   He
    describes the Appellant's father as his client and states that  he  was
    instructed by the Appellant's mother the day after he was arrested,  21
    October 2012.  He states that the Appellant's father was released on  8
    November 2012.  The judge does not give any reasons for why he does not
    find this letter to be evidence of the Appellant's father's arrest.  He
    just states that he is satisfied that the circumstances of  the  arrest
    do not provide a credible account.  I find that this  failure  to  give
    reasons for rejecting the evidence of the lawyer is an error of law.


18. As submitted by the  Appellant's  representative,  other  evidence  was
    provided to corroborate the account that  the  Appellant's  father  had
    been arrested in 2012.  I find that the judge has erred in law  in  his
    approach to this evidence.


Ground 2


19. In relation to the witness  evidence,  there  is  no  mention  of  this
    evidence in the findings.  Mr. Avery submitted that, in his view,  this
    evidence did not add much and gave reasons for why.  However, this  for
    the judge to do.  The judge has not given any reasons as to why he  has
    not considered or given any weight to the evidence of  the  Appellant's
    cousin.

Ground 3


20. In relation to the  medical  evidence,  I  find  that  the  summary  in
    paragraph [49] is not correct given paragraphs 6.2 and 7 of Dr  Mason's
    report.  Paragraph 6.2 states:


    "There is however no way of telling for certain that the  fractures  of
    Mr. Jeyasingam's left arm occurred at the time and in the circumstances
    that he describes in his report although, as  indicated,  the  clinical
    findings strongly support his contention."


21. Paragraph 7 states:


    "Following my evaluation of Mr. Jeyasingam's scars, in particular their
    appearance, patterns of distribution and other characteristics,  it  is
    my overall opinion that they are highly consistent with his account  as
    to the manner in which the reasons that caused them arose.   The  scars
    on his left arm are in themselves diagnostic of his having undergone an
    operation to reduce broken bones in his left forearm although the  time
    and the cause of these fractures cannot be discerned from their present
    characteristics.  The scars on his right lower leg and  his  left  foot
    are  consistent  with  Mr.  Jeyasingam's  account  being  beaten  there
    although  accidental  injuries  might  also   cause   scars   of   such
    appearance."


22. In paragraph [49] of the decision the judge states:


    "In any event, having  regard  to  the  totality  of  the  evidence,  I
    consider that Mr Mason's view that the injuries that occurred  were  at
    least consistent with everyday activities and/or accidents  that  might
    have occurred further undermines the claim that they are linked to  any
    specific allegations of torture."


23. This is not an accurate  summary  of  what  Dr.  Mason  concluded,  but
    underplays his conclusions.


Ground 4


24. In relation to the Appellant's diaspora activities, evidence  of  these
    was provided in the bundle running to some  44  pages.   The  Appellant
    explained these documents in his witness  statement.   The  Appellant's
    activities in the United Kingdom are mentioned in paragraph [52] of the
    decision, but there is no assessment in this paragraph to the  evidence
    provided by the Appellant, or  to  his  explanation,  set  out  in  his
    witness statement, of the events that he has attended.  The  judge  has
    not done a thorough analysis of GJ.  He has just stated that he is  not
    satisfied that any of the risk factors apply, without setting out which
    risk factors he is considering, and why they do not apply.  I find that
    his failure to address the relevant country guidance case  law  in  any
    detail is an error of law.


25. Paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice  Statement  dated  10  February  2010
    contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    where the effect of the error has been to deprive a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing  or  other  opportunity  for  the
    party's case to be put to and considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Given the nature and extent of the  fact-finding  necessary  to  enable
    this appeal to be remade, having regard to the overriding objective,  I
    find that it is appropriate  to  remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

   26. I find that the decision involves the making of material  errors  of
       law and I set the decision aside.


   27. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

No anonymity direction was requested and none was  made  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal.  I see no reason to make one now.




Signed                                  Date 4 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain



