
[pic]




UPPER TRIBUNAL


IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER    Appeal No. AA/10846/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 01 June 2015                      |On 04 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
                          Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


                                   Between

                                     AA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, instructed by A H Law Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the determination promulgated on  19  January
    2015 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope which  refused  the  asylum  and
    human rights appeal of the appellant.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to  avoid
    a likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant from  the  issues
    put forward in AA's protection claim.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. Her claim for asylum is made on
    the grounds that she fears harm from her family and others on return to
    Pakistan as a result of her sexual conduct in the UK, reported  to  the
    authorities in Pakistan by  her  family  and  resulting  in  an  arrest
    warrant and her status as a single woman who has had a child outside of
    marriage.

 4. It was part of the appellant's claim that whilst in the UK she  entered
    into an Islamic marriage with a man who  was  physically  and  sexually
    abusive towards her and subsequently left her, denouncing  her  to  her
    family in Pakistan.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope found  that  the  appellant  was  not  a
    reliable witness and that her account of her history in the UK  and  of
    the harm that would arise on return to Pakistan was not credible. Judge
    Cope  draws  a  clear  conclusion  in  this  regard  at  [105]  of  the
    determination.

 6. Part of the  reasoning  that  led  to  the  conclusion  on  credibility
    concerned a psychiatric report dated 6 October 2014 of Dr M F  Hussain.
    At [42] and [43], the First-tier Tribunal  stated that:

         "42. There is a particularly significant matter that is only raised
         in the report from Dr Hussain. This is an allegation  made  by  the
         Appellant that her husband had raped her and sexually  abused  her.
         In addition the assaults on her took place on  multiple  occasions,
         and he would lock her in the room when he went out.

         43. This allegation of rape, and  the  degree  and  extent  of  the
         physical abuse, have  not  been  raised  elsewhere  in  the  asylum
         application process."

 7. At [44] - [45] Judge Cope found that  it  was  not  credible  that  the
    appellant would only mention these matters to Dr Hussain. She  went  on
    at [47] to find that it was "[e]ven more surprising" that the appellant
    had not disclosed this mistreatment to a worker from the  HALO  project
    who was female, spoke Urdu  and  where  the  HALO  project  focuses  on
    assisting women involved in honour-based violence and forced marriage.

 8. At [49], the judge states:

         "I consider that the manner in which the  Appellant  disclosed  the
         sexual and physical abuse to Dr Hussain and the lack of any further
         mention of it or previous referral during (sic) asylum  application
         process raises very serious doubt as to whether  the  Appellant  is
         being truthful even allowing for  the  difficulties  that  a  woman
         might feel in disclosing such abuse."

 9. Mr Walker conceded for the respondent that the First-tier Tribunal  was
    in error in stating that the appellant only disclosed to Dr Hussain the
    abuse she suffered within her Islamic marriage. As set out in paragraph
    4(b)-(d) of the appellant's grounds, she has disclosed it elsewhere, in
    the "Child at Risk" form dated 6  June  2014  and  Children's  Services
    Department Child and Family Assessment dated 14 May 2014  (both  handed
    up at the hearing on 26 November 2013), the letter dated 27 May 2014 of
    Dr Doukova (at 19-23 of the appellant's bundle) and in the medico-legal
    report dated 1 January 2014 of Ms Forbes (at 81-107 of the  appellant's
    bundle).

10. Further, although the HALO Project letter dated 25 September  2014  (at
    15-18 of the appellant's bundle) did  not  refer  in  terms  to  sexual
    abuse, it did refer at pages 15, 16 and 22 to violence having  occurred
    within the appellant's marriage and previous relationships.

11. There is no dispute that these document were before the  First-tier  as
    indicated at [37] of the determination. We should point  out,  however,
    that it was not clear to us that the  evidence  of  disclosure  of  the
    abuse to the appellant's GP on 10 April 2014 as  contained  in  her  GP
    records was before the First-tier Tribunal, a copy  being  attached  to
    the grounds of appeal against the decision of Judge Cope  and  a  loose
    copy on file, so we took paragraph 4(a) of the grounds no further.

12. Mr Walker did not go as far as to concede that the mistake  as  to  the
    appellant disclosing abuse only to Dr Hussain was material, however. It
    was our view that this was so  where  the  First-tier  Tribunal  placed
    particular weight  on  this  mistaken   finding,  referring  to  it  as
    "significant" and as raising "very serious doubt" about the appellant's
    reliability as a witness. This was additionally so given  the  positive
    findings at [32]  and  [33]  that  the  appellant  had  been  generally
    consistent across her various accounts  and  that  this  supported  her
    credibility. Those matters being so we could not be  certain  that  the
    outcome of the appeal would have been the same had the  mistake  as  to
    the appellant disclosing her abuse  within  her  marriage  only  to  Dr
    Hussain not occurred.

13. We decided for these  reasons  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had to be set aside to be remade de novo. It was not necessary
    to consider the remaining grounds where that was so.

14. Where entirely new findings of fact had to be made it was our view that
    this should  take  place  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  line  with
    paragraph 7.2 of Part 3 of the Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
    dated 25 September 2012.

DECISION

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law such that it is set aside to be re-made.

16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  re-made  de
    novo.

DIRECTIONS

17. No later than 7 days prior to the hearing the appellant is to  serve  a
    consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of all evidence relied upon.





Signed:     [pic]      Date:  2 June 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
