
 [pic]


Upper Tribunal


(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
AA100462015



|At  Field House                        |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                    |
| on 6th June  2016                     | on 20th June 2016             |
|                                       |                               |
|                                       |                               |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between


                                     MA
                                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                          Appellant

                                     And


               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                          Respondent



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms H.Foot, Hammersmith and Fulham Community Law Centre.
For the Respondent: Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction



     1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan said to be born in or
        around January 1997. He arrived in United Kingdom at the age of 13
        and a claim for asylum was made. That claim was refused. On the
        basis he was an unaccompanied minor he was granted discretionary
        leave to remain until he became an adult.

     2. The appellant's claim was that his father was a member of the
        Taliban who had been taken away by the police. The appellant and
        his mother made enquiries from the police as to his whereabouts but
        to no avail .He was repeatedly interrogated by the police. He
        subsequently learned that his father had been killed. The Taliban
        came to the appellant's home looking for him. They were annoyed
        that he had given the names of two commanders to the police.
        Letters were thrown over the wall of his home telling him he should
        join the Taliban. Fearful for his safety because of the Taliban and
        the police his mother arranged for him to leave the country.

     3. An appeal against the refusal was heard by Designated Immigration
        Judge Manuell in 2011 and was dismissed. The judge did not find the
        claim credible and found the appellant to be an unreliable witness.

The First Tier.

     4. A further application was refused on the 3rd June 2015. On appeal,
        in a decision promulgated on 9 December 2015, Judge of the First-
        tier Tribunal Bowes allowed the appeal under paragraph 276 ADE of
        the immigration rules.

     5. At the appeal evidence was heard from a Mr. W A. He said he was
        from the same village as the appellant and they met in the United
        Kingdom. His evidence was that his father and the appellant's
        father were Taliban members and that he had heard in the Madrassa
        the appellant's father had been killed. The judge was supplied with
        the decision in Mr. W A' s asylum claim where he was found
        credible. Judge Bowes also found Mr. W A to be credible.

     6. There was also evidence from the appellant's solicitor to the
        effect she had managed to speak on the telephone with the son of
        the Malik of his village, Mr. Z U. She said he told her the
        appellant's father had been killed and that he was a member of the
        Taliban and the appellant's mother and siblings were no longer in
        the village and their whereabouts were unknown. He was to provide a
        letter confirming the details.

     7. The appellant's foster parent, Mr. R gave evidence suggesting he
        had destroyed a document which had arrived not appreciating its
        significance.

     8. The tribunal also heard evidence from the appellant's school about
        how well he was doing and from a clinical psychologist about
        difficulties he was displaying. There were various letters of
        support indicating the appellant's integration into the United
        Kingdom.

     9. Judge Bowes did not find the new evidence justified dealing de novo
        with the respondent's original decision. The judge found the
        principles in Devaseelan -v- SSHD [2002] UKIAT 0072 applied. The
        judge at paragraph 51 said that Designated Immigration Judge
        Manuell had found several reasons for dismissing the claim. He had
        found it implausible that the Taliban would seek to recruit him in
        the way he described. Moreover if they suspected he was an informer
        he would have been killed. It was not considered plausible that the
        Afghan police would regularly interrogate the appellant as claimed.



    10. At paragraph 52 Judge Bowes  said :

             Although I accept Mr. W A's evidence and that of the
             appellant's solicitor corroborates that of the appellant to a
             degree, the previous decision did not stand and fall on the
             question of whether the appellant's father had been a Taliban
             member or that he had been killed. There were further and
             substantial concerns about the evidence given by the
             appellant, which were not addressed in the evidence before me.


         The judge at paragraph 54 said:


             Aside from the additional evidence from Mr. W A and the
             appellant's solicitor, I find that the issues and evidence
             with regard to the asylum claim materially the same as the
             previous appeal. I find that I must treat the grounds of
             appeal in respect of the appellant's asylum claim as decided
             by the previous judge.


    11. Judge Bowes made additional findings. Based on the evidence of the
        psychologist and the schoolteacher it was accepted that the
        appellant's emotional development was behind that which would be
        expected of an 18-year-old boy. The judge accepted that the fact
        the appellant was now 18 did not mean that any risk in Afghanistan
        would automatically disappear. The judge was satisfied the
        appellant's family were no longer in the village and accepted that
        it was likely he would be unattached if returned. Whilst concluding
        the appellant may be vulnerable the judge was not satisfied he
        would be at particular risk or that there was a real risk of a
        breach of article 3. Article 2 was not pursued.
    12. In allowing the appeal under paragraph 276 ADE the judge
        acknowledged the appellant has lived in Afghanistan for 13 years;
        spoke the language; and had acquired skills in the United Kingdom
        which would help him on return. The intention would be for return
        to Kabul but the evidence did not suggest he had ever lived there
        before. The judge found the psychologist's evidence credible and
        that return was likely to cause deterioration in his mental health.
        The judge also accept that the appellant was now very westernised.


    13. At paragraph 67 the judge recorded :


             I find that in essence, if the appellant were to be returned
             to Afghanistan, it would be the equivalent of returning an
             emotionally immature British teenager with mental health
             difficulties to that country. I find such a boy would
             encounter very significant obstacles to his integration.
             Whilst this appellant may speak the language, he would
             effectively be returning alone to a culture which, save for
             his religion, he appears to have abandoned. He would have few,
             if any contacts to assist him in Kabul and the network of
             support of adults he has in the UK would be lost. It is likely
             that his mental health would suffer. Taking the evidence in
             the round, I am satisfied that these factors are cumulatively
             capable of amounting to and do amount to very significant
             obstacles to the appellant integration into Afghanistan.


    14. Having allowed the appeal under paragraph 276 ADE the judge went on
        to say at paragraph 69:

             As I have allowed the appeal under the immigration rules, I
             have not considered whether article 8 applies directly. Had I
             done so, for similar reasons as set out above, it is likely
             that given the appellant's integration into the UK and his
             mental health difficulties, I would have found the
             respondent's proposed interference with the appellant's
             private life to be disproportionate.


The Upper Tribunal

    15. The respondent has not sought to challenge the finding on problems
        of reintegration and the appeal succeeding under paragraph 276ADE.


    16. The appellant's representative when seeking leave submitted that as
        Judge Bowes had come to a different conclusion from DIJ Manuell
        about  his father being  a Taliban member who had been killed then
        the rest of the claim should have been examined again. It was also
        submitted that the judge's conclusion that the appellant would not
        face an article 3 risk on return was unreasonable on the found
        personal facts.


    17. At hearing Ms Foot relied upon the grounds raised when seeking
        leave to appeal. The first argument was that given the acceptance
        the appellant's father was in the Taliban and had been killed the
        judge should have reassessed the appellant's claim in its entirety.
        The second argument was that the findings about the appellant's
        mental state; the lack of support available to him on return; and
        the conditions in Kabul should have led to a finding that 15 C and
        article 3 applied.

    18. In response Mr. Duffy refers to paragraphs 51 to 54 of the decision
        as setting out adequately the judge's reasoning. He pointed out
        that the issue in paragraph 276 ADE related to the appellant's
        integration and this was a different test from that arising in the
        grounds argued by Ms Foot.

    19. Both parties were agreement that if I found a material error of law
        in relation to the first point the matter should be remitted to the
        First-tier Tribunal. If there were merit in the second argument it
        could be dealt with in the Upper Tribunal.


Consideration.

    20. The answer to the first ground is contained at paragraph 52 of
        judge Bowes decision: namely, the previous decision did not stand
        or fall on whether the appellant's father had been a Taliban member
        or had been killed. The judge referred to further and substantial
        concerns about the evidence of the appellant not addressed by the
        fresh evidence. The appellant was making claims about what happened
        to him and the risk he faced. These had not been believed in the
        first appeal. Examples are his claim about the Taliban throwing
        messages over the house wall and the police repeatedly
        interrogating him. Judge Manuell he found that had the appellant
        revealed to the Taliban he had given he police information about
        them he would have been killed. Judge Manuell noted the entire
        family did not leave and go for instance to Pakistan. Consequently,
        I see no merit in the first argument advanced.


    21. I find greater force in the second argument given all that was
        found about the appellant's integration into life in the United
        Kingdom; his mental health issues; and the lack of support on
        return. I bear in mind what was said in AA (Unattended Children)
        Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 on the return of children and the
        view that although an adult the issues remained for the appellant.

    22. Whilst the issues in paragraph 276 ADE and article 3 and
        humanitarian protection are different, on the facts of this case
        there is an overlap. The personal findings made and the comments in
        paragraph 67 indicated that to return the appellant could cause a
        real risk breach of article 3 and entitlement to humanitarian
        protection.

    23. Judge Bowes at paragraph 56 to 58 sets out relevant findings. The
        judge concluded the appellant may well be vulnerable. However the
        judge was not satisfied of particular risk factors. Whilst finely
        balanced it is my conclusion that there was a material error of law
        here given the findings. I remake the decision and allow the appeal
        not only under paragraph 276 ADE but also under article 3 and that
        the appellant is entitled to humanitarian protection.

Decision

    24.  There was a material error of law in the decision of First-tier
        Tribunal Bowes and I remake the decision and allow the appeal not
        only under paragraph 276 ADE but also under article 3 and find that
        the appellant is entitled to humanitarian protection.

   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

