
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: AA/10783/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                 |Determination Promulgated |
|On 5 July 2016                         |On 7  July 2016           |
|Prepared on 6 July 2016                |                          |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between
                                    E. N.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
                       Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant claimed asylum in the  UK  in  January  2015  upon  her
       arrest. She claimed to have entered the UK in March 2007 using  false
       documents, and that as a citizen of Cameroon she faced a real risk of
       harm as one who was already  perceived  to  be  a  lesbian,  and  had
       suffered serious persecution as a result. She said that she would  in
       any event be unable to live openly as a lesbian  upon  return,  since
       the perception of her homosexuality would lead  to  further  violence
       and persecution by members of the general public  against  which  the
       state would offer no protection.  That  risk  was  also  said  to  be
       countrywide so that internal  relocation  would  not  avoid  it.  The
       credibility of her claim to be a lesbian therefore lay at the core of
       her claim.
    2. The asylum application was refused on 21 July 2015,  and  a  decision
       was made to remove her from the UK in consequence. The Appellant duly
       appealed that immigration decision and her appeal was in  due  course
       heard by First Tier Tribunal Judge O'Hanlon. The appeal was dismissed
       in a decision promulgated on 11 May 2016 in the course of  which  her
       claim to be a lesbian, and her account of her past experiences in the
       Cameroon were rejected as untrue.
    3. The Appellant lodged an application with the First Tier Tribunal  for
       permission to appeal. The application asserted first that  the  Judge
       had ignored a newspaper article that had been produced in evidence in
       which she was named as a lesbian. The content of the article was also
       said to corroborate her  account  of  past  persecution.  Second  the
       Judge's approach to the risks facing a  homosexual  was  said  to  be
       flawed, because he was said to have failed to follow the guidance  to
       be found in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.
    4. The application was granted by First Tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 26
       May 2016 on the  basis  that  it  was  arguable  the  Judge  had  not
       considered fully the newspaper article, which in  turn  might  impact
       upon the merits of the second ground.
    5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response on 16 June 2016. She  pointed
       out that the Judge had given adequate reasons for  the  rejection  of
       the  Appellant's  claimed   sexuality,   and   had   given   adequate
       consideration to the newspaper article. In the light of his  findings
       there was no error in his approach to HJ.
    6. The Appellant made no application pursuant  to  Rule  15(2A)  of  the
       Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.
    7. Thus the matter came before me.


  Error of law?
    8. The record of proceedings show that it  was  the  Judge  himself  who
       identified that the Appellant's  solicitors  had  failed  to  file  a
       legible or complete copy of the  document  that  was  said  to  be  a
       genuine newspaper article. Thus the document filed in advance of  the
       hearing was incomplete, and it did not name the Appellant as claimed.
       In the circumstances the Judge quite properly stood the  appeal  down
       so that the document could be produced and considered. It  is  ironic
       to reflect on the fact that if he had not done so  there  would  have
       been no basis whatsoever for the criticisms that are now made of  him
       in the grounds, since the incomplete document that had been  produced
       in evidence did not name the Appellant.
    9. The document in question as eventually produced to the  Judge  is  on
       the Tribunal file. It is a screenshot of a webpage, taken on 18 April
       2016 by the Appellant's solicitors (as recorded in the ribbon bar  at
       the foot of the screenshot). The webpage purports to be that  of  the
       "Cameroon Tribune", and to the extent that any date for  the  article
       is legible, it appears to bear the date of either 8 May  2000,  or  8
       May 2006.
   10. Ms Cleghorn opened the appeal to me on the  basis  that  the  Judge's
       approach to this document was perverse, although  that  was  not  the
       basis upon which ground one  had  been  drafted  by  her  instructing
       solicitors, and such a criticism was not merited.
   11. Ms Cleghorn ultimately accepted that the decision  records  that  the
       Judge was  alert  to  the  existence  and  content  of  the  complete
       document, and (once I had read the relevant passage of the record  of
       proceedings to her), that it was only due to the Judge's intervention
       that a complete and legible copy was ever produced in  evidence.  She
       also accepted that the Judge  had  made  specific  reference  to  the
       existence and content of this document in his  decision  [11,  32,  &
       33], and that there was no basis  for  the  suggestion  that  he  had
       overlooked the complete document produced to him  in  favour  of  the
       incomplete version originally filed in evidence.
   12. Nevertheless Ms Cleghorn argued that the Judge had  given  inadequate
       reasons for his failure to proceed on the basis that this "compelling
       evidence" was both genuine, and proof that  the  Appellant's  account
       was true. As such her argument appeared to assume that this  document
       should somehow hold the status of some sort of "trump card".
   13. Although Ms Cleghorn made submissions  concerning  what  the  results
       would be of any internet searches made upon the  Appellant's  claimed
       name, she was forced to accept that no such evidence  had  ever  been
       placed before the Tribunal, and that  it  would  have  been  entirely
       inappropriate for the Judge to undertake such an  exercise  upon  his
       own initiative.


  Conclusions
   14. The answer to the criticisms that are made of the Judge  in  relation
       to this document are in my judgement to  be  found  in  the  approach
       taken by Ouseley J in CJ (on the application of R) v  Cardiff  County
       Council [2011] EWHC 23, where he  re-stated  the  importance  of  the
       approach in Tanveer Ahmed v  SSHD  [2002]  Imm  AR  318.  Documentary
       evidence along with its provenance needs to be weighed in  the  light
       of all the evidence in the case. Documentary evidence does not  carry
       with it a presumption of authenticity, which specific  evidence  must
       disprove, failing  which  its  content  must  be  accepted.  What  is
       required is its appraisal in the light  of  the  evidence  about  its
       nature, provenance, timing and background evidence and in  the  light
       of all the other evidence in the case, especially that given  by  the
       claimant.
   15. In my judgement, when the decision is read as a  whole,  it  is  self
       evident that this is precisely the approach that the  Judge  adopted.
       He looked at  the  Appellant's  immigration  history,  which  clearly
       raised a number of s8 issues concerning her general credibility as  a
       witness of fact. He also looked  at  the  inconsistency  between  the
       Appellant's current claim to have been a lesbian for many years,  and
       her previous claim to be in a heterosexual relationship. (She did not
       present herself at the appeal as bisexual.) He  also  looked  at  the
       general credibility of the Appellant's claim to have been arrested in
       the Cameroon for kissing another woman in public.
   16. Having looked at all of the evidence  in  the  round  concerning  the
       Appellant's sexuality, it was plainly  well  open  to  the  Judge  to
       conclude that the Appellant was not a reliable witness, and  that she
       had not told the  truth  about  either  her  sexuality  or  her  past
       experiences in the Cameroon. Adequate reasons were  given  for  those
       findings.  That  being  the  case,  as  Ms  Cleghorn  accepted,   the
       criticisms raised in ground 2 concerning the approach  taken  to  the
       guidance in HJ simply fell away. The first step for the Appellant was
       to establish that she was in truth a lesbian, and she had  failed  to
       do so. That was the end of the matter.
   17. This was very far from being a  careless  decision.  Having  had  the
       benefit of hearing Ms Cleghorn's submissions,  I  am  satisfied  that
       notwithstanding the grant of permission, there is no merit in  either
       of the grounds, and that the Appellant has failed to  establish  that
       there was any error of law that requires the decision to be set aside
       and  remade.  The  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  is   therefore
       confirmed.


   DECISION


 The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on  11  May
 2016 did not involve the making of an error of  law  in  the  decision  to
 dismiss the appeal that requires that decision to be set aside and remade.
 The decision to dismiss the appeal is accordingly confirmed.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
 granted anonymity. No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
 indirectly identify her. This direction applies both to the Appellant  and
 to the Respondent. Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to
 proceedings being brought for contempt of court.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 6 July 2016
