
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10669/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House, London Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On the 5th May 2016    On 17th May 2016


                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                                    [A V]
                        (No Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Benfield (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Greasley promulgated on the 14th March 2016, in  which
       he dismissed the Appellant's asylum appeal.

    2. Permission to appeal against that decision has been granted by First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Ford on the 4th April 2016. When referring to the
       Grounds of Appeal he found  that  it  was  arguable  that  given  the
       Appellant had been taking medication for major  health  problems  and
       had done so  for  some  time  and  given  that  he  had  changed  his
       solicitors less than two weeks before the  hearing,  that  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Greasley had erred in  not  granting  an  adjournment,
       although Judge Ford questioned as  to  why  his  solicitors  did  not
       immediately seek an adjournment when he initially instructed,  rather
       than  waiting  until  the  hearing.   Judge  Ford   further   granted
       permission to argue ground 2 in that it was arguable that  the  Judge
       had failed  to  make  clear  findings  on  material  aspects  of  the
       Appellant's claim including escape from detention  or  payment  of  a
       bribe, CID interest post-departure sur place activities  and  leaving
       with an agent.

    3. The Respondent had submitted a Rule 24 Reply  dated  the  15th  April
       2016, in which it was argued that  the  Judge  had  directed  himself
       properly and had properly considered the adjournment application  and
       that there had been ample time  for  the  Appellant  to  provide  any
       documentation deemed relevant and that the Appellant had  been  given
       the opportunity to substantiate his claim orally  and  to  rebut  the
       criticisms made.

    4. However, it was conceded by Mr Kotas on behalf of the Respondent that
       in fact there was a material error of law in the decision  of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Greasley in that at [42] the "Appellant  produced
       a packet of medication  indicating  that  he  was  taking  Citalopram
       daily, but the package is dated the 17th February 2016.  There is  no
       indication the Appellant has taken such medication any  earlier  than
       two weeks prior to the appeal hearing."  Mr Kotas  accepted  that  in
       fact the Appellant had mentioned  that  he  was  on  such  medication
       within the screening interview and  that  therefore  was  a  material
       error in the way the Judge dealt with the  medical  evidence  in  the
       case and that the Judge  thereby  had  not  given  the  case  anxious
       scrutiny and was unsafe.

    5. In light of this concession made on behalf of the Secretary of  State
       and the concession made that as a result of that material  error  the
       case would need to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, I  do
       find that the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Greasley  does
       contain a material error in that he has based  his  decision  on  the
       basis that there was no evidence that the Appellant was on Citalopram
       more than two weeks before the hearing, but in  fact  this  had  been
       mentioned on the screening interview, and that as was conceded by  Mr
       Kotas the Judge has not given anxious scrutiny to the case.  Although
       this was an error of fact, the circumstances of this case  it  did  a
       matter material error of law, as it was not an error brought about by
       the appellant himself, the fact was easily verifiable by  looking  at
       the screening interview and was therefore not  contentious,  and  the
       error  did  pay  a  material  part  in  the   Tribunal's   reasoning,
       particularly in respect of the decision not to adjourn.

    6. In such circumstances, I do consider and agree with Mr Kotas that the
       decision is unsafe and that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
       Greasley should be set aside and the decision remitted  back  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal for the appeal to be heard before any  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley does contain  a  material
error of law, as has been conceded by the Secretary of State.  The  decision
of First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley is therefore set aside.

The appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for the  case  to  be
reheard before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Greasley.


Signed

R McGinty
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 5th May 2016
