
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10462/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18th August 2017                      |On 20th September 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                            HAJI MOHAMMAD HASSAN
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott, of Counsel, instructed by Hoole & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Afghanistan  who  claimed  asylum  upon
    arrival in the United Kingdom in June 2014.  That claim was refused  by
    the respondent in a decision dated 8th July 2014.

2.   Thereafter a number  of  hearings  and  applications  were  to  follow.
    Eventually the appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal  for  hearing
    on 12th January 2017  and  21st  February  2017.   In  a  determination
    promulgated shortly  afterwards,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chambers
    dismissed the appeal in all respects.

3.   The appellant, although born in Afghanistan, spent most  of  his  adult
    life working in Pakistan.  In 1982 he was employed at the  headquarters
    of Hezbi-Islami and worked with them first of all as  a  secretary  and
    typist, then to work in connection with the welfare of refugees.

4.   He was also self-employed working as  an  agent  for  travel  and  tour
    companies for Afghan nationals.  It was this  job  which  came  to  the
    attention of the Taliban, who issued threats against the appellant.  In
    particular, three threatening letters were sent  in  the  period  April
    2014 and June 2014.  On receipt of the  fourth  threatening  letter  in
    October 2014 the appellant fled to the United Kingdom.

5.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge took as a  starting  point  the  previous
    determination of the matter by the First-tier Tribunal.  The account of
    the appellant as to receiving the letters was not found to be credible.
     In the alternative, internal relocation was possible.  The  Judge  did
    not accept the credibility of the employment It was not  accepted  that
    the appellant was facilitating travel of young men  and  women  to  the
    west. Little weight was placed upon the threatening  letters,  for  the
    reasons as set out in paragraph 47 of the determination.  The judge had
    not accepted that the appellant worked for Hezbi-Islami and, even if he
    had been, found that by itself would not attract attention.

6.   In terms of the appellant's ill health and  the  arguments  as  to  the
    lack of safety  on  return,  the  Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant's said oppressive symptoms were referable to any  persecution
    by the Taliban and even if the illness of the appellant  was  accepted,
    he had lived  in  Pakistan  seemingly  without  difficulty.   This  was
    highlighted in paragraph 65  of  the  determination.   The  Judge  gave
    little weight to the evidence of Professor Katona.

7.   The appellant sought to challenge the decision.  Leave was  granted  to
    the Upper Tribunal to determine that issue and thus  the  matter  comes
    before me to do so.

8.   It is said firstly that  the  Judge  failed  to  approach  the  medical
    evidence of Professor  Katona  in  the  correct  manner.   Rather  than
    considering the evidence as a whole, it is clear from paragraph  53  of
    the determination, that the Judge has come to a conclusion  as  to  the
    medical evidence having first considered the credibility of the overall
    account.

9.   Further it is said that scant consideration of the evidence  was  made.
    Indeed it is suggested, particularly in terms of the  appellant's  role
    as a migration agent and working in the Hezbi-i-Islami, that no account
    is given of the evidence and certainly little reference is made to what
    the appellant had to say about his role and function.  Further there is
    scant regard to the report of Mr Foxley as to the profile  which  would
    thereby be created.  It is not so much that his  working  for  Hezbi-i-
    Islami would be a risk factor in itself but it would be a matter  which
    may well arise in questioning of the appellant by the  authorities  and
    as such would contribute to his risk.  Fundamentally, however,  it  was
    said that the Taliban remained a real risk to the appellant wherever he
    may be.

10.  In terms of return it was argued that the appellant  could  not  safely
    return, both as to the risk  that  his  profile  be  revealed  and  the
    interest of the Taliban still a live one.  The medical evidence  as  to
    his PTSD was also relevant to his ability to  cope.   It  is  contended
    that the Judge failed to consider properly the approach to return,  nor
    did the Judge consider the issue of risk by way of suicide.

11.  Mr Draycott submits that even a return to Kabul would not  address  the
    concerns as to return.  The appellant is still a person  vulnerable  by
    way of illness, he lacks  any  support  structure  and  his  past  will
    clearly emerge when questioned because he is a stranger.

12.  Mr Bates indicates that certain of  the  challenges  are  perhaps  more
    fact-sensitive and are not so obvious as others.  He concedes, however,
    that the approach taken to  the  medical  evidence  generally  was  not
    appropriate.  It was relevant evidence to be taken  into  consideration
    in assessing the credibility of the account of matters  as  given.   It
    was also important evidence to consider the issue on safety of  return.
    Mr Bates also concedes most fairly that the approach to return  is  one
    that is defective in all the circumstances.  He does not submit in  the
    light of such matters that any of the findings made by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge should be maintained.

13.  In all the circumstances, therefore, he concedes that the  decision  is
    not one that should stand.  Accordingly, both he and Mr Draycott invite
    me to set it aside.  This I do.

14.  In the light of the necessity to make substantial findings both  as  to
    credibility and fact, it is appropriate to  remit  the  matter  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal in accordance with the Senior President's  Practice
    Directions.  It will be for that Tribunal to issue such  directions  as
    it thinks proper.

Notice of Decision

15.  The appeal in the  Upper  Tribunal  allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside to be re-made in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed        [pic]                          Date 18 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
