
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/10815/2014
         AA/10819/2014
     AA/10821/2014
     AA/10823/2014
     AA/10825/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |   Determination Promulgated  |
|On 29 July 2015                              |   On 28 September 2015       |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                                MM and others
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Christopher Simmonds, Solicitor, of Duncan Lewis
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellants  are  asylum
    seekers on political grounds who might be at risk  just  by  reason  of
    being identified.

 2. The appellants appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellants appeal on asylum  and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 20 June 2014 refusing to grant  them  leave
    to remain and to remove them to Mauritius.

Introduction

 3. The first appellant is a Muslim citizen of Mauritius born in 1968.  The
    remaining appellants are his wife and  children.  The  first  appellant
    claims that his problems started in the 2005 general election  when  he
    supported the then ruling coalition of the Mouvement Militant Maurician
    ("MMM") and the  Mouvement  Socialiste  Militant  ("MSM").  He  put  up
    posters, handed out leaflets  and  arranged  night-time  meetings.  The
    election was won by the opposition  Socialist  Alliance  party  ("SA").
    Hindus dominated the parliament and cabinet.

 4. The appellant claims that he was beaten and harassed by agents  of  the
    Labour Party from 2005 onwards and was afraid to travel or go to  work.
    The police took no action  because  they  said  that  the  people  were
    government agents. The  windows  in  his  house  were  broken  and  his
    children were frightened and also threatened at school. The family came
    to the  UK  via  Ireland  but  all  except  the  first  appellant  were
    apparently removed on three occasions before arriving on visit visas in
    December 2013 and claiming asylum in March 2014. When the  family  were
    in Mauritius between 2009 and 2013 they suffered further harassment and
    the children had to move school. A 58 year old man wanted to marry  the
    daughter and threatened to kill her mother if she did not agree.

 5. The respondent did not accept the account of political violence at  the
    time of the 2005 election as it ran contrary to objective evidence. The
    political involvement of the first appellant  was  insufficient  reason
    for the alleged continual attacks. Even if the attacks had taken  place
    that was nine years ago, the first appellant has renounced interest  in
    politics and the MMM are now in power. The family  immigration  history
    was poor and involved deception. The asylum claims were long delayed.

The Appeal

 6. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Columbus House on 18 March 2015. They were represented by Mr
    Tuburn, Solicitor.  The  judge  found  that  the  appellants  were  not
    entirely credible witnesses, particularly in relation to the  delay  in
    claiming asylum and their claim that all of their travel documents  had
    been lost. The first appellant's account of  his  political  activities
    and their consequences was not particularly compelling and while it was
    possible that there were incidents in 2005 or thereafter they could not
    have  been  that  serious  because  the  first  appellant  remained  in
    Mauritius for another three years and left his family there. He had not
    taken part in political activity since 2005 and it  was  not  plausible
    that after a space of ten years he would  still  face  persecution  for
    whatever took occurred in 2005, particularly as the party  he  said  he
    supported is now in power.

 7. In relation to the threat from the 58 year old man, the  accounts  were
    vague and if such approaches were made it may be that was  because  the
    first appellant was not there to speak up for his daughter. There is  a
    functional if flawed police force in Mauritius  and  a  sufficiency  of
    state protection.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on 15 April 2015 on the basis
    that the judge had made a material error of fact because  the  MMM  are
    not in power.  The  election  results  were  clearly  set  out  in  the
    appellants' bundle and  the  judge  failed  to  properly  consider  the
    evidence. The judge found that the appellants were not at risk  because
    the MMM were now in government and that is a material error of law.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-Tier Tribunal Judge McDade on
    27 April 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the  judge  failed
    to understand any current risk to the appellants, the judge erroneously
    considering that it was MMM - the party that the appellant claims to be
    at risk from.

10. In a rule 24 response dated 15  May  2015,  the  respondent  sought  to
    uphold the judge's decision on the basis that  the  credibility  of  an
    appellant's account is primarily a question of fact and the findings of
    fact in relation to credibility were properly open to the judge. In any
    event the grant of permission to appeal was not valid because the first
    appellant fears the Labour Party and not the MMM.

11. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

12. Mr Richards helpfully did not seek to rely upon the submission that the
    grant of permission to appeal was somehow invalid. The  judge  granting
    permission did err in referring to the MMM as the party that the  first
    appellant fears (in fact it  was  his  own  party)  but  the  grant  of
    permission is otherwise correct.

13. Mr Simmonds submitted that the ruling coalition won  41  seats  in  the
    2010 elections and the MMM won 18 seats. The MMM are not in power. That
    is a glaring error of fact and goes to  the  core  of  the  claim.  The
    important word in paragraph 22 of  the  decision  is  particularly  and
    there is a clear error of law.

14. Mr Richards submitted that there were further elections  in  2014  when
    the MMM were in alliance with the Labour Party but they still lost. The
    judge was wrong to say that the MMM were in power but the error is  not
    material. If the judge had found the first  appellant  to  be  credible
    i.e. at risk in the past but not now that would be a material error  of
    law. However, the judge found that the account  was  not  credible  and
    there was a sufficiency of protection. The decision is not infected  by
    a minor error of fact and the appeal should be dismissed.

15. Mr Simmonds replied that the MMM lost the 2014 elections as  well.  The
    sufficiency of protection finding was based on the MMM being in power.

16. The objective evidence before me submitted  by  Mr  Richards  indicates
    that the Alliance de L'Avenir (including the Labour Party and the  MSM)
    won the 2010 elections and the MMM were not  part  of  that  coalition.
    During the  period  2010-2014  the  MSM  and  another  party  left  the
    coalition and the Labour Party continued alone. In September  2014  the
    Labour Party and the MMM entered into a  coalition  but  the  MMM  then
    broke up with a breakaway Muvman Liberator party  forming  a  coalition
    (Alliance Lepep) with the MSM and another party. Alliance Lepep won the
    2014 election.

17. It is common ground that the judge erred by finding that the  MMM  were
    in power from 2010. The real situation is much more  complex  including
    an alliance between most of the MMM (the first appellant's  party)  and
    the Labour Party (the alleged persecutors in this appeal).  The  Labour
    Party is not currently in power. I accept Mr Simmonds' submission  that
    the use of the word  particularly  in  paragraph  22  of  the  decision
    indicates that the judge placed considerable weight on the finding that
    the MMM came to power in 2010. That conclusion  is  reinforced  by  the
    somewhat vague nature of the other findings  set  out  at  paragraph  6
    above. There are no clear findings as to what factual elements  of  the
    claims are accepted and I reject Mr Richards' submission that the judge
    simply found that the  account  was  not  credible.  The  phrases  "not
    entirely  credible"  and  "not  particularly  compelling"  are  not  an
    adequate basis for dismissing  an  asylum  claim.  I  accept  that  the
    finding in relation to sufficiency of protection  is  infected  by  the
    error as to the party in power from 2014.

18. I have considered R (Iran) & others v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982. I  find
    that the judge has made a mistake as to a material fact which could  be
    established by objective and uncontentious evidence where the appellant
    and/or his advisors were not responsible  for  the  mistake;  it  being
    clear from the objective evidence within the  appellants'  bundle  that
    the MMM were not in power from 2010. I am satisfied that unfairness has
    resulted from that mistake because  the  finding  was  central  to  the
    judge's decision. There is no certainty that the  appellants'  position
    will improve at a rehearing in light of the coalition between  most  of
    the MMM and the Labour Party but the complex political situation should
    be fully considered and  the  appellants  are  entitled  to  clear  and
    untainted findings of fact in relation to the core of their claim.

19. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of errors of law  and  its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

20. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

21. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.



Signed   [pic]                      Date 26 September 2015


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


