

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10831/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 15 December 2016                           |on 19 December 2016          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                       & UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    A M A

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as described above, but the rest of this decision refers to
    them as they were previously and will be again in the FtT.

 2. By decision promulgated on 29th of March 2016 FtT Judge Kempton allowed
    the appellant's appeal "on humanitarian protection grounds only".   She
    found at paragraph 63 that  the  appellant  is  excluded  from  refugee
    status under article 1F (a) of the Refugee Convention; and at paragraph
    65 that he is not excluded from humanitarian protection by "Home Office
    guidance", and that the country situation is too  dangerous  to  refuse
    such protection.

 3. The SSHD's first ground of  appeal  says  that  involved  legal  error,
    because  exclusion  from  humanitarian  protection  arises   not   from
    "guidance"  but  from  the  Immigration  Rules,  paragraph  339D   (i),
    accurately transposing the Qualification Directive, article 17 (1) (a).
     The appellant acknowledges this error of law.

 4. At paragraph 67 the judge said that being unable  to  accept  that  the
    appellant was entitled to asylum, she did not consider  it  appropriate
    to allow the appeal under articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR.

 5. In a rule 24 response the appellant submitted that this was  a  further
    error, because exclusion from refugee and humanitarian protection  does
    not take the appellant outside the scope of direct protection under the
    ECHR.  The SSHD acknowledges this error of law.

 6. Those two errors require the decision to be set aside.

 7. The SSHD's second ground is failure  to  apply  country  guidance  that
    indiscriminate violence is not at  such  a  level  as  to  qualify  all
    Libyans for protection. The third ground in  effect  extends  the  same
    argument to the findings about the appellant's wife  and  children.  We
    need not resolve these grounds, as those matters  will  be  encompassed
    into the remaking of the decision under the ECHR, and will turn on  up-
    to-date evidence about country conditions.

 8. During these proceedings, AT and Others Libya CG [2014] UKUT 318  (IAC)
    has been replaced by FA (art 15(c)) Libya CG [2016] UKUT  00413  (IAC).
    Although the present case, due to exclusion, does not fall  within  art
    15 (c), the general finding in FA applies.  Risk is to be determined on
    a case-by-case basis, on the evidence in each  individual  case,  until
    general up-to-date guidance is again published.

 9. To preserve his position, the appellant had submitted to the FtT an out-
    of-time application for permission to appeal to the UT,  which  remains
    undecided. In view of the acknowledgement by the SSHD of the  error  of
    law above, the appellant withdrew that application  orally  before  us.
    His solicitors undertook to confirm withdrawal to the  FtT  in  writing
    for the record.

10. It was common ground that although there is travel in and out of Libya,
    including air travel, no enforced returns are presently  taking  place,
    but that the case will fall to be determined on the assumption that the
    appellant and his family would be returned.

11. An anonymity direction  was  made  in  the  FtT.  That  point  was  not
    addressed before us,  so  the  direction  remains  in  force.  We  have
    anonymized this determination.

12. The decision of the FtT is set aside. Its findings stand  only  to  the
    effect that the appellant is excluded  from  refugee  status  and  from
    humanitarian protection.

13. In view of the remaining scope of the  case  and  the  requirement  for
    findings based on up-to-date evidence about country conditions, parties
    agreed that it was appropriate in terms of section 12 (2)  (b)  (i)  of
    the 2007 act and of Practice Statement 7.2 to remit the case to the FtT
    for further hearing.

14. The members of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not  to  include
    Judge Kempton.

            [pic]

            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
           16 December 2016.
