

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10551/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Laganside Courts, Belfast            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 October 2014                            |On 7 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                                     AI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

Appellant:    Mrs Donnelly of Law Centre (NI)
Respondent:   Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. I grant anonymity to the Appellant: please note the acronym above.

 2. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),
    dated 24 October 2013, whereby the  application  of  the  Appellant,  a
    national of Bangladesh now aged 35 years, for asylum  was  refused,  on
    the ground that a well founded fear  of  persecution  for  one  of  the
    proscribed reasons had not been established. It was further  determined
    that the Appellant does not qualify for  humanitarian  protection.  She
    did, however, secure the benefit recorded in the following passage:

         "Consideration has been given to whether your removal from  the  UK
         would breach your right to respect  for  private  and  family  life
         under Article 8 [ECHR] .....


         It is noted that you claim that your child is a British citizen and
         that your ex husband is also  a  British  citizen.   Based  on  the
         documentary evidence you have provided to substantiate this,  these
         aspects of your claim are accepted  and  it  has  been  decided  to
         exercise discretion in your favour and grant you limited  leave  to
         enter/remain in the UK because of your family life."

 3. The Appellant's appeal against the refusal of asylum was  dismissed  by
    the First tier Tribunal (the "FtT").  Some of the core  issues  in  her
    unsuccessful claim for asylum and ensuing appeal  are  encapsulated  in
    the following passages in the Notice of Appeal:

         "The Appellant maintains  that  she  would  be  at  risk  from  the
         authorities in Bangladesh if  returned  there,  in  particular  the
         Awami League, members of the  Bangladesh  National  Party  and  the
         Bangladesh armed forces .....


         She is at risk of persecution .............. owing to  her  imputed
         political opinion and the risk of persecution  from  her  husband's
         family in Bangladesh ....


         She was arrested and  detained  by  the  Bangladeshi  armed  forces
         whilst living  in  Bangladesh  owing  to  her  husband's  political
         activities."

    The FtT dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  As appears from [36] -  [38]
    of its determination, the Appellant's case was considered not  credible
    and this was the essential reason for the dismissal.

 4. One aspect of the Appellant's case was that her estranged husband, also
    a Bangladeshi national, had acquired British citizenship pursuant to  a
    successful asylum claim in the United Kingdom.  As recorded in [11]  of
    the determination, no independent verification of  this  assertion  was
    available.  It would appear that the Judge  rejected  it,  without  any
    consideration of the Appellant's evidence,  on  the  ground  that  such
    verification was an essential proof which had not been established.  At
    first instance, it  was  contended  that  one  of  the  errors  of  law
    contaminating the Secretary of State's refusal decision was  a  failure
    to address  and  resolve  this  discrete  issue.   On  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal, the same complaint was levelled against the FtT.   The  other
    three grounds of appeal, in summary, were:

    (i)  In the determination of the FtT, consideration  was  given  to  an
          issue which had not been previously raised either in  the  refusal
          decision  or  at  the  hearing,  namely  the  lack  of   evidence,
          particularly Court orders, arising out of  the  breakdown  of  the
          Appellant's marriage, giving rise to procedural unfairness  and/or
          constituting  the   impermissible   intrusion   of   an   improper
          consideration.


    (ii) Ditto, the issue of the  Appellant's  asserted  failure  to  claim
          asylum in other countries prior  to  her  arrival  in  the  United
          Kingdom.

     iii) "The Judge erred in law making irrational findings or failing  to
          give adequate reasons for findings or failing to take account  of
          fact or opinion on material matters  concerning  the  Appellant's
          general credibility and fear of return to Bangladesh."


          Permission to appeal was granted in fairly general terms.

 5. Upon the hearing of the appeal, Mr Mills, on behalf of the Secretary of
    State, disclosed the  following.   Arising  out  of  diligent  searches
    carried out by him, it has now, belatedly, been  established  that  the
    Appellant's estranged husband did indeed claim  asylum  in  the  United
    Kingdom, in 1997, unsuccessfully.  This  was  followed  by  an  appeal.
    While there is at present no  information  about  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal, this can be ascertained from a file in  long  term  storage  in
    London, retrievable within approximately three days.  Regrettably,  the
    file is not available at present.   Mr  Mills  acknowledged  that  this
    further information bears directly on one of the  cornerstones  of  the
    Appellant's case.  He conceded that the absence of this information  at
    first instance gave rise to unfairness to the Appellant, rendering  the
    decision of the FtT unsustainable.  When questioned by me, Mr Mills was
    also disposed to accept, correctly in my view, that the  other  grounds
    of appeal, particularly the first and second of those tabulated  above,
    possess some merit: the cross references in this respect  are  to  [29]
    and [31] of the determination.

DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 6. I decide and direct as follows:

    (i)  The decision of the FtT is set aside.


    (ii) I remit the appeal  to  a  differently  constituted  FtT  for  the
          purpose of remaking the decision.

     iii)  The  "missing"  file,  noted  above,  will  be  served  on   the
          Appellant's representative and lodged with the FtT within 21 days
          of today.


      iv) Thereafter, the relisting before the FtT will  be  on  the  first
          available date.






                                                 [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 31 October 2014
