
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10908/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18th June, 2013                            |On 3rd July, 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                              ali akbar hassani

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Rasoul of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Rackstraw, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran, who  was  born  on  18th  December,
    1978.  On 23rd November, 2011, the respondent  decided  to  remove  the
    appellant as an illegal entrant and the appellant appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal.  His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Duff
    on 24  January,  2013,  and  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  4th
    February,  2013,  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Duff   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal on asylum grounds, humanitarian  protection  grounds
    and human rights grounds.

2.   The appellant's claim was based on him having been bought up in  Tehran
    and having worked in  an  electrical  shop  before  beginning  national
    service in 1997.   During  his  national  service  he  was  in  a  unit
    commanded by a General Soloki and some time towards  what  should  have
    been the end of his service he had a  serious  disagreement  with  that
    individual, as a result of stamping the leave booklets of three members
    of his unit who were  followers  of  the  Baha'i  faith.   The  general
    disagreed with this and a fight occurred between the appellant and  the
    general.  The appellant maintains that he was arrested and detained for
    a week because of this argument.

3.   The appellant was obliged to serve a further eighteen months'  national
    service as punishment for this incident, but  only  completed  this  in
    2006, because he absconded on a number of occasions and was missing for
    a considerable period.  He eventually completed  his  national  service
    when persuaded by his family to return and do  so  but  was  unable  to
    obtain either a driving licence or  passport  without  completing  that
    service.  Eventually the appellant went to work again in the electrical
    shop but his brother-in-law obtained employment with a local branch  of
    the Sepah forces.  He initially fulfilled one role in Sepah,  but  then
    after some time moved to another role in which he was monitoring people
    in the community who were suspected of being against the ruling  regime
    or otherwise of interest to the authorities.  He was  uncomfortable  in
    that  role,  because  suspects  were  detained  and  tortured  by   the
    organisation for which he was working.   The  appellant  spoke  to  his
    brother-in-law and to his superior officer asking not  to  continue  in
    that role but he was told that  he  could  not  leave.   The  appellant
    stayed at home and did not go and do his job, but  after  a  while  the
    authorities came to his home and he was taken  back  to  his  place  of
    work, questioned and informed that he must attend a military court.  He
    was detained and then sentenced to one and a half year's in  detention.
    After some time in detention the appellant was released on bail subject
    to a number of  conditions.   The  appellant  subsequently  left  Iran.



4.   Before the  Immigration  Judge  was  an  expert  report  from  Mohammad
    Kakhki. He is a member of the Iranian bar who practised in the  Iranian
    courts for a number of years.  He obtained  a  PhD  in  Middle  Eastern
    Politics and Law at Durham University in 2008 and is a special  adviser
    to  the  Centre  for  Criminal  Law  and  Criminal  Justice  at  Durham
    University.  Additionally he is an associate director of the Islam  Law
    and Modernity Research  Centre  at  Durham  Law  School.   He  provides
    holistic analysis and updates of Country of Origin Information  Reports
    and since 2003 has been providing expert opinions on  Iranian  law  and
    procedure.

5.   At paragraph 33 of the determination, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Duff
    notes the expert's report and says that since much of the report  deals
    with generalities of the situation in Iran and its  conclusions  depend
    upon the appellant having  given  a  truthful  account  and  not  being
    credible he finds the report loses much of its impact.  He  notes  that
    the report deals with an Iranian legal document, a copy of which is  at
    pages D1 and D2 of the respondent's bundle, and says that this part  of
    the report appears to be persuasive in relation to that  Iranian  legal
    document and suggests that the document is a genuine one issued by  the
    Iranian authorities.  He goes on, however, to suggest that the document
    is shrouded in mystery and its whereabouts are unclear.  A copy of  the
    Iranian legal document was provided to the respondent, but no  original
    has ever been supplied, either to the respondent or to the judge.   The
    judge went on to say that he felt he could attach little weight to  the
    report, since the expert did not attend for cross-examination  and  the
    original Iranian legal document in questions has never been seen by the
    respondent or by the Tribunal.

6.   The determination was challenged and in granting permission  Designated
    Immigration Judge Barton said this:-

         "The  application  now  before  me  on  behalf  of  the   appellant
         incorporates overlong grounds taking issue with several aspects  of
         the determination.  I focus here upon two matters raised which  are
         arguable and which certainly warrant discussion at an oral  hearing
         in order to determine (after input from both parties) whether there
         has been an error of law:


         (1)  The judge's decision to attach no weight to the arrest warrant
             (paragraph  33)  was  arguably  influenced  too  much  by  the
             whereabouts of the original document being unknown, so that he
             found it 'shrouded in mystery and its whereabouts are entirely
             unclear.'  However, the grounds explain that it was in transit
             to and from  the  expert  and  the  solicitors  now  have  the
             original back in their possession.


         (2)  The Article 8 family life assessment arguably failed  to  take
             account of the current application by the appellant's wife for
             settlement, an application which is  now  said  to  have  been
             granted."


7.    Ms  Rasoul  addressed  me  at  some  length  and  explained  that  the
    appellant's father-in-law had now been recognised as a refugee.  Before
    her marriage to the appellant, the appellant's wife made application to
    the respondent as her father's dependant and has now been granted leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.  In addressing me in  respect  of  the
    grounds, Ms Rasoul took me  to  paragraph  33  of  Immigration  Judge's
    Duff's report and suggested that he had erred, because while it was not
    at the time known where the original Iranian legal document was it  was
    perfectly clear that the expert had actually seen  the  original.   The
    second challenge dealt with the issue of  proportionality.   The  judge
    did not,  in  the  view  of  the  appellant,  adequately  consider  the
    interests of and the impact on the appellant's  wife  and  daughter  of
    removal.  The appellant's wife is an invalid and wheelchair  bound  and
    the judge failed to take account of that and failed to take account  of
    the fact that the documents before him  indicated  that  she  had  made
    application for indefinite leave.

8.   For the respondent Mrs Rackstraw relied on  the  Secretary  of  State's
    written response under Rule 24.  The judge could not be criticised  for
    his approach  when  it  was  clear  from  the  determination  that  the
    whereabouts of the warrant (the Iranian legal document) was just simply
    unknown.  The judge makes it  clear  that  Counsel  did  not  have  the
    original and was unaware of the whereabouts of  the  original,  despite
    the fact that the expert claimed to have seen it.  The judge could  not
    be criticised in his approach.

9.   So far as the second  challenge  is  concerned,  the  judge  cannot  be
    criticised for not 'second guessing' the  outcome  of  the  appellant's
    wife's application for indefinite leave to remain.  The grounds  amount
    largely to further representations  and  the  correct  avenue  for  the
    appellant  is  not  via  the  appeal  system  but  by  way  of  further
    submissions to the Secretary of State.   Ms  Rasoul  did  not  wish  to
    respond, but she did clarify that  the  appellant's  child  was  now  a
    British subject and in possession of a British  passport  although,  at
    the date of the judge's determination, the  child  was  not  a  British
    subject.

10.  I have concluded that the determination does  contain  an  error  on  a
    point of law.  If First-tier Tribunal Judge Duff was  concerned  as  to
    the whereabouts of  the  original  warrant,  he  should  have  put  the
    representatives on notice and adjourned in order that they  could  have
    time to find it and produce the original, either to the  respondent  or
    to the Tribunal.  In simply saying he could place little weight to  the
    expert's report because the expert did not attend for cross-examination
    and the original document has not been seen by the Tribunal respondent,
    he acted unfairly and erred in law.

11.  I do not believe that he erred in relation to the  appellant's  Article
    8 claim; he very clearly did, at paragraph 43 and  again  at  44,  take
    account of the fact that sadly the appellant's  wife  is  significantly
    disabled and needs assistance with daily activities.

12.  Paragraph 7 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement  provides  as
    follows:-

              "7. Disposal of appeals in Upper Tribunal


         7.1  Where under Section 12(1)of   the  2007  Act  (Proceedings  on
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper  Tribunal  finds  that
             the making of the decision concerned involved the making of an
             error on a point of law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside  the
             decision and, if it does so, must either remit the case to the
             First-tier Tribunal under Section 12(2)(b)(i) or  proceed  (in
             accordance with relevant Practice Directions)  to  remake  the
             decision under Section 12(2)(b)(ii).


         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to remake the decision, instead of remitting the case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that:-


             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for that party's case to be put and considered
                  by the First-tier Tribunal; or


             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  remade is such  that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.


         7.3  Remaking rather than remitting  will  nevertheless  constitute
             the normal approach to determining appeals where an  error  of
             law  kin  found,  even  if  some   further   fact-finding   is
             necessary."

13.  I am satisfied that this is  an  appeal  which  falls  squarely  within
    paragraph 7 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statement,  given  the
    length of time the parties would have to wait  for  the  matter  to  be
    relisted before me in South Shields or  at  Field  House  and  that  it
    could, conversely, be  heard  relatively  speedily  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and in view of the overriding objective following  the  onward
    conduct of the appeal, I have decided that this appeal be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  hearing  afresh  before  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Duff.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
