







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10923/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 13 October 2014                           |On: 30 October 2014          |
|Prepared: 28 October 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                           Ms Lkhagvakhand Khalzan
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, counsel (instructed by Quality
Solicitors (Orion))
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Mongolia, born on 14th  November  1970.
      She appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal.


   2. Her appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
      respondent to remove her from the UK, having refused her asylum claim,
      was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brenells in a determination
      promulgated on 1st May 2014.


   3. At the hearing before Judge Brenells, counsel withdrew her  Article  8
      claim [19].


   4. The appellant claimed that she  had  been  a  victim  in  Mongolia  of
      domestic violence perpetrated by her husband, whom she claimed was and
      is a police officer.


   5. She claimed that she left Mongolia  in  1998  to  get  away  from  her
      husband who was beating her. She fears returning to Mongolia presently
      as her husband remains the same and she does  not  want  him  anywhere
      near her. She has plans to marry in the UK. She claimed that were  she
      to return, he would be able to find her and could kill her. She  knows
      this because when he came to the UK, he was able to find her easily.


   6. She said that she married her husband, a shamanist, in 1996, when  she
      was 26 years old. He began to abuse her, and has raped and beaten her.




   7. In order to escape from him she applied for a visa to study in the UK.
      She flew to the UK.  She entered the UK on 26th  December  1998  on  a
      student visa and claimed asylum  on  29th  March  1999.  Before  being
      interviewed, she withdrew that  claim,  alleging  that  she  had  been
      subject to duress from her husband who came to the UK  in  2000  on  a
      student visa. He managed to find her. She lived with him here for less
      than a year. She did not report him to the police.


   8. The form on which she withdrew her asylum  claim  was  signed  on  5th
      September 2001 shortly before her voluntary return flight was  due  to
      depart. However, she did not go back but continued to  remain  in  the
      UK.


   9. In 2009, someone told her that her husband was still a policeman.  She
      believes he still is a policemen. Two or three years ago,  her  friend
      in Ulaan Baatar told her that her husband had been asking about her.


  10. During the last 12 years she did not seek to regularise  her  stay  in
      teh UK or claim asylum. All her papers had been left with her husband.
      She had regular contact with her legal representatives about  claiming
      asylum but she did not want to use a  "free  one"  as  they  would  be
      working for the other side as well.


  11. She has not divorced her husband in Mongolia. She is exploring whether
      she can divorce him in the UK. She was issued with an IS 151A document
      as an overstayer. This resulted in a second claim for asylum  made  on
      15th September 2013.


  12. In the reasons for refusal, the respondent did not accept that she was
      married when she left Mongolia. Given that  she  had  been  consistent
      concerning the level of violence, the respondent accepted that she had
      been in a violent relationship at some juncture. However, that was not
      to say that the  violence  was  at  the  hands  of  her  husband.  The
      respondent stated that she had failed to  show  that  Namsraijav,  her
      alleged husband - allegedly a policeman - was the perpetrator of  this
      violence: paragraph 16.


  13. At paragraph 17, the respondent contended that her 'lack  of  tangible
      insight into his job' places in doubt whether he  was  really  in  the
      police.


  14. It was thus accepted that she is a Mongolian woman who had been in  an
      abusive relationship. However, in applying the principles of paragraph
      339L of the Immigration Rules, the respondent did not  'believe'  that
      this was her husband and that he is a policeman in  Mongolia.  It  was
      also not accepted that having fled to the UK, she  later  attempted  a
      reconciliation with him in the UK.


  15. Her failure to submit a fresh claim  for  asylum  in  the  intervening
      years following his claimed return to Mongolia, having had discussions
      with her legal  representatives  in  this  regard,  was  "believed  to
      support  the  belief"  that  she  did  not  have  a  genuine  fear  of
      persecution in Mongolia now -  (paragraph  36).  The  respondent  also
      contended that even if her account is  truthful,  the  opportunity  to
      seek protection to the standard raised in Horvath  and  to  internally
      relocate, "are reasonable in your case" (paragraph 35).


  16. The appellant instructed Mr Robert  Chenciner  to  provide  an  expert
      report, which was considered as part of the evidence  produced  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.


  17. Judge Brenells set out the summary of the expert's report in  full  at
      paragraph 12 of the determination. Mr Chenciner "confirmed"  that  the
      'context' of  the  appellant's  statements  "......is  plausible  with
      regard to, inter alia, conditions in Mongolia, shamanism in  Mongolia,
      domestic violence, corrupt police, trumped up charges, unfair  trials;
      relocation not secret".


  18. He stated that if she were to be returned she would be at risk of rape
      and physical and psychological abuse from her  estranged  husband.  He
      appeared to be a Tangri cult shaman from a relatively  small  minority
      ethnicity. His worst drunken attack on the appellant involved  cutting
      her and chanting which appears to be a  confabulation  of  an  ancient
      shamanic ritual - paragraph 4 of the report [12].


  19. Mr Chenciner  also  asserted  that  her  husband  is  a  long  serving
      policeman  with  plausibly  many  contacts.  If  returned,  she  would
      reasonably visit her friends which might come to his  notice,  as  one
      was approached in 2009. Because of  re-registration  requirements,  he
      would be alerted through police contacts. A woman on her own would  be
      noticed outside Ulaan Baatar.


  20. Accordingly secret relocation is not feasible 'for  long'.  He  stated
      that a policeman who is violent to his wife would likely  be  able  to
      act with even greater impunity. The few  shelters  are  temporary  and
      poorly funded. If she refused to go back to him, he has threatened  to
      put her in prison on a trumped up charge. The police and judiciary are
      corrupt. Her husband is a long serving policeman and it  is  therefore
      plausible that she takes his threat seriously and is afraid.


  21. The Judge also had regard [13] to a psychiatric report prepared by  Dr
      Robin E Lawrence. The  appellant  dictated  a  record  of  events.  Dr
      Lawrence accepted that the appellant had been the victim  of  domestic
      violence.


     Judge Brenell's findings


  22. The Judge's findings with regard to "credibility and fact" are set out
      in four paragraphs [14 to 17].


  23. He noted that the appellant provided no evidence establishing that her
      husband has had any contact with her in recent years. At  the  hearing
      she stated that she has had no contact since 2010 with her friends  in
      Mongolia who  helped  her  in  the  past  as  she  did  not  want  any
      information about her getting through to her husband and  because  she
      wanted to forget about her former life.


  24. He found that it is unlikely that her friends would relay  information
      to her husband. The Judge did not understand why she did not speak  to
      her friends when faced with a threat of return. [14]


  25. He stated that the appellant claimed to have been married but had  not
      produced documentary evidence of this. However, he did not regard this
      as a serious omission because the respondent accepts that she has been
      the victim of domestic violence prior to her coming to the  UK.  There
      was no suggestion that this took place anywhere other than in Mongolia
      [15].


  26. He went on to state that whilst the appellant claimed that her husband
      was a policeman, she has produced no evidence of this other  than  her
      own testimony. Further, the only evidence of her husband  having  come
      here and that he persuaded her to withdraw her first asylum claim, was
      her own word.


  27. She has not explained why, having withdrawn her claim and agreeing  to
      leave the UK, she withdrew her consent but did not continue her  claim
      and remained here without renewing that claim until 2013. She had been
      advised by solicitors when  she  made  her  first  claim.  She  cannot
      therefore claim ignorance of the procedure and had not suggested  that
      she was unable to obtain legal advice in the ten or more years between
      the dates of withdrawal  and  the  dates  when  she  made  the  second
      application [16].


  28. At paragraph 17, the Judge stated that he has considered and  rejected
      the  appellant's  claim  that  there  would  be  no  state  protection
      available to her. In so doing, he has borne in mind that she would  be
      unlikely to advertise her return to  the  person  who  previously  was
      violent towards her "....and the likelihood which I assess as  low  of
      her coming to that person's attention on  her  return  and  the  small
      chance of his wishing to resume the relationship and  her  ability  to
      relocate internally so as to avoid him if that became necessary."


  29. He has also '.....borne in mind  the  background  evidence  indicating
      that Horvath level of protection may well be available to her,  albeit
      that the local courts and police are unlikely to offer the same  level
      of protection from domestic violence as  would  be  available  in  the
      United Kingdom" [17].


  30. In the  result,  Judge  Brenells  concluded  after  considering  those
      factors that the appellant was unlikely to suffer domestic violence on
      her return and that, if this becomes likely, she could  receive  state
      protection or relocate [17].


      The appeal before the Upper Tribunal


  31. On 21st July 2014, Upper Tribunal Judge Allen  granted  the  appellant
      permission to appeal. He stated that the Judge arguably erred  in  not
      making any findings on the expert report, since he  provided  evidence
      on specific  issues  of  relevance  such  as  risk  on  return,  state
      protection and relocation.


  32. Ms Iqbal, who did not represent the appellant at  the  hearing  before
      the First-tier  Tribunal,  relied  on  the  grounds.  She  accordingly
      submitted that the Judge had failed to take into  account  the  expert
      report  of  Mr  Chenciner  in  the  assessment  of   the   appellant's
      credibility or the risk on return.


  33. Although at paragraph 17, the Judge stated that he had borne  in  mind
      the background evidence, there was no attempt to engage with either of
      the expert reports produced. Mr Chenciner's report set out  in  detail
      that if she refused to go back to her husband, he  has  threatened  to
      put her in prison on a trumped up charge. Mr Chenciner stated that the
      police and  judiciary  are  corrupt  because  he  is  a  long  serving
      policeman and it is plausible that she takes this threat seriously and
      is afraid.


  34. The expert also had regard to her claim that a Mongolian  acquaintance
      in London told the appellant  in  2009  that  her  husband  was  still
      working with the police. She also phoned her friend occasionally.  Her
      friend told her that she was approached in 2009 by people asking where
      she was. Mr Chenciner also stated at page 15 of his report that if she
      tried to relocate in a place outside Ulaan  Baatar  she  would  'stick
      out'. Her estranged husband would quickly find her. She would wish  to
      visit her friend and this would get back to her husband.


  35. Ms Iqbal submitted that this evidence was given by the appellant in  a
      statement before the First-tier Tribunal. The  appellant  also  stated
      that she was unable to obtain a copy of her marriage certificate as in
      Mongolia they do not just give out personal information to  any  other
      person.


  36. Further, Ms Iqbal referred to the  answers  that  the  appellant  gave
      during her asylum interview (questions 51-52),  where  she  was  being
      questioned about her fear of returning to Mongolia.  She  stated  that
      she has spoken on three occasions to her friend in the past years  and
      that two or three years ago, her friend in Ulaan Baatar  said  he  had
      been asking about her.


  37. Ms Iqbal submitted that the Judge at paragraph 17 of the determination
      assessed the likelihood of the appellant's coming to the attention  of
      a person who had been violent towards her on her return 'as low'. That
      indicates that the  Judge  was  indeed  accepting  that  there  was  a
      possibility of this happening.


  38. However, he then assessed  that  possibility  only  in  terms  of  the
      background evidence. He did not have regard at  all  to  the  evidence
      given by the expert at paragraphs 2.1.6 and 2.1.7 of the report  which
      dealt with the fact that he is a shaman who had used alcohol  and  who
      had repeatedly beaten her when drunk.


  39. Accordingly, she submitted, the failure by the Judge to have regard at
      all to the expert report meant he had failed to assess  her  claim  on
      the totality of the evidence, including the reports.


  40. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Duffy submitted that it  was  'not  in
      the expert's domain to rely on her account  for  the  purpose  of  his
      finding that she would be subject to further abuse  from  him'.   That
      was a matter for the Judge.


  41. Neither the respondent nor the Judge in fact accepted that 'he was  or
      is a policeman'. At paragraph 16 it was accepted that she had been  in
      a violent relationship at some juncture. However, the Judge stated  at
      paragraph 16 that there  was  no  evidence  that  her  husband  was  a
      policeman, apart from her own testimony.


  42. Accordingly, although it may have been accepted by the expert for  the
      purpose of his opinion, that he was a policeman, this was not accepted
      by the Judge. Accordingly, the expert report sought to  be  relied  on
      was not "germane" to the issue. The expert's ultimate  opinion  as  to
      relocation and risk on return is 'predicated' on  the  fact  that  her
      assailant was and remains in a position of power.


  43. Accordingly, if her husband is "an ordinary  person"  there  would  be
      appropriate state protection available.


  44. Mr Duffy accepted that there was no explicit finding that her  husband
      was not a member of the police. However, paragraph  17  must  be  read
      with regard to the earlier paragraphs, namely paragraphs 14 to 16.


  45. She was thus found on the available evidence to be a former victim  of
      domestic violence from an unknown person.


     Assessment


  46. The basis upon which permission to appeal was  granted  was  that  the
      Judge erred in not making any findings  on  the  expert  report  which
      provided evidence on specific issues of  relevance  such  as  risk  on
      return, state protection and relocation.


  47. However, the basis for the risk factors identified by the  expert  was
      that the appellant's husband is a police officer. Thus, he  refers  at
      paragraph 1.2 to the appellant's  account,  including  the  contention
      that her husband is a policeman. He  goes  on  to  state  that  it  is
      plausible that because of the corrupt patronage system in Mongolia, it
      would be likely that he got  a  job  in  the  police  because  he  was
      sponsored by friends.


  48. Furthermore, at page 2 of his report, he refers to an attack  in  1998
      when she tried to lodge a complaint against  him  at  a  different  UB
      police station to where he had worked  since  1991,  but  nothing  was
      done. He states that the appellant thought "plausibly"  that  she  was
      unable to successfully report her husband to the  police  in  Mongolia
      because her husband worked for the police for a long time and is  well
      connected there.


  49. At page 3 of his report he refers to the appellant's  acquaintance  in
      London who informed her in 2009 that her husband was still working for
      the police. Further, her friend told her that she  was  approached  in
      2011 by people asking where she was.


  50. At paragraph 2.1.1 of his report, page  3,  he  refers  to  widespread
      domestic violence and sexual harassment in Mongolia which indicates  a
      climate where her original experience of domestic violence  from  1996
      to 2001 is plausible. If she  were  now  returned  and  found  by  her
      estranged husband, 'the situation has not significantly changed'.


  51. Finally, at paragraph 2.1.8, when  he  dealt  with  the  viability  of
      internal relocation, he stated that if she tried to  relocate  outside
      Ulaan Baatar, she would stick out and her "police  estranged  husband"
      would quickly find her.


  52. However, the Judge assessed the availability of  state  protection  in
      the light of his earlier assessment of credibility at  paragraphs  14,
      15 and 16. Although he found that her claim to have  married  had  not
      been supported by documentary evidence, this was  not  regarded  as  a
      serious omission because it was accepted by the  respondent  that  she
      had been a victim of domestic violence prior  to  coming  to  the  UK.
      There had been no suggestion that this took place anywhere other  than
      in Mongolia.


  53. The Judge also stated that the appellant's claim that her husband  was
      a policeman had not been supported by any evidence apart from her  own
      assertion. Further, her claim that her husband  came  to  the  UK  and
      persuaded her to withdraw her asylum claim was again, her own word.


  54. She had however not explained why having  withdrawn  her  claim  after
      agreeing to leave the  UK,  she  withdrew  her  consent  but  did  not
      continue her claim, remaining here and not renewing it until 2013.  He
      found that she had been advised by solicitors when she made her  first
      claim and could not therefore claim ignorance of the procedures.


  55. Although no explicit finding was made regarding  her  claim  that  her
      husband was a policeman, it is evident that the Judge did  not  accept
      that she had produced evidence apart from her own  testimony  that  he
      was a policeman.


  56. As submitted by Mr Duffy, findings of fact in this respect were in the
      province of the Judge and not the expert. The Judge had regard to  the
      summary of Mr Chenciner at paragraph 4 of the report.  The  Judge  has
      reproduced the summary in full, including  Mr  Chenciner's  acceptance
      that "he is also  a  long  serving  policeman  in  Ulaan  Bataar  with
      plausibly many contacts."


  57. The Judge was thus well aware that the conclusions relating to risk on
      return, relocation and state protection were upon  the  basis  of  her
      husband's status as a long  serving  policeman  who  would  have  many
      contacts and who would thus be alerted through those  police  contacts
      because of re-registration requirements.  In such circumstances secret
      relocation was not feasible for  long  -  para  4  of  Mr  Chenciner's
      report.


  58. However, the Judge  found  that  the  chance  of  her  coming  to  the
      attention of the 'person who was previously violent towards  her'  was
      low,  as  was  the  small  chance  of  his  wishing  to   resume   the
      relationship. She would also have the ability to  relocate  internally
      so as to avoid him if that became necessary.


  59. It is evident from paragraph 17 of the determination  that  the  Judge
      carefully referred to him as 'the  person'  who  was  previously  been
      violent towards her.  He did not accept that she had produced evidence
      that he was a policeman apart from her own assertion [15].


  60. The appellant did not provide any evidence of his  being  a  policeman
      apart from her own assertion.  Nor did she explain why  such  evidence
      was unavailable. Nor did the appellant provided evidence that  he  has
      had any contact with her in recent years [14].


  61. The findings as to 'credibility and fact' are set out from  paragraphs
      14 onwards.  These findings regarding the  credibility  of  her  claim
      constitute findings of fact which  were  open  to  the  Judge  on  the
      evidence before him.


     Decision


  62. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not  involve  the
      making of any material error on a point of  law.  The  decision  shall
      accordingly stand.







                               Signed                 Date 28/10/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




