
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/10026/2012
     AA/10028/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 11 April 2013                                |On 14 June 2013            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     s a
                                     H A
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Tete, instructed by Kirklees Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants, S A and H A, were born on 11 June  1987  and  25  March
    2010 respectively and are citizens  of  Pakistan.   The  appellant  had
    claimed asylum in the United Kingdom on 6 September 2012 but her  claim
    had been refused and a decision made on 19 October 2012 for her  to  be
    removed from the United Kingdom by way of directions under paragraphs 8-
    10 of Schedule 2 of the Immigration Act 1971.  The  appellant  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a determination promulgated on  21
    January 2013, had dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are five grounds of appeal.  The first ground  asserts  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Sarsfield) had failed to  consider  evidence
    or had made a  mistake  as  to  material  facts.   The  respondent  had
    accepted that the appellant had  suffered  from  ill-treatment  at  the
    hands of her husband although the extent of the ill-treatment  and  the
    claimed ongoing threat from the husband were disputed.   The  appellant
    asserted that she could not return to her home  area  of  Pakistan  or,
    indeed, anywhere else within Pakistan as her husband  would  find  her,
    take away her son (the second appellant) and she would be at real  risk
    of death or ill-treatment.  The grounds assert that, at [22], the judge
    had recorded that the appellant "Has a degree and worked as  a  teacher
    ... the appellant has had her stepfather to look after her from a  very
    early age and her own words - 'He's rich'."  The grounds note that  the
    appellant had stated in her SEF interview (question 51) that NZ was her
    stepfather.  At question 53, the  appellant  had  said,  "[NZ]  is  not
    supportive any more as I am against my husband."

 3. The respondent filed a reply under Rule 24 on 15 February 2013.  At [4]
    of that reply the respondent asserts:

         "The grounds argue  that  the  judge  has  overlooked  evidence  in
         relation  to  the  (now  lack  of)  financial  support   from   the
         stepfather.  This, on careful reading of the determination,  cannot
         be  so  concluded.   The  grounds  argue  that  the  judge  implies
         financial support may be available upon return.  This  is  not  so.
         Paragraph 20(a) makes clear the judge  finds  no  evidence  of  any
         current support.  Nor, with reference to  paragraph  22,  does  the
         judge find that family support would be forthcoming.  The criticism
         of the expert [Dr Shah] is  based  on  the  expert  report  in  the
         Appellant's claim that she is not from a  wealthy  family  but  she
         appears not to take into account the history with  the  stepfather.
         The judge is therefore  passing  comment  on  the  select  evidence
         before the expert - not the stepfather would  support  upon  return
         (sic)."

 4. At [20(a)] the judge found that "There was no evidence of  any  current
    financial support from [the appellant's father-in-law, mother or  other
    family] ...."   Having  considered  the  evidence  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination very carefully, I find that  I  agree  with  the
    submission made in the respondent's reply.   Judge  Sarsfield  did  not
    find that there was evidence to show that the stepfather or  any  other
    family member would in the future support the appellant upon her return
    to Pakistan.  Rather, he is at [22] commenting on the  failure  of  the
    expert, Dr Shah, to have regard to  all  the  evidence  before  him  in
    preparing his report.  That evidence  included  the  appellant's  claim
    that her "rich" stepfather had supported her in the  past.   I  do  not
    find that the judge has misunderstood the evidence or ignored  part  of
    the appellant's evidence.

 5. The second ground asserts that the judge has  "not  asked  himself  the
    correct questions with respect to internal relocation."   Referring  to
    KA (Pakistan) CG [2010]  UKUT  216,  the  grounds  assert  that  it  is
    "important to examine more closely what services exist by way of crisis
    centres, shelters or refuges" for women in Pakistan who have  been  the
    victims of domestic violence and notes that "a range of factors such as
    class, age, health education and child responsibilities etc." should be
    taken into account.  It is asserted that the judge has failed to  adopt
    a "fact sensitive approach" in his approach to and analysis of internal
    relocation.  She has a son who has behavioural difficulties and she  is
    without family or friends to support her.  She  has  no  experience  of
    independent living.  She continues to receive counselling and emotional
    support and advice in the United Kingdom.   It  is  asserted  that  the
    judge has exaggerated the appellant's Bachelor  of  Arts  qualification
    and has applied "UK educational standards" to what  the  appellant  had
    described as "basic studies in Islamic Quran and  other  topics."   The
    appellant's teaching in Pakistan had not been on a professional  basis;
    she had worked voluntarily in a college.

 6. The Rule 24 reply at [5] asserts that,

         "The grounds also argue that the judge has placed undue  weight  on
         the appellant's  educational  and  work  experience.   Again,  with
         reference to paragraph 22, this is not so.  That  the  judge  finds
         the appellant  has  the  education  and  work  experience  to  find
         employment is a finding  entirely  open  to  him  to  make  on  the
         evidence.  The fact the appellant undertook voluntary  rather  than
         paid teaching does not undermine the finding that this puts her  in
         good stead to get future employment.   Likewise,  her  education  -
         whether or not her BA degree is not comparable to a  UK  degree  is
         not critical.  The appellant must hold a degree award  in  Pakistan
         and thus [sic] puts her at an educational advantage  in  comparison
         to the vast majority of the population."

 7. At [23] the judge wrote:

         "Dr Shah confirms that the appellant is  not  the  subject  of  any
         police investigation and will not face  hostility  because  of  any
         immoral behaviour.  He says internal relocation in big cities is  a
         possibility and there are shelters available.  The police are  more
         willing to investigate in  cases  where  there  has  been  physical
         violence - as in this instance - and do take action.  He says it is
         unlikely that the appellant's husband or either family will try  to
         find  her  in  another  city.   I  have  considered  the  issue  of
         relocation and the principles and additional guidance in  the  case
         of Januzi [2006] UKHL 5 which  incorporate  the  criteria  in  Rule
         339O.  Pakistan is a  large  country  with  several  large  cities.
         Supporter systems and protection are available."

 8. The appellant has stated unequivocally in answer to question 25 at  the
    asylum interview that she "did  a  BA  in  Islamic  studies."   In  his
    report, Dr Shah [18] records that "[The appellant's] education level is
    not very high: it is matriculation, i.e. education up to tenth class in
    high school (equivalent to GCSE in England)."  The appellant refers  in
    her evidence to having been away at college and working  on  a  campus.
    It is difficult to reconcile the appellant's evidence with what Dr Shah
    has said about her education.  On the face of the evidence, I find that
    Judge Sarsfield was entitled to conclude that there was  a  discrepancy
    between the appellant's evidence and the contents of Mr  Shah's  report
    and further to find that the appellant had a higher level of  education
    than that which Dr Shah had taken as the basis of his risk  assessment.
    I have no reason to doubt that the judge was aware of  the  differences
    in the education systems of the United Kingdom and Pakistan  but  I  do
    not see why he should be criticised for taking at face value  what  the
    appellant had said in her own evidence.  It follows  from  the  judge's
    findings that he was entitled to find that the appellant (with  her  BA
    degree and teaching experience, albeit on a voluntary basis)  would  be
    better placed to find a job outside her home area of Pakistan  than  Dr
    Shah considered to be the case.

 9. Ground 4 asserts that the judge made findings  that  "are  inconsistent
    with the evidence about the appellant's ability to live independently."
     At [22] the judge had found that "[The appellant's] ability to  settle
    in the UK and look after her son on her own whilst  also  pregnant,  is
    experience that would assist her in looking after him and surviving and
    another aspect that is not covered [in Dr Shah's report]."  The grounds
    assert that the appellant had faced homelessness in the United  Kingdom
    had she not enjoyed the assistance of NASS.

10. For better or for worse, the appellant has had  to  live  independently
    with her child while she has been  in  the  United  Kingdom.   She  has
    received support and counselling but the fact that she has required for
    those services here, where they are available at little or no cost  and
    where she has been living in an entirely foreign environment where  she
    does not speak the language and where she may have struggled to get  to
    grips with different  social  and  cultural  norms,  does  not,  in  my
    opinion, indicate that she would have any such need for similar support
    in her country of nationality, Pakistan.  I find that it  was  open  to
    the judge in considering internal flight to take into account the  fact
    that the appellant was a relatively well-educated woman who  had  lived
    independently in the United Kingdom.

11. Ground 5 asserts that the judge failed to take account of  evidence  (a
    letter from Lynne Hirrington) a parent support  worker.   That  letter,
    which was in the papers before the  judge,  confirms  the  support  the
    second appellant is receiving and also details the behavioural problems
    he has which appear to result from the domestic  violence  suffered  by
    the first appellant.  At [6], the judge stated that he had  "considered
    all  grounds  of  appeal  open  to  the  appellant  and  the  documents
    available."  In the light of  that  statement,  I  have  no  reason  to
    believe that the judge has failed to consider any  particular  item  of
    evidence. I find that there was no need for the judge to refer to  each
    and every item of evidence in his determination.  He was aware  of  the
    child's behavioural problems and I note that  very  little  appears  to
    have been made of those problems in either the oral evidence adduced to
    the First-tier Tribunal  or  in  the  submissions  of  the  appellants'
    Counsel (Miss Pickering) at that hearing,.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    judge has considered all relevant evidence relating to both  appellants
    in reaching his conclusions as to internal flight within Pakistan.

12. Ground 6  asserts  that  the  judge  has  failed  to  address  evidence
    concerning the best interests of the child [the second appellant]  (see
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009).   The
    grounds assert that it would "not be in [the second  appellant's]  best
    interests to be removed from the UK.  It is not in accordance with  his
    general wellbeing and promoting his welfare to do so."

13. This ground is without merit.  The judge considered Section 55 at [29].
     He refers also to ZH (Tanzania) 2011 UKSC 4.  He makes the valid point
    at [30] that "whilst prospects in the UK may be better than in Pakistan
    and there may be more and better services and facilities available, the
    appellants are not UK citizens."  He  also  found  that  there  is  "no
    medical evidence of any serious problems and medical care is  available
    in Pakistan.  Education is available too.  [The  second  appellant]  is
    not at school in the UK.  He is  young  enough  to  adapt  to  life  in
    Pakistan; the family could return as  one  unit."   Those  observations
    clearly indicate that the judge has taken proper account of Section  55
    in reaching his determination.  He  might  have  added  that  the  best
    interests of the child are satisfied by the second appellant  remaining
    with his mother and that  there  is  no  prospect  that  they  will  be
    separated as a consequence of the decisions to remove both of  them  to
    Pakistan.  The grounds make no reference to the importance of  a  child
    growing up in a country of his or her nationality and  with  access  to
    their own culture.  The judge's findings in respect of Section 55  were
    clearly open to him on the evidence.

14. For the reasons I have given above, I find that the judge has not erred
    in law such that his determination should be set aside.  The appeal  is
    dismissed accordingly.

DECISION

15. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 2 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
