
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10025/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |          Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 5 August 2015                         |          On 14 August 2015       |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     RN
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr T Bahja of Counsel instructed by Duncan  Lewis  &
Co, solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Respondent  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as the "Applicant", is a  national
    of Sri Lanka born on 1 July 1990.  He is a Sinhalese from Colombo.

 2. On 27 January 2010 he arrived with leave as a Tier 4 (General)  Student
    Migrant.  On 8 March  2012  the  Appellant  (the  SSHD)  curtailed  his
    student leave.  It would appear the  Applicant  did  not  exercise  his
    right of appeal and on 6 June 2012 submitted an application  for  leave
    as a Tier 1 (Highly Skilled Entrepreneur) Migrant which  on  15  August
    2012 the  SSHD  refused  with  no  in-country  right  of  appeal.   The
    Applicant sought permission to bring proceedings  for  judicial  review
    which on 16 April 2013 was refused.  On 21 October 2014 he reported  an
    assault upon himself to the police  which  brought  him  again  to  the
    attention of the SSHD who on 22 October 2014 made  directions  for  his
    removal to Sri Lanka in ten days.

 3. On 28 October 2014 the  Applicant  claimed  asylum  because  he  feared
    persecution on return to Sri Lanka by reason of his sexual orientation.
     He was detained on 1 December 2014.  Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Adio later ordered the transfer of his appeal out of the detained  fast
    track procedure.

 4. By a decision promulgated on  1  June  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Eban allowed the Applicant's appeal on asylum and human rights
    grounds and made a direction for anonymity.

 5. The SSHD sought permission to appeal which on 23 June 2015 Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Page granted because it was  arguable  the  Judge's
    decision was so devoid of reasoning that the SSHD could not  understand
    why the Applicant had been successful and arguably the Judge had failed
    to make findings whether the Applicant could internally relocate in Sri
    Lanka.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 6. The  Applicant  attended  although  he  took  no  active  part  in  the
    proceedings.

 7. For the SSHD Mr Wilding relied on the permission  grounds.   The  Judge
    had failed to give proper consideration to the learning in  LH  and  IP
    (gay men: risk) Sri Lanka CG  [2015]  UKUT  00073  and  had  failed  to
    consider the issue of internal relocation which the SSHD had raised  at
    some length at pages 12 and 16 of her reasons for decision letter of 18
    November 2014.

 8. The Judge had failed to consider whether the Applicant  could  relocate
    to a different area of Colombo or  to  another  city,  such  as  Kandy.
    Additionally paragraph 17 of her decision was inadequately reasoned  to
    support her allowing the appeal.

 9. LH and IP at paragraphs 118 and 119 stated:-

         ...  Although there is a lack of  state  protection,  there  is  no
         evidence of serious harm except in isolated instances.   There  may
         be  a  few  members  of  the  wider  LGBTI  community  who   suffer
         difficulties at the level of persecution, but the evidence  is  not
         there to indicate that it is only because they are gay men.

         ...  If a risk exists,  we  find  that  internal  relocation  would
         normally be sufficient to enable an individual to avoid  the  risk,
         since  risks  are  usually  from  family,  friends  or  neighbours.
         Colombo would ... be the obvious choice for internal relocation ...
         options may exist to other Sri Lankan cities also.

    The decision contained material errors of law and should be set aside.

10. Mr Bahja for the Applicant submitted the Judge had been entitled to the
    findings of fact she had made on the basis of the evidence  before  her
    and to conclude the Applicant would be at  risk.  References  had  been
    made to internal relocation at paragraphs 11, 12 and 17.  The Judge had
    made clear findings of fact at paragraph 14 of her decision.

11. The circumstances of the Appellants in LH and IP  were  different  from
    those of the Applicant who had been beaten by his father and  raped  on
    two occasions.  He would not be able to relocate.

12. There was no material error of law in the Judge's decision which should
    be upheld.

13. In response Mr Wilding noted that Mr Bahja had not mounted a  sustained
    defence of the reasoning in paragraph 17 of  the  Judge's  decision  in
    which she had barely dealt with the issue of internal relocation and so
    had not adequately dealt with that issue  which  had  been  a  material
    feature in the SSHD's reasons for refusal of the Applicant's claim.

Findings and Consideration

14. The Judge's  decision  is  as  indicated  in  the  SSHD's  grounds  for
    permission to appeal extremely brief.   Brevity  in  a  decision  is  a
    quality to be admired so long as all the material issues are adequately
    considered.  The Judge's decision failed adequately to address:-

       . the availability of internal  relocation  in  Colombo  which  is  a
         substantial city or anywhere else in Sri Lanka;

       . the assessment of the likely origins of risk to gay  men  addressed
         at paragraph 119 of LH and IP;

       . the relevance and impact of the Applicant's evidence  that  he  had
         been beaten by his father, raped by his uncle and  subjected  to  a
         gang rape by fellow students;

       . generally to match the findings  of  fact  made  by  the  Judge  to
         specific elements of the evidence, being the Applicant's replies at
         interview, statement and oral evidence before the Judge; and

       . the need for her decision to set out or refer to the relevant parts
         of the oral evidence.

    These were material errors of law such that the decision should be  set
    aside in its entirety. Concessions made by the Respondent will survive.



15. There then followed  discussion  whether  the  parties  were  ready  to
    proceed to a substantive re-hearing.  No interpreter  had  been  booked
    and for lack of rehearsal of the oral evidence in the decision, I found
    that without oral evidence it would be unlikely that I could order that
    the Judge's findings be preserved.  I took account of the fact that the
    SSHD had accepted  the  Applicant's  sexual  orientation  but  had  not
    expressly accepted his account of his beating and rapes.

16. The decision has been set aside. Section 12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007 allows for the case  to  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal with directions or for the Upper  Tribunal  to  re-
    make it. Having regard to Practice Statement 7.2(b) and the nature  and
    extent of the fact finding required, I conclude the decision should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to decide afresh.

Anonymity

17. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction  and  although  the
    issue of anonymity was not addressed at the hearing before me I find it
    appropriate for the time being to continue the anonymity direction  and
    make an anonymity order.

Notice of Decision

    The First-tier Tribunal's decision contained errors of law such that it
    should be set aside in its entirety and the appeal heard afresh.


Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  11.
viii. 2015




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




