
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10054/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Promulgated on                       |
|24 July 2015                         |On 2 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AZA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms K Parker, instructed by Avon and Bristol Law
Centre


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against  the  decision
    of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Suffield-Thompson)  allowing  the
    appeal of the respondent (whom we shall call "the claimant") against  a
    decision on 28 October 2014 refusing her asylum and  deciding  to  give
    directions for her removal.

 2. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  a  substantial  amount  of
    evidence, including documentary evidence, and also including  a  report
    from a person she described as  an  "expert".   She  decided  that  the
    appellant was a vulnerable person who had been open and truthful in her
    account at her asylum interview and in telling  her  story  to  medical
    professionals, the expert and to the Tribunal.  On  the  basis  of  her
    evidence, and the other evidence in the case, the judge concluded  that
    the claimant was at risk of ill treatment  as  a  person  who  had  not
    undergone FGM; that relocation would not be viable and that there would
    be no sufficient protection against the persecution of which she had  a
    well-founded fear.  Those were the reasons for which  she  allowed  the
    appeal.

 3. The Secretary of State raises three grounds of appeal.   The  first  is
    that the judge failed to apply Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] UKAIT 00439,
    in relation to the documents that had been produced.  There is no merit
    in that ground.  The  only  reason  that  there  might  have  been  for
    disbelieving the claimant's documents was that it might be possible  to
    obtain them fraudulently.  The judge assessed the evidence as a  whole,
    however, and, as we have said, accepted the personal credibility of the
    claimant.  There was  no  specific  reason  in  that  context  for  her
    documents to be doubted.  The judge was entitled to reach the view that
    she did.

 4. The Secretary of State's second ground  is  that,  although  the  judge
    regarded the report of the expert as "extremely helpful" she omitted to
    make any findings of fact in relation to it.  This ground  is  bizarre.
    The judge specifically  indicated  that  she  accepted  the  report  as
    extremely helpful, and set out the help she derived from it in  sixteen
    sub-paragraphs, every one of which would have been entirely  irrelevant
    if she was not making findings of fact based on it.

 5. The third ground is that the judge failed  to  apply  relevant  country
    guidance, FB (Lone women - PSG -  internal  relocation  -  AA  (Uganda)
    considered) Sierra Leone [2008] UKAIT 00090.  That might  have  been  a
    good ground, but for the fact that, as Ms Parker pointed out, that case
    is not a country guidance determination.

 6. The relevant section of the Practice Direction of the Senior  President
    of Tribunals is as follows:

          "12 Starred and Country Guidance Determinations

         ...

         12.2 A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT or  the  IAT
             bearing the letters "CG" shall be treated as an  authoritative
             finding on  the  country  guidance  issue  identified  in  the
             determination, based on the evidence before the members of the
             Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT that determine the appeal.  As  a
             result, unless it has been expressly superseded or replaced by
             any later "CG" determination, or is  inconsistent  with  other
             authority that is binding on  the  Tribunal,  such  a  country
             guidance case is authoritative in any  subsequent  appeal,  so
             far as that appeal:-

                  (a) relates to the country guidance issue in question; and



                  (b) depends on the same or similar evidence.

         12.3 A  list  of  current  CG  cases  will  be  maintained  on  the
             Tribunal's website.  Any  representative  of  a  party  to  an
             appeal concerning a particular country will be expected to  be
             conversant with the current "CG"  determinations  relating  to
             that country.

         12.4 Because of the principle that like cases should be treated  in
             a like manner, any  failure  to  follow  a  clear,  apparently
             applicable country guidance case or to show why  it  does  not
             apply to the case in question is  likely  to  be  regarded  as
             grounds for appeal on a point of law".

 7. The decision in FB to which the Secretary of State refers, has a number
    of features of a country guidance determination, including an  appendix
    setting out a list of materials taken into account, but its citation is
    not marked "CG", and it is not listed on the Tribunal's  website  as  a
    country guidance case.  In the circumstances, it appears to us that the
    Secretary of State's third ground of appeal is also without foundation.
     The Judge took into  account  the  material  before  her  relating  to
    country circumstances.  Her conclusions do not appear to us  to  suffer
    from any error of law.

 8. For the foregoing reasons we dismiss the Secretary of  State's  appeal:
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision, allowing  the  appellant's  appeal,
    therefore stands.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 13 August 2015
