


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/10973/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17 October 2017                         |On 19 October 2017             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                       ANDRE RODILPHE M'BIKAYI KALONJI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr Vokes instructed by TRP Solicitors.
For the Respondent:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 6 July 2017, the Upper Tribunal  handed  down  its  decision  in
        which it was found the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in  law  in
        dismissing the appellants protection and  human  rights  claim  but
        only in relation to the assessment of the claim pursuant to article
        8 ECHR.
     2. The matter comes before the Upper Tribunal today for  the  purposes
        of a Resumed hearing to enable that aspect  of  the  appeal  to  be
        considered further and for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  substitute  a
        decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.
     3. For the purposes of this hearing the appellant has produced further
        evidence including a report from Diane Harris an Independent Social
        Worker dated 10 October 2017.
     4. At the outset of the hearing Mr Mills  addressed  the  Tribunal  in
        relation to two key questions being (a) whether the child in  issue
        in this case is a British national and (b)  whether  the  appellant
        has a genuine parental relationship with  the  child  and  that  it
        would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  United
        Kingdom. Having considered the material now made available Mr Mills
        accepted both these questions will be answered in the affirmative.
     5. Section 117B (6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
        2002 provides that in the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to
        deportation, the public interest  does  not  require  the  person's
        removal where-


        (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
        with a qualifying child, and
        (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
        United Kingdom.


     6. It was conceded that as both these requirements are  satisfied  the
        public interest does not require the appellant's removal  from  the
        United Kingdom and that the appeal must therefore be allowed.
     7. Mr Vokes also referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal in MA
        (Pakistan) which supported the position adopted by Mr Mills.
     8. In light of the concession, which is wholly in accordance with  the
        law and represents  the  only  outcome  the  Upper  Tribunal  could
        realistically achieve in relation to this  matter,  the  appeal  is
        allowed on human rights grounds.


Decision

     9. The original First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has  been  found  to  have
        materially erred in law and that decision set aside.  I remake  the
        decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity


    10. I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 17 October 2017



