
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10534/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 5th October 2015                       |On the 14th October 2015      |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                             Mr Nazar Wali Hotak
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Lay, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For the reasons that I am about to give I find that the determination
    of Judge Carlin does not contain an error of law.  The Appellant is a
    national of Afghanistan and had applied for asylum.  That was refused
    and his appeal was heard by Judge Carlin at Birmingham on the 16th
    April 2015 and the appeal was dismissed for reasons given in a decision
    promulgated on the 22nd May 2015.

 2. It is not disputed by the Home Office or at any other point that the
    Appellant has previously sustained injuries in some sort of blast.  The
    Appellant's case is that that was as a result of action against him by
    the Taliban.  The Home Office dispute that.

 3. The findings made by the Judge start at paragraph 13.  The Judge
    correctly noted there at paragraph 15 that there was the lower standard
    of proof and reasons for the finding that he had not reached that
    standard and discharged the burden are to be found starting at
    paragraph 16.

 4. The Judge would have expected the Appellant's mother to have had visits
    from members of the Taliban since he had left Afghanistan and did not
    accept to the lower standard that that had taken place.  In paragraph
    17 he noted that the Appellant had had no contact from the Taliban
    until two weeks before he left and his mother had prevented him from
    being taken.

 5. Referring to the evidence as to the position of women in Afghanistan
    the Judge rejected the suggestion that his mother would have been able
    to prevent the Taliban from taking him, if that was their intention,
    and also found that it was improbable that they would then leave him
    there for his mother to take the chance to make arrangements for him to
    leave the country.  Those are perfectly justified findings which were
    clearly open to the Judge on the information that he had.

 6. Issue is taken by the Appellant with the Judge's reliance on the
    absence of evidence from his mother.  The Judge looked at what the
    Appellant had said had taken place both before and after he had left,
    whether contact was direct or indirect is perhaps not particularly
    important.  The fact is that indirect contact at the very least was
    maintained over the years since the Appellant has been in the UK, and
    that had resulted in his mother being able to forward to him documents
    that he has relied on in the appeal.

 7. Even if she had not provided him with a witness statement either
    through reluctance or even perhaps through illiteracy information could
    have been provided that would have given the detail that the Judge
    found was missing.  In paragraph 20 he found the Appellant to be vague.
     He was unable to give any detail about the visits such as the number
    and frequency and the Judge noted that had the Appellant's mother been
    receiving those visits he would have expected the Appellant to be able
    to provide such details.

 8. It is correct to note that the Judge did also note that there was
    nothing directly from the mother but given the findings that the Judge
    had made on the information that he had that were open to him those
    findings are irrelevant.  One can simply take out paragraph 22 and that
    does not affect the reasoning that the Judge applied.

 9. That left the Judge with a situation where the Appellant was injured in
    a country which we know has internal conflict and the question for the
    Judge was were those caused by the Taliban where he gave perfectly
    decent reasons for rejecting the Appellant's account as to how it was
    he came to leave Afghanistan and was entitled against that rejection of
    credibility to find that the claim that this had been brought by the
    Taliban rather than by some other cause was entirely open to the Judge.

10. Accordingly I find that the Judge made no error of law, the findings
    were open to him and the decision stands.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law and the
decision stands as the disposal of the Appellant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 13th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

