
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10930/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal   |Decision Promulgated |
|on 18 January 2017                        |on 20 January 2017   |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                               NAJAM UL SEHAR
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Solanki instructed by Morden Solicitors LLP
                    (Birmingham)
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Juss
    (hereinafter referred to as 'the Judge'), promulgated  on  the  4  July
    2016, in which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  refusal
    of her protection application and/or  for  leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds.
 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on the  21  December  1960
    who was accepted as being a follower of the Ahmadi faith.

Preliminary issue

 3. Miss Solanki drafted the grounds of appeal which contain six  heads  of
    challenge.  The grant of permission refers only to one issue, "There is
    arguable error, however, over the judge's alleged  failure  to  address
    the reason why the appellant would not proselytise in Pakistan, or even
    admit to her faith, in accordance with MT (Ahmadi -  HJ  (Iran)  [2011]
    UKUIT 00277  Permission is given on this ground."
 4. If a judge grants permission on some, but not all, the grounds on which
    permission to appeal is sought the correct procedure is for a notice to
    this effect to be sent to the party making the application giving  them
    the opportunity to make additional representation to the Upper Tribunal
    before the matter is listed for hearing. Miss Solanki relies  upon  the
    decision in Ferrer (limited appeal grounds: Alvi) [2012] UKUT 00304 the
    second headnote of which reads:

         "(2)     Where the First-tier Tribunal judge  nevertheless  intends
         to grant permission only in respect of certain of  the  applicant's
         grounds, the judge should make this abundantly plain, both  in  his
         or her decision under rule 25(5)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
         Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and by ensuring that the Tribunal's
         administrative staff send out  the  proper  notice,  informing  the
         applicant  of  the  right  to  apply  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal on  grounds on which the  applicant  has  been
         unsuccessful in the application to the First-tier Tribunal."



 5. This did not  occur  in  this  case,  which  amounts  to  a  procedural
    irregularity, although it was not an issue that it was agreed needed to
    be canvassed further or the matter adjourned for the  reasons  set  out
    below.

Error of law

 6. In paragraph 23 of the decision under challenge the Judge wrote:

         "23.     In  addition  to  this,  it  remains  the  case  that  the
         Appellant is a person who has remained in Lahore  itself  for  many
         decades working in the city hospital where she  could  have  easily
         been traced by the Tehrik-Khatam-Nabwat and targetted  in  the  way
         she claims.  The second witness, Aneela, herself came to the UK  as
         a student and then returned to Pakistan in 2010 (see  paragraph  20
         of the refusal letter).  This despite Aneela's  evidence  that  she
         was  being  targeted  by  Abdul  Rahman  from  2004  onwards.  Most
         importantly, the Appellant has not actively preached her  faith  in
         Pakistan and she does not now and the  letter  from  the  Ahmaddiya
         Associaition does not say so either.  The Appellant's working at  a
         government hospital for 25 years did not lead her to experience any
         problems that were related to her faith, and even  now  the  family
         moved around Lahore, over many decades that  they  were  there,  it
         would have been possible for them to have been targeted if that was
         the wish of any person or body."

 7. In her asylum interview at question 117 the appellant was  asked  "Did
    you practice your faith discretely in Pakistan?" To which her  response
    was "Yes, because we feared if people  found  out  about  us  we  would
    encounter problems.  If I held any programme in my house  I  fear  that
    the pele in the neighbourhood would find out  and  create  problems.  I
    wasn't holding any position in the community because I was working  and
    I was involved in the problem of the murder  of  my  son  pursuing  the
    case."  The appellant also stated that she had  not  been  involved  in
    preaching activities in the UK due to her health.
 8. The grounds assert legal error in the Judge failing  to  give  the  sur
    place activities careful consideration or evidential  analysis  as  the
    country guidance recommends and that there had not been  the  necessary
    enquiry and analysis of the appellants intentions and wishes. The  need
    to consider intention is established by the decision of MN  and  Others
    (Ahmadi - country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 389  where
    the Tribunal found that those considering cases of this nature need  to
    ask themselves the following:

         "5.      In light of the above, the first  question  the  decision-
         maker must ask is (1) whether the claimant genuinely is an  Ahmadi.
         As with all judicial fact-finding the  judge  will  need  to  reach
         conclusions on all the evidence as a whole giving  such  weight  to
         aspects of that evidence as appropriate in accordance with  Article
         4 of the Qualification Directive.  This is  likely  to  include  an
         enquiry  whether  the  claimant  was  registered  with  an   Ahmadi
         community in Pakistan and worshipped and engaged there on a regular
         basis. Post-arrival  activity  will  also  be  relevant.   Evidence
         likely to be relevant includes  confirmation  from  the  UK  Ahmadi
         headquarters regarding the activities relied  on  in  Pakistan  and
         confirmation from the local community in the UK where the  claimant
         is worshipping.


         6. The next step  (2)  involves  an  enquiry  into  the  claimant's
         intentions or wishes as  to  his  or  her  faith,  if  returned  to
         Pakistan.  This is  relevant  because  of  the  need  to  establish
         whether it is of particular importance to the religious identity of
         the Ahmadi concerned to engage in  paragraph  2(i)  behaviour.  The
         burden is on the claimant to demonstrate that any intention or wish
         to practise and manifest aspects of the faith openly that  are  not
         permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) is genuinely held and of
         particular importance to  the  claimant  to  preserve  his  or  her
         religious identity.  The decision maker needs to evaluate  all  the
         evidence. Behaviour since arrival in the UK may also  be  relevant.
         If the claimant discharges this burden he is likely to be  in  need
         of protection.


         9. A sur place claim by an Ahmadi based on post-arrival  conversion
         or revival in belief and practice will require  careful  evidential
         analysis. This will probably include consideration of  evidence  of
         the head of the claimant's local United  Kingdom  Ahmadi  Community
         and from the UK headquarters,  the  latter  particularly  in  cases
         where there has been a conversion.  Any  adverse  findings  in  the
         claimant's account as a whole may be relevant to the assessment  of
         likely behaviour on return."

 9. As the grant of permission identified, there is no consideration of the
    second element of the above test. If the appellant wishes to preach her
    faith but is prevented from doing so as a result of a well founded fear
    of persecution or ill treatment, she may be entitled to  be  recognised
    as a refugee.  I find that in failing to consider these aspects of  the
    case, adequality or at all, the Judge erred.
10. This is also relevant when  considering  the  question  of  entitlement
    under 276ADE and whether  the  appellant  will  face  very  significant
    obstacles on return if she is unable to practice her faith openly.
11. It is also asserted the Judge failed  to  give  proper  weight  to  the
    letter from the Ahmadi  Association  UK  which  it  is  said  contained
    detailed and specific information of the appellants activities  in  the
    UK, the significance of which appears to have been overlooked.
12. It was accepted by Ms Aboni that the decision does not  make  reference
    to intention which is a key factor when assessing risk on return. It is
    accepted by this Tribunal  that  the  finding  of  little  evidence  of
    problems in Lahore was made, but if this was because the appellant felt
    unable to openly declare her faith, as  she  claims,  it  explains  the
    absence of risk and  may  give  rise  to  the  need  for  international
    protection as per HJ (Iran).
13. I find the Judge has erred in law for the reasons set out above. It was
    agreed in all the circumstances that the decision shall  be  set  aside
    with there being no preserved findings. As this is a  matter  in  which
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary in
    order for the decision in the appeal to be remade, having regard to the
    overriding objective in rule 2, is key to the merits of the  claim  and
    has not yet been undertaken, it is appropriate to remit the case to the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.


Decision

14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set aside  the
    decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as follows.  This
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Sheldon  Court
    Birmingham to be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge Juss.


  Anonymity.


15. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  I  make
    no such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 18 January 2017
