
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM/DP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/10564/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th August 2015                  |On 21st September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                     Aa
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Tabori, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Eritrea born on 1st December 1995 (albeit
    that that date of birth is disputed by the Secretary of State).  It  is
    however accepted by the Secretary of State  that  the  Appellant  is  a
    minor.  The Appellant applied for asylum on the basis that  she  had  a
    well-founded fear of persecution in Eritrea due to her  religion  being
    that of a Pentecostal Christian and also because  she  left  illegally.
    The Appellant originally left Eritrea on 19th January  2011  travelling
    to the Sudan and she left  Sudan  on  22nd  March  2014  travelling  to
    France.  She arrived in the UK by lorry on 25th March  2014  which  was
    the same day upon which she claimed asylum.

 2. The Appellant appealed the Notice of Refusal of the Secretary of  State
    and her appeal came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Kelly
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 8th April 2015.  It is relevant to note that
    at that hearing the Appellant was represented by Counsel  but  did  not
    personally attend and that no reason was given to the Tribunal for  her
    non-attendance.  The Appellant's appeal was subsequently  dismissed  on
    asylum and human rights grounds and the Appellant was found not  to  be
    in need of humanitarian protection.  An anonymity direction was however
    made.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal on 28th April 2014.
     Those grounds contended that the Appellant was unable  to  attend  the
    hearing due to a sudden illness and that  supporting  hospital  medical
    documentation setting out the detail  of  the  illness  and  a  witness
    statement by the Appellant as to the events which led up  to  her  non-
    attendance were lodged with  the  grounds  for  permission  to  appeal.
    Further grounds were submitted in relation to the Appellant's  date  of
    birth and credibility.

 4. On 11th May 2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  granted
    permission to appeal concluding that there was an arguable error of law
    that had the Appellant been able to attend the evidence may have made a
    material  difference  to  the  outcome  or  to  the  fairness  of   the
    proceedings.

 5. On 18th May 2015 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  It is pertinent to note paragraph 3 of the  Rule
    24 response which states:

         "The Respondent does not have the medical documentation referred to
         in the application for permission.  If the  documentation  supports
         the Appellant's contention that she was unable  to  attend  through
         ill-health the Respondent is inclined to the view that  refusal  of
         that application for an adjournment is a material error of law."

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Mr Tabori.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Avery.

 7. It is important to note the concession made by the Secretary  of  State
    in the Rule 24 response to the  effect  that  if  medical  evidence  is
    produced that the Appellant was unable to attend the hearing before the
    First-tier Tribunal that it may be conceded by the Secretary  of  State
    that there is a material error of law.

 8. I am taken by Mr Tabori to paragraph  18  of  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.
    Those  Grounds  of  Appeal  submit  that  there  is  medical   evidence
    confirming the Appellant attended the Emergency Department at 20:53  on
    8th April with a 24 hour history of diarrhoea and vomiting and that the
    Appellant  was  diagnosed  as  suffering  from   "gastro-intestinal   -
    diarrhoea and  gastroenteritis  of  presumed  infections  origin."   He
    submits that that diagnosis explains why the Appellant  was  unable  to
    travel from Plymouth to London on 8th April  in  order  to  attend  the
    hearing and that her failure to inform her solicitors on the day of the
    reasons for her absence must be viewed in the light of the severity  of
    the symptoms she describes, the lack of  charge  on  her  mobile  phone
    battery and, significantly, her age.

 9. In addition I am provided with copies of the confirmatory evidence from
    the hospital that the  Appellant  did  attend  in  the  above-mentioned
    circumstances.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

12. There has been a plethora of case law regarding issue of  fairness  and
    failure of the First-tier Tribunal  to  grant  an  adjournment  in  the
    absence of an Appellant.   Generally  speaking  those  authorities  are
    strict  in  their  interpretation  of  the  law  and   emphasise   that
    adjournments can only be with good reason and that every  attempt  must
    be  made  by  all  parties  attending  before  the  Tribunal  to  avoid
    circumstances arising when an adjournment request is made.

13. To that extent it is difficult to criticise the approach adopted by the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  After all Judge Kelly was merely  aware  of
    the fact that the Appellant  had  a  poor  attendance  history  and  no
    explanation was given to him as to why she had not  attended.   However
    subsequent circumstances show quite clearly that the Appellant was  ill
    and had been receiving hospital treatment.  Further I take into account
    the Appellant's age although she is not a minor.  However the principal
    issue is that the Appellant was unable to give testimony in support  of
    her claim and in such circumstances I find that there  was  a  material
    unfairness to the Appellant.  The correct approach, and this is  agreed
    by both legal representatives, is to note evidence  produced  from  the
    Emergency Department at Plymouth NHS Trust subsequently sent on to  the
    Appellant's GP Dr J Pickard and to remit the matter back to the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be re-heard on the first available date with  none  of
    the findings of fact stand.

14. There is  one  further  issue  that  I  wish  to  address  within  this
    determination.  It is an administrative issue  but  an  important  one.
    The Appellant attends before the Tribunal.  She has travelled  all  the
    way from Plymouth.  She has clearly attended having been advised to  do
    so by her instructed solicitors Blavo  &  Co.   However  the  Appellant
    advises that she lives in Plymouth and that she does not  live  at  the
    address set out in the notice of hearing of  [-]  Thurlow  Street  SE17
    2UW.  She believes that to be the contact  details  of  an  interpreter
    that she was referred to.  The Appellant clearly  does  not  speak  any
    English and is having difficulty  in  providing  the  Tribunal  with  a
    correct address.  I therefore direct as a preliminary  issue  that  the
    Appellant's  instructed  solicitors  do  notify  the  Tribunal  of  the
    Appellant's correct address within seven  days  of  today's  date.   It
    would be useful  if  they  are  able  to  provide  a  full  and  proper
    explanation as to why the address was previously recited  as  being  to
    the Tribunal as the address in Thurlow Street, SE17.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  The matter is remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
to be re-heard and the following directions are given:

       . None of the findings of fact of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  to
         stand.

       . The matter is to be re-heard on the first available  date  28  days
         hence at Hatton Cross before any First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other
         than Immigration Judge Kelly, with an ELH of three hours.

       . That there be leave to either party to file and serve an up-to-date
         bundle of evidence upon which they intend to rely  at  least  seven
         days pre-hearing.

       . An Amharic interpreter is required.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
