
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10446/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 August 2016                            |On 17 August 2016             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                    [I m]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Chakmakjian, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Libya who appealed against a decision  of
    the respondent to refuse asylum, grant Humanitarian Protection and also
    argued that his Article 2, 3 and 8 rights under the European Convention
    of Human Rights would be breached were he to be returned to his country
    of origin.

 2. His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal K. Real who in
    a decision promulgated on 12 May 2016 dismissed it on all grounds.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was  initially  refused
    by the First-tier Tribunal.  However, the grounds were renewed for  the
    Upper Tribunal and in a decision dated  11  July  2016  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Rintoul gave his reasons for granting permission to appeal.  They
    were:-

         "It is arguable that, in assessing risk on return, the judge failed
         properly to take into account the evidence of Dr. Benkato.   It  is
         also arguable that she  wrongly  considered  the  incident  at  the
         checkpoint [34] to be random, and  that  at  [35]-[37]  she  failed
         properly  to  apply  the  law  with  respect  to  country  guidance
         decisions.

         All grounds are arguable."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.  At the hearing  Mr.  Chakmakjian
    handed up the following:-

      a) Country Information and Guidance Libya: Security  and  Humanitarian
         Situation Version 1.0 June 2016.

      b) Country Information and  Guidance  Libya:  Ethnic  Minority  Groups
         Version 2.0 June 2016.

      c) MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC).

      d) HH (Somalia), AM (Somalia), J (Somalia), MA (Somalia) v SSHD [2010]
         EWCA Civ 426.

    Both representatives urged me to take into account the authority of  AT
    and Others (Article 15c; risk categories)  Libya  CG  [2014]  UKUT  318
    (IAC) which they also handed up.

 5. At the heart of the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal,  which  Mr.
    Chakmakjian expanded upon is an  argument  that  the  judge  materially
    erred in law in his assessment of the risk on return of this  appellant
    to Libya, particularly in light of the  positive  credibility  findings
    made by the Judge and the opinions expressed within the  expert  report
    prepared by Dr. Adam Benkato dated 27 April 2016.  The Judge found that
    the appellant is of Amazigh ethnicity, the  documentation  relating  to
    the report of threats made to his brother and wider family are genuine,
    that militia members concerned about Amazigh activism would perceive  a
    connection between the appellant and others with the same  surname  and
    that the factual basis of the appellant's account  is  plausible.   The
    grounds assert that the Judge's finding that the account the  appellant
    gives about being beaten at a checkpoint would be a  random  event  and
    that  he  was  not  specifically  targeted  is  materially  flawed  and
    inconsistent with his positive credibility findings made earlier within
    the decision.  The appellant's evidence being that he was beaten  as  a
    consequence of his name and his family connection  to  Amazigh  issues.
    Further, that the judge failed to adequately assess the  evidence  that
    the appellant had been previously specifically  targeted,  particularly
    that the judge  erred  in  finding  that  because  the  threat  to  the
    appellant was in 2012 he was not satisfied  that  any  such  threat  is
    current.  This finding, it is submitted, is contrary to the opinion  of
    the expert evidence before the judge and the judge has failed  to  give
    adequate reasons as to  why  the  expert  opinion  was  rejected.   Dr.
    Benkato made it clear that on the basis that  the  appellant  was  once
    targeted because of his family name and that, in addition, his  brother
    was also targeted, the appellant would be at risk of further  targeting
    upon return.  Further, the judge's findings  at  paragraph  35  of  his
    decision are materially flawed.  Dr. Benkato's conclusion was  that  it
    is entirely plausible that militia members at  checkpoints,  especially
    those concerned about "Amazigh activists" would perceive  a  connection
    between one "Madi" and  another  "Madi".   One  of  the  risks  to  the
    appellant is that he would be identified as an Amazigh  connected  with
    known Amazigh activists because of his name.  Contrary to  the  judge's
    findings that the risk that the appellant faces from militias  are  not
    simply random, albeit that the judge accepted at paragraph  37  of  his
    decision that random  kidnappings  at  checkpoints  around  Libya  have
    occurred, but rather, are specific to  the  appellant  because  of  his
    ethnicity and family name.  Dr. Benkato's conclusion on  the  issue  is
    not limited to "fear" as opposed to "future risk", but  as  the  expert
    report makes clear "it is plausible for Mr [M] to be at risk  in  Libya
    as an Amazigh Libyan".  As a consequence  it  was  submitted  that  the
    judge has misunderstood  parts  of  the  expert  report  or  failed  to
    adequately consider it.  The errors made have infected  his  assessment
    of the reasonableness of return or relocation.  Dr. Benkato  concluding
    that the appellant would be at risk in Libya.

 6. Beyond relying on these grounds  Mr.  Chakmakjian  submitted  that  the
    judge had not borne in mind  that  the  appellant  is  from  an  ethnic
    minority, has close links to that minority which has a high profile and
    would be recognised as a minority member himself  if  returned  to  his
    country of origin.  The judge has failed to consider material  evidence
    and when invited to depart from country guidance (AT) he has not  given
    sufficient weight to the expert evidence or acknowledged  the  position
    in Tripoli where the airport was burnt to the ground in  2014  and  the
    impact of this on the appellant's claim and ability  to  return  and/or
    internally relocate.  In short the expert  evidence  should  have  been
    preferred.  In any event, in light of the country guidance handed up at
    the hearing and relying on MM, the situation in Libya  was  much  worse
    than at the time the country guidance case was decided.  He referred me
    to paragraphs 2.3.13 and 2.3.14 of  the  Country  Information  Guidance
    Libya: Security and Humanitarian Situation Report.   He  accepted  that
    that report was not before the judge when deciding the appeal, but that
    the expert evidence was and, in his submission, should  have  "usurped"
    the country guidance available.

 7. Mr. Kotas submitted that it was unfair to criticise the judge as in the
    circumstances of this appeal there was no  other  evidence  before  him
    beyond that of the expert whose report in any event does not deal  with
    the issue of internal relocation.  He argued that there were no "strong
    grounds" before  the  judge  to  enable  him  to  depart  from  country
    guidance.  Moreover, there was a finding at paragraph 40 of the judge's
    decision that the only reason the appellant had  given  for  not  being
    able to live  in  Tripoli  was  that  it  was  "quite  expensive".   He
    submitted,  contrary  to  Mr.  Chakmakjian's  submissions,  the  expert
    evidence did not go so far as was suggested in relation to the issue of
    internal relocation.  Beyond that the judge's findings at paragraphs 42
    to 47 of his decision in relation to Article 8 should be  preserved  as
    they have not been challenged within the grounds seeking permission  to
    appeal.

 8. Mr. Chakmakjian responded  stating  that  in  light  of  the  erroneous
    consideration of background material, even the Article  8  findings  of
    the judge were unsafe  and  particularly  so  in  the  context  of  the
    authority of MM referred to earlier in this decision.

 9. The judge has plainly given consideration to the report of Dr. Benkato.
     For example, paragraphs 28, 29, 30 and 31 of his decision state:-

         "28. The Appellant relies on an expert report by Adam Benkato dated
             27th April 2016.  Dr. Benkato concludes that  the  Appellant's
             ethnicity is Amazigh because of his ability to speak Tamazight
             fluently with a dialect of Yefren.  I find  this  evidence  to
             carry significant weight because of his expertise and  because
             it  is  not  contradicted  by  positive  evidence   from   the
             Respondent, and I find Dr. Benkato's report overall to address
             and outweigh the concerns of the Respondent within the Reasons
             for Refusal.  For these reasons I find the expert evidence  to
             support the Appellant's claim to have Amazigh ethnicity and  I
             find this aspect of the Appellant's claim to  be  established.
             Since his ethnicity is key to the rest  of  his  narrative,  I
             bring forward this finding in assessing the credibility of the
             rest of the Appellant's account.

         29.  Dr. Benkato also examines two documents  put  forward  by  the
             Appellant concerning the report of threats made to his brother
             and wider family,  which  were  reported  by  the  Appellant's
             brother on 12th April 2012.  He concludes that  the  documents
             are authentic documents produced in Libya by the offices named
             therein.  I find this  opinion  to  carry  significant  weight
             because it is based on external comparison and  Dr.  Benkato's
             knowledge of and experience with  Libyan  documents,  although
             this cannot be determinative of the  events  described,  which
             were reported to  these  offices,  nor  determinative  of  the
             relationship between the person reporting and this  Appellant.
             Dr. Benkato is candid in being unable to  cite  evidence  that
             would establish a risk for  individuals  known  to  have  been
             involved with the death of  regime  figures  solely  for  that
             reason in post-2011 Libya.  In light of that, and because  the
             threat was in 2012 I am not satisfied that any such threat  is
             current.  It follows that, even taking the Appellant's case at
             its highest; I do not find him to establish  a  real  risk  of
             persecution or serious harm as a consequence of  his  family's
             past actions.

         30.  However Dr. Benkato confirms that the family name is known  to
             be active in the movement for Amazigh rights and  recognition,
             and also states that most Libyans easily recognise family  and
             tribe names, especially from their  own  regions.   For  these
             reasons I accept that it would  follow  that  militia  members
             concerned about Amazigh activism would perceive  a  connection
             between this Appellant, from Yefren, and others with the  same
             surname, also from Yefren, whether the  two  were  closely  or
             distantly linked.

         31.  I find  that  Dr.  Benkato's  report  puts  into  context  the
             Appellant's account of events and I find this to be consistent
             with the reports of threats complained of in April  2012,  and
             also consistent with the  Appellant's  account  of  events  in
             December 2011.  I conclude,  in  the  round  with  the  expert
             report, that it is a plausible account  set  against  external
             information  and  the  relevance   that   derives   from   the
             Appellant's family name.  I do not find that in context  there
             are inconsistencies that actually, as opposed  to  potentially
             engage section 8."

    I have also born in mind the authority of SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 940
    and in particular paragraph 47 thereof which states:-

         "It  is  for  these  reasons,  as  well  as  the  desirability   of
         consistency, that decision makers and tribunal judges are  required
         to take Country Guidance determinations into account, and to follow
         them unless very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence,  are
         adduced justifying their not doing so."

10. In this particular appeal  I  find  that  albeit  that  the  judge  has
    considered the expert evidence, there is  a  failure  to  have  engaged
    fully with it which amounts to a material error of law.  In so  failing
    there is no consequent analysis with adequate reasons  as  to  why  the
    expert evidence should not have  been  preferred  and  findings  as  to
    whether  there  are  strong  grounds  supported  by   cogent   evidence
    justifying not adhering to country guidance.

11. In light of that finding which causes me to conclude that  this  is  an
    appeal that will have to be heard afresh, it is not necessary for me to
    give  detailed  consideration  to  the  other  grounds.   However,  for
    completeness I indicate that I find that all the grounds are  made  out
    and that the position within the appellant's country of origin  at  the
    time of the judge's decision was different to those prevailing  at  the
    time AT was decided.  In falling into error on these points I also find
    that the judge erred at paragraph 34 of his decision in relation to the
    appellant being beaten at a  checkpoint  and  a  finding  that  it  was
    random.

12. The judge's Article 8 analysis can be found at paragraphs 42 to  47  of
    his decision.  I find it has not been challenged in the grounds seeking
    permission to appeal.  Therefore that aspect alone of this  appellant's
    appeal is preserved and  it  is  the  issues  of  asylum,  Humanitarian
    Protection and Articles 2 and 3 which require consideration afresh.

13. The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

14. I set aside the previous decision.  The appeal is remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal to deal with afresh pursuant to  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Direction
    7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge K. Real.  The remittal is  on
    those issues only and the judge's findings and decision in relation  to
    Article 8 are preserved.


Signed                              Date 16 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
