
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10398/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th November 2016                |On 05th December 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                    R M C
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Pipi, Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Kenya born on 24th November 1954 and  is
    61 years old.  She appeals with  permission  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Malcolm who dismissed her appeal against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 10th July 2015 refusing her claim  for
    international protection.

 2. The appellant asserted she was married in 1975 and in 1997  she  learnt
    her husband had joined the Mungiki; he then became violent towards  the
    family.  In her statement  the  appellant  detailed  that  her  husband
    forced her to join the Mungiki although initially she was not  required
    to undertake the initial ceremony.  She claimed that she was threatened
    with death if she did not carry out  the  said  orders  properly.   She
    claimed that she managed to escape one day, obtained a visit  visa  for
    the UK, arrived in the UK on 1st October 1999 and then  claimed  asylum
    which she promptly abandoned in January 2000 only to return  to  Kenya.
    On her return she was  found  by  associates  and  taken  back  to  the
    compound  and  was  forced  to  undergo  the  initiation  ceremony  and
    circumcision.  It was at this point she became a member of the  Mungiki
    and performed FGM ceremony on new recruits.  She persuaded her  husband
    to allow her to visit the UK again in July 2003 to see  sick  relatives
    and she again returned to Kenya in 2003  and  once  again  escaped  the
    compound.  She claims that she  again  was  taken  by  the  police  and
    detained and  imprisoned  and  beaten  but  again  managed  to  escape,
    obtained a visit visa for the UK and left.  That  is  the  history  and
    background of this account.

 3. The challenge to the decision was based on  various  grounds  asserting
    that the appellant was a Mungiki defector and would  be  persecuted  on
    return to Kenya where there was no state protection for her.

 4. It was argued that there were three issues in the appeal that the judge
    failed to address.

      1) Could a Mungiki member be allowed to leave the  sect  or  will  the
         person still be regarded as member or backslider even after  he/she
         had left?

      2) In the alternative did the Immigration Judge consider what happened
         to Mungiki backsliders or defectors?

      3) In the alternative should the  judge  have  considered  her  mental
         state as witnessed by the medical report.

 5. In relation to Ground 1, it was argued that the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider whether the Appellant could leave the Mungiki  and  that  once
    the oath was taken a person became a member for life as such she  would
    be regarded  as  a  backslider  and  subjected  to  severe  persecution
    including murder.  The judge effectively had failed to consider VM (FGM-
    risks-Mungiki-Kikuyu/Gikuyu)  Kenya  CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00049  and  the
    Country of Origin Report 2013 specifically paragraph  3.17.11  and  the
    Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada.

 6. In relation to  Ground  2  the  question  was  whether  the  judge  had
    considered what happened to defectors.  The  credibility  findings  did
    not affect the centrepiece of the appellant's case  namely  that  as  a
    defector or a backslider she would be persecuted on return.

 7. Finally (Ground 3), it was alleged and asserted that the appellant  was
    tortured and diagnosed as having PTSD type 2 and the Immigration  Judge
    failed to say whether this evidence was accepted or rejected.

 8. Mr Pipi asked to amend his grounds of appeal to include that the  judge
    had applied the wrong standard of proof.  He argued that the  essential
    question of whether she was a  defector  or  backslider  had  not  been
    addressed.  She had  managed  to  escape  when  her  husband  had  been
    effectively duped by her stating that she had obtained his  permission.
    Of key importance was the judge had not addressed the medical  evidence
    or her state of mind.

 9. Mr Duffy submitted that there was a sufficiency of protection  for  the
    appellant and a possibility of relocation.  The appellant had been able
    to leave Kenya on numerous occasions.  He further submitted that VM was
    effectively on FGM and these were matters  that  were  not  before  the
    judge.  The judge was not expected to do his or her own research and VM
    was a red herring as it concentrated on FGM.  Fear of Mungiki  was  not
    part of the ratio.

10. He disputed that the standard of proof was applied in  error  and  that
    'reasonably likely' was the reverse of 'highly  unlikely'.   The  judge
    may have mixed the first and second escape, but  if  she  had  returned
    there would be internal relocation available.

11. Mr Duffy submitted that the decision should be looked at as a whole.

12. In conclusion, I take the last ground first.   Although  the  judge  at
    paragraph 94 stated in relation to the  psychotherapy  assistance  that
    the appellant could access this through telephone that with respect  is
    not quite the point of the report.  The  report  as  I  understand  it,
    asserted  that  the  appellant  suffered  with  post  traumatic  stress
    disorder as a result of her treatment and it  was  necessary  therefore
    for the judge to apply the vulnerable witness  guidelines  specifically
    when considering matters of credibility. That does not appear  to  have
    been factored into the judge's determination. The judge  accepted  that
    she was a member  of  the  Mungiki  but  did  not  accept  the  overall
    credibility of her  account  of  her  subsequent  treatment.     I  can
    appreciate that the judge considered that the appellant had entered and
    re-entered the United Kingdom and did not claim asylum until  2015  but
    nonetheless the judge largely  rejected  the  appellant's  evidence  in
    relation to her account and made adverse credibility findings [82]-[89]
    but needed to view the evidence of the appellant  against  the  context
    and background of her mental state and further consider the  appeal  in
    the light of the medical evidence.

13. In essence a fact-finder must not reach his or  her  conclusion  before
    surveying all the evidence relevant thereto Mibanga v SSHD [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 367. I consider this to be an error of law.

14. In relation to the first two grounds, of  key  relevance  is  that  the
    judge found at paragraphs 79 and 80 the following

         "79. The Appellant has claimed that she  is  unable  to  return  to
             Kenya due to her membership and association with the  Mungiki,
             that she has in the past been imprisoned and ill-treated.

         80.  I accepted that  the  Appellant  had  been  a  member  of  the
             Mungiki."

15. The judge made detailed findings in relation to whether  the  appellant
    had escaped or not, but, as indicated by Mr Pipi  made  no  assessment,
    having found that she was a member of the Mungiki, as  to  whether  she
    would be considered to be a backslider or a defector and the  treatment
    that she might receive on her return.

16. The judge makes a  reference  to  the  Operational  Guidance  Notes  in
    December 2013 on Kenya and states that he or she considered that  there
    was sufficient protection for the appellant in  Kenya,  but  the  judge
    makes no detailed assessment of that guidance in view of the acceptance
    that she had been a member of the Mungiki, and how the appellant  would
    be perceived and treated on  return.   At  paragraph  3.17.2  there  is
    reference  to  gross  human   rights   violations   against   citizens,
    adversaries and defecting members and further  reference  to  the  fact
    that the Kenyan authorities have not succeeded  in  their  attempts  to
    limit  Mungiki's  influences  or  abuses   despite   crackdowns   which
    reportedly also included summary executions of suspected adherents.  As
    Mr Duffy states VM refers to FGM but in fact does contain some evidence
    on the then power and reach of the Mungiki

17. Having found the appellant was a member of the Mungiki, the  judge  did
    not made any specific assessment or give adequate reasoning of  whether
    the appellant would be at risk having defected from the Mungiki and the
    treatment of this particular appellant would receive, as  a  backslider
    or defector.  The sufficiency of protection needed to  be  assessed  in
    this light.

18. I do not accept the assertion that the judge applied the wrong standard
    of proof but I have noted that the medical evidence  was  not  factored
    into the credibility findings and as such I set aside the  findings  of
    the judge in their entirety, including the finding that  the  appellant
    was a member of the Mungiki.

19. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

20. Owing to the nature and extent of the findings to be made by the First-
    tier Tribunal I therefore remit the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 24th November 2016

Helen Rimington
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
