
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10406/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 17 October 2016              |On 6 December 2016              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     M M
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N. Garrod of counsel, instructed by RBM
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                   ______________________________________

                             DECISION & REASONS
                   ______________________________________


1.   This appeal first came before me for an error of law hearing on 29
June 2016 when I decided that the First tier Tribunal Judge had materially
erred in law in dismissing the appeal [decision appended]. The appeal was
adjourned for a resumed hearing to take place on 17 October 2016. My
directions confined the scope of the appeal to risk on return to Zimbabwe,
in particular: whether the Appellant could be said to have a significant
MDC profile; whether the Appellant would engage in political activities
upon return which are likely to come to the adverse attention of ZANU-PF or
would do so but for fear of coming to the adverse attention of ZANU-PF. The
findings of the First tier Tribunal Judge at [67]-[69] of his decision were
preserved i.e. that the Appellant would not be at risk on return to
Zimbabwe on account solely of events that took place in 2001 and his
evidence that there was an arrest warrant was not found to be credible.

Hearing

2.   The Appellant was called to give evidence when he confirmed the
contents of his statement of 10th October 2016. He also sought to rely on
printouts from YouTube. He said that he would engage in political
activities likely to come to the attention of Zanu-PF because he wanted
things to change in Zimbabwe and for the government to stop mistreating and
abusing people and that there are no jobs. He said that he was prepared to
risk his life doing that and that this was why he was posting videos on
YouTube - so that people could see and share it and that he and others
wanted Mugabe to go.

3.   In cross-examination by Mr Tarlow, the Appellant said that he started
attending the Vigil in 2007 and attended lots of times although he was not
sure in terms of numbers but he had done so continuously since 2007. He
said that he had been attending at least 3 times a month. The Appellant
confirmed that he supported the MDC in the United Kingdom. The Appellant
confirmed that he lives in Thamesmead, but there is no branch of the MDC
there and they meet on Saturdays at the Embassy once a month and he
confirmed that he had attended the last two monthly meetings. The Appellant
stated that he was not an office holder or committee member of the MDC but
he took an official part. He denied that his involvement in the Vigil and
meetings was purely to boost his asylum claim and stated that they had
people all over the country who want change for Zimbabwe because the
government have been abusing human rights.

4.   The Appellant stated that he comes from Harare and that he had last
been there in 2001; that it was both MDC and ZANU-PF and he agreed that it
had become more MDC since he was there. However, he believed that he would
be at risk if returned to Zimbabwe because it was not a safe place for
people who oppose the government and the President and this was despite the
fact that the area of Harare he comes from leans more towards MDC. The
Appellant said that he would be at risk of being arrested, tortured and
possibly being killed. He said the area he was from is a high density area.


5.   In response to questions from the Upper Tribunal, the Appellant stated
that he had an on-line presence on YouTube, Facebook, LinkedIn and there
was also a page for the restoration of human rights in Zimbabwe, which put
videos on-line. The Appellant stated that he also has a website -
www.zimbabwevoicewhois[MM] and he provided handouts from this website. In
respect of MDC meetings at the Embassy which take place on Saturday, the
Appellant stated that they have a meeting outside the Zimbabwe Embassy,
which is a public space and takes place at midday, when they do their vigil
because it is easier for everyone to meet there. He said that anyone can
speak but usually it was the leader, Ephraim Tapa, who speaks. The
Appellant said that 20-30 people would usually attend.

6.   In re-examination, the Appellant stated that he was not too sure
whether his area of Harare was predominantly MDC or ZANU-PF. His counsel
explained that he was being asked whether the political activists there
support MDC or ZANU PF and he stated that ZANU PF had a physical presence
and were still in the majority. The Appellant was then asked how his
activities for MDC in London; "Yes We Can", the Restoration of Human Rights
and the Vigil related to each other and he said that they were all for
people who want change for Zimbabwe. With regard to "Yes we can" he said
that his activity involved demonstrating on a monthly basis. The
Restoration of Human Rights met once a month; the MDC met once a month and
the Vigil took place two to three times a month, when they demonstrated and
asked people to sign petitions. The Appellant stated that all the
activities took place outside the Zimbabwe Embassy on Saturdays but some
also took place outside London e.g. the Restoration for Human Rights has
met in Southampton. He said that they communicated by email and the details
are on line as to meetings; that meetings are normally an hour and the
vigil starts at 12 - banners are put up - MDC, Yes We Can and Vigil
banners. He confirmed that D1-D6 of the Respondent's bundle as to the MDC
meeting at the Strand was correct in that they used to hire a room and that
there were photos on-line on the Vigil website. He said that the building
was at the Charing Cross end of the Strand opposite Tesco and that the
Zimbabwe Embassy is on Trafalgar Square.

7.   In his submissions, Mr Tarlow sought to rely on refusal letter dated
26.6.15. He drew my attention to the assertion in the refusal letter at
[10] where it records that the Appellant stated that he had joined MDC in
2010 but was not active in MDC since 2013 and this was not an indication of
someone who is active: see also the asylum interview at Q.100. In evidence
the Appellant stated that he attended two meetings a month this year and
last year and it was his submission that the Appellant attended the Vigil
and MDC meetings purely to boost his asylum claim. He said the Zimbabwe
authorities relied on evidence led intelligence and there is no reason why
this individual should be wanted by the authorities in light of his
activities which are self serving and low risk. Mr Tarlow invited me to
dismiss the appeal.

8.   In his submissions, Mr Garrod adopted his skeleton argument and the
contents of the Appellant's witness statement dated 10.10.16. He submitted
that it is not the Appellant's case that he held a position with the MDC
but he does have a profile that is anti-government. He submitted that the
YouTube clips were very relevant in that what is said in the interview is
not terribly enlightening but when one looks at the clip and sees a picture
of the Appellant with his name saying "Mugabe must Go" and openly
criticizing Mugabe that is the profile that would cause him to be at risk.
He submitted that the Appellant would be identified from the most cursory
check on the internet because both his photo and name are on the internet.
Mr Garrod submitted that the Appellant would be at risk on return, not just
because he claimed asylum abroad but because he would be perceived to be in
the opposition. He drew my attention to evidence of the Appellant's
activities at the Vigil and his regular attendance, as confirmed by the
letter from Rose Benton at Vigil and his Yes We Can membership card in
original bundle. He submitted that, coupled with his on-line activities,
the Appellant would be at risk.

9.   With regard to the country guidance decision in CM at [214] he
submitted that the Appellant would be reasonably likely to engage in such
activities but for coming to adverse attention of ZANU PF and that with
regard to [215] at (v) return would be to Harare and it was the Appellant's
case that he would be returning to a high density area. Mr Garrod submitted
that there was nothing specific to this case since these Country Guidance
cases and he was unaware of any cases providing judicial comment on the
role of social media and risk on return. He submitted that there is
evidence the Appellant was taking part in activities in Zimbabwe in 2001
which led to his arrest and that the Appellant has a profile and would be
at real risk on return.

Decision

10.  I find the evidence of the Appellant as to his political activities in
the United Kingdom to be credible. It was presented in a straightforward
manner and is corroborated in its material respects by evidence, including
printouts from websites on the internet; YouTube; photographs of the
Appellant attending meetings, the Vigil and demonstrations and a supporting
statement from Rose Benton of Zimbabwe Vigil dated 20.2.16 [C1-C2 of the
Appellant's bundle]. I do not consider his political activities in the UK
to be self-serving, given both the length of time he has been politically
active and the breadth of his activities.

11.  The country guidance decision in HS (returning asylum seekers)
Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094 (IAC) at [34] reiterated the previous CG as
set out in AA (Risk for involuntary returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT
00061 as follows:

    "248.    All persons identified  as  deportees  will  be  diverted  for
    questioning by CIO officers who are required to  produce  a  report  in
    respect of all persons who have been forcibly removed to Zimbabwe  from
    the United Kingdom, whether escorted on the plane or not. There  is  no
    indication  that  the  authorities  in  Zimbabwe  have  any  means   to
    distinguish between deportees who  have  made  an  unsuccessful  asylum
    claim in the United Kingdom and those  who  have  been  removed  simply
    because they have no leave to remain.

    249. The purpose of the initial interview is to establish  whether  the
    deportee is of any interest to the CIO or the  security  services.  The
    deportee will be of interest if questioning reveals that  the  deportee
    has a political profile considered adverse to  the  Zimbabwean  regime.
    Further  interrogation  away  from  the  airport  may  also  follow  if
    enquiries reveal aspects of a military history to be followed  up  such
    as being absent without leave or being involved in military  activities
    outside Zimbabwe. Also, the CIO will refer to the police any issues  of
    outstanding criminal matters such  as  arrest  warrants.  There  is  no
    evidence that the fact alone of a past criminal conviction, as  opposed
    to an unresolved allegation of  criminal  activity  or  an  outstanding
    arrest warrant, will give rise to such an interest. There  is  also  no
    evidence that the simple fact that a returnee has in the past served in
    the Zimbabwean army will prevent the passage of a returnee through  the
    airport after this first stage enquiry.

    250. If such a political or relevant military profile is suspected,  or
    if there are outstanding criminal matters to be resolved, the  deportee
    will  be  taken  away  by  the  relevant  branch   of   the   CIO   for
    interrogation...

    251. This second stage interrogation carries with it  a  real  risk  of
    serious mistreatment sufficient to constitute a breach of article 3. If
    the reason for suspicion is that the deportee has a  political  profile
    considered to be adverse to the Zimbabwean regime that is likely to  be
    sufficient to give rise to a real risk of persecutory ill-treatment for
    a reason that is recognised by the Refugee Convention.  That  will  not
    necessarily be the case where the only matter of interest is a relevant
    military history or outstanding criminal  issues.  Each  case  must  be
    considered on its particular facts."

12.  In RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT the focus shifted from risk
on return at the airport to what happens after a person has passed through
the airport and entered into Zimbabwe [19]. This CG decision was then
replaced by that of EM and Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98
(IAC) which was then supplemented by the decision in CM (EM country
guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059 (IAC) which provides as
follows at [5]:

    "A returnee to Harare will in general face no significant difficulties,
    if going to a low-density or medium-density  area.  Whilst  the  socio-
    economic situation  in  high-density  areas  is  more  challenging,  in
    general a person without ZANU-PF connections will not face  significant
    problems there (including a "loyalty test") unless  he  or  she  has  a
    significant MDC profile, which might cause him or her to feature  on  a
    list of those targeted for harassment, or  would  otherwise  engage  in
    political activities likely to attract the adverse attention of ZANU-PF
    or would be reasonably likely to engage in such activities, but  for  a
    fear of thereby coming to the adverse attention of ZANU-PF."

13.  Whilst the Upper Tribunal has referred consistently to the phrase
"significant MDC profile" I have been unable to find a specific definition.
The underlying purpose of the phrase is that it is only those who are
likely to have come to the attention of the Zimbabwe authorities who would
be at risk on return, thus any political profile must be sufficient for
there to be a reasonable degree of likelihood that the Appellant has come
to the adverse attention of the Zimbabwe authorities either due to sur
place activities and/or an active on-line presence. Mr Tarlow in his
submissions made reference to the fact that the Zimbabwean authorities rely
on intelligence led evidence and I accept that submissions.

14.  On the basis of the evidence before me, I consider that this Appellant
could be said to have a significant MDC profile. The starting point is the
fact that it has been accepted by the Respondent that the Appellant was
attacked and detained due to his political opinion in Zimbabwe in September
2001, following which he immediately fled from Zimbabwe and came to the
United Kingdom. Whilst the letter from Rose Benton of Zim Vigil states that
the Appellant has been demonstrating outside the Embassy since October
2002, it was the position of the Respondent and the First tier Tribunal
Judge that he joined the MDC in the United Kingdom in 2007 and he also
joined Zim Vigil in 2007. His MDC activities consisted of signing petitions
and attending meetings. He has attended demonstrations on a weekly basis
outside the Zimbabwean Embassy for Zim Vigil and the MDC and currently
attends monthly, along with his other activities. In January 2015 he joined
"Zimbabwe Yes we can" and he also belongs to a human rights organization
Restoration of Human Rights. The Appellant has a presence on YouTube and
his own website, linked to the Zimbabwe Voice website. There are
photographs of the Appellant in the bundle taken in September 2014, January
2016 and February 2016 showing him at demonstrations and a number of
YouTube videos of the Appellant. The Appellant has been active in his
opposition to the Zimbabwe regime for at least 9 years, since 2007 and
considering his activities cumulatively, I consider there is a serious
possibility that he has been identified by the Zimbabwean regime and would
be perceived by them as a person with a significant MDC profile.

15.  The CG decision in HS was made nine years ago and the decision of AA
was ten years ago. On the basis of those decisions, I find that the
Appellant would be at risk on return because he would be identified as
someone with a political profile and he would thus be transferred to the
CIO for interrogation, with a concomitant risk of torture and ill-
treatment, which would amount to persecution and/or treatment in breach of
Article 3 of ECHR. However, there is no recent country guidance or up to
date evidence as to the risk on return at the airport to a MDC activist
with a significant profile. Therefore, I go on to consider whether the
Appellant would engage in political activities upon return which are likely
to come to the adverse attention of ZANU-PF or would do so but for fear of
coming to the adverse attention of ZANU-PF.

16.  The Appellant is from Highfield in Harare. It is his case that this is
a high density area and he submitted evidence from the ZRP charge office
and his uncle [MF] that his uncle's house in Highfield was broken into and
that he and the Appellant's son, M Junior, were assaulted for political
reasons on 28 July 2016 [B1-B4 of the Appellant's bundle refer]. This
evidence was not challenged by Mr Tarlow and I find that the Appellant is
from a high density area and that his uncle and his son were assaulted due
to their perceived political opinion. The Appellant is a family member of
his uncle and son and holds the same political opinion and I find that he
would be at real risk of detention and ill-treatment for this reason. The
Appellant's evidence was that he would criticize the regime and he would
risk his life in order to do so. I accept his evidence given his history of
political opposition to the Zimbabwean authorities. In HJ (Iran) at [18]
Lord Hope held that "the fact [an applicant for asylum] could take action
to avoid persecution does not disentitle him from asylum if in fact he will
not act in such a way as to avoid it. That is so even if to fail or to
refuse to avoid it would be unreasonable." This approach was followed by
the Court of Appeal per Beatson LJ in SSHD v MSM (Somalia) [2016] EWCA Civ
715. I find that there is a serious possibility that the Appellant would
exercise his right to freedom of speech and political expression if he
returned to Zimbabwe and that he would be at risk of persecution for this
reason.

17.  The appeal is allowed on the basis that removal of the Appellant would
be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations with regard to the 1951
Refugee Convention and because it would be contrary to Article 3 of the
European Convention on Human Rights.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

6 December 2016

