
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10046/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Sent           |
|(via video link)                              |On 9 June 2014               |
|On 22 May 2014                                |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR KHOJA AGHA SAFIZADA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant/Secretary of State:   Mr N Smart, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr S Vokes, Coventry Law Centre


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The claimant (whom I shall call the appellant  as  he  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the FtT") is a citizen of Afghanistan
    and his date of birth is 1st January 1987.

2.   The appellant was encountered by UK  police  on  10  October  2008  and
    arrested for being an illegal entrant.  He made a claim for  asylum  on
    the same day.  The details of his claim can be summarised. He  is  from
    Kapisa province. Members of his  family  had  been  involved  with  the
    Taliban. The Taliban had demanded that the appellant join them  and  he
    feared being taken by force.

3.   The Secretary of State refused the application for various  reasons  in
    a decision of 22 October 2013.   The  appellant  appealed  against  the
    decision and his appeal was allowed by Judge of the FtT  Landes,  in  a
    determination dated 14 March 2014, following a hearing on 5 March 2014.
     The Secretary of State made an application for  permission  to  appeal
    which was granted by FtT Judge Davidge in a decision of 3  April  2014.
    Thus the matter came before me.

The Decision of the FtT

4.   Findings of the FtT are found between [32]-[54]  of  the  determination
    and can be summarised as follows:

    (i)  There are significant inconsistencies in the appellant's account.


    (ii) The appellant's failure to apply for asylum  in  Greece  does  not
         significantly damage his credibility.


    (iii)    It was not accepted that the Taliban had attempted to take the
         appellant by force or that his father  was  forcibly  recruited  by
         them. It was accepted that the appellant's father was deceased  but
         the evidence about how this came about was not accepted.


    (iv) It was not accepted that the appellant's brother or uncle had been
         in the Taliban.


    (v)  The appellant was not a credible witness and nor was  the  witness
         Mr Noori.   The  Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant's
         father's stepbrother had been killed or that the  family  home  had
         been set on fire.


    (vi) There is no reason  why  the  Afghan  authorities  would  have  an
         adverse interest in the appellant.


    (vii)    The appellant would not be at risk from the Taliban on  return
         to  his  home  area  on  the  basis  that  he  had  escaped  forced
         recruitment  from  them.   He  would  not  be  at  risk  of  forced
         recruitment on return (the Judge noted  that  the  appellant  as  a
         result of an injury was unable to walk without crutches).


    (viii)   The background evidence established that the  Taliban  are  in
         control over at least part of the district in which  the  appellant
         lived and that control is being extended.  The Judge found at [46],




             "I have no direct evidence about the attitude the Taliban take
             to those who return to their home area having  claimed  asylum
             abroad, but their intense opposition to what they perceive  as
             western influences and their adverse treatment of  those  whom
             they suspect of collaborating with the government  or  working
             with international forces is well-known (see in particular the
             material quoted in the UNHCR Report including a  reference  at
             P70 appellant's bundle to a Taliban court in  Kapisa  Province
             convicting and executing a  man  on  charges  of  spying).   I
             consider that such evidence justifies the conclusion  that  if
             the Taliban become aware that there is a  person  in  an  area
             under their control who has recently returned from Europe they
             are likely to take an adverse  interest  in  that  person  and
             subject him at the very least  to  ill-treatment  contrary  to
             Article 3 ECHR.  The appellant would not  be  able  simply  to
             disappear into the background  on  return  to  his  home  area
             because he cannot walk well and is on crutches.  People  would
             know he had returned.   Given  that  the  background  material
             indicates that the Taliban are either in actual control of the
             appellant's home  village  or  it  is  in  an  area  which  is
             contested and the Taliban are therefore from time to  time  in
             control, I find that there is a real risk that  the  appellant
             would be  persecuted  and  suffer  ill-treatment  contrary  to
             Article 3 ECHR on account of  his  imputed  political  opinion
             were he to return to his home village.  Even if  he  were  not
             killed as a spy, I  find  there  is  a  real  risk  given  the
             Taliban's methods that he will suffer serious harm  when  they
             seek to find out what he knows.  On my findings, this  is  not
             due to anything which has happened  to  him  in  the  past  in
             Afghanistan but simply because of  his  association  with  the
             west."


    (ix) The appellant would not be at risk of  persecution  on  return  to
         Kabul, but relocation would be unreasonable and unduly  harsh.  The
         Judge took into account the appellant's disability as a  result  of
         an injury in 2012. In relation to the assistance  of  a  relocation
         grant he found that  the  appellant's  difficulties  would  not  be
         solved by giving him money to start in business  because  there  is
         nothing to suggest that he has particular skills or  experience  in
         any area other than farming or unskilled work.  He is not  able  to
         work and would not be able to put in the necessary effort to run  a
         business in an unfamiliar area of  the  country  where  he  has  no
         relatives to help him.  The appellant needs help when travelling or
         shopping and is unable to carry heavy bags. The appellant's  mother
         would not be able to travel to Kabul in order to assist him.

The Grounds seeking Permission to Appeal and Submissions

5.   Mr Smart made  submissions  in  the  context  of  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal.  It was argued that the  Judge  made  a  material
    misdirection in law in speculating about the attitude of the Taliban in
    the appellant's home area (at [46]).  The FtT failed to reason why  the
    appellant would be perceived to be a spy.  The appellant has  relatives
    in his home area  and  is  still  in  contact  with  his  mother.   The
    consideration of risk on return to the appellant's home area is flawed.
    There is no evidence that a failed asylum seeker would be perceived  as
    a spy and therefore at risk.

6.    Mr  Vokes  made  oral  submissions  which  can  be  summarised.    The
    determination  is  full  and  detailed.   The  Judge   considered   the
    background evidence in relation to the claimant's home  area  (at  [36]
    and [37]) and found that the province was  dominated  by  the  Taliban.
    She took into account the UNHCR Report and  was  entitled  to  conclude
    that there was a real risk to the appellant as a result of his  imputed
    political opinion.  It is accepted that  the  Taliban  are  hostile  to
    western influences and the finding is not in conflict with any  country
    guidance case.  The  decision  is  not  irrational  or  perverse.   The
    findings and reasons are sourced from the background evidence.

Conclusions

7.   In the Reasons for Refusal Letter the Secretary of  State  referred  to
    the Country of Origin Information Service and  the  Country  of  Origin
    Information  Report.   The  Secretary  of  State  concluded  that  this
    established that there was no evidence of forced recruitment in  Kapisa
    and that forced recruitment by the Taliban was rare.  At The Judge took
    into account the UNHCR Report  of  2013  (page  8  of  the  appellant's
    bundle).  The Judge noted at [36] that there are no specific reports of
    forced recruitment in Kapisa  but  the  UNAMA  Annual  Report  of  2012
    indicated that specific districts in the province of Kapisa were one of
    the areas which was almost  completely  controlled  by  anti-government
    elements ( reference was made to page 48 of  the  UNHCR  2013  Report).
    The Judge found (at[  37])  that  Kapisa  province  has  served  as  an
    insurgent bastion for several  years,  hosted  criminal  and  terrorist
    networks and had been used as a staging area for  attacks  into  Kabul.
    However, the Judge found  at  [38]  that  the  background  material  is
    "equivocal" and that Kapisa is not named as a province in  which  there
    has been forced recruitment to the Taliban, but activity by  insurgents
    has become more intense since 2012.  The FtT went on to  find  that  it
    was "certainly possible" that the Taliban have used forced  recruitment
    in Kapisa Province, but that the appellant would  not  be  at  risk  of
    forced recruitment.

8.   The FtT was of the view that because of  the  Taliban's  opposition  to
    western influences and their  adverse  treatment  of  those  whom  they
    suspect  of  collaborating  with  the  government   or   working   with
    international forces the claimant would be at risk.  In  reaching  this
    conclusion the FtT referred to page 70 of  the  UNHCR  report  of  2013
    which refers to an incident in Badghis Province where a  Taliban  court
    reportedly convicted a local teenager on charges of spying for ANSF and
    cut his ear off in punishment on 1 February 2012.  In December  2011  a
    Taliban court in Kapisa Province reportedly convicted a man on  charges
    of spying for the IMF and executed him.  In September 2011, the AGEs in
    Nangarhar Province reported  they  executed  a  man  on  the  basis  of
    suspicions that  he  delivered  fuel  to  pro-government  forces.   The
    victim's eyes were reported to have been removed post-mortem.

9.   There is no country guidance case that supports the conclusion  that  a
    failed asylum seeker would be at risk on return to  Afghanistan  to  an
    area, which is at least in part, Taliban controlled.   The  appellant's
    evidence was rejected by the FtT.  He is not at risk of recruitment and
    he has had no previous involvement with  the  Taliban.   The  issue  is
    whether the Judge was entitled to conclude that he would be at risk  on
    return to his home area (which the Judge found  was  likely  to  be  at
    least in part a Taliban controlled area) as a result of  the  Taliban's
    intense opposition to western influences.

10.  There is no country guidance case that supports the conclusion  that  a
    failed asylum seeker with no profile would be at risk on return to  his
    home area.  Having considered the background evidence contained in  the
    UNHCR report, to  which  the  Judge  attached  significant  weight,  in
    reaching her conclusions, in my view it does  not  establish  that  the
    appellant would be at risk.  The  Judge  drew  an  inference  from  the
    evidence that was speculative. It establishes that those  suspected  of
    spying are at risk of persecution, but it cannot be inferred from  this
    that the appellant would be perceived a spy.  The  conclusion  was  not
    open to the FtT and it is irrational.

11.  The Judge materially erred and I set aside  the  decision  pursuant  to
    Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007.
    Both parties agreed that the  decision  could  be  remade  pursuant  to
    section 12 (2) (b) (ii)  of  the  2007  Act.  Neither  party  submitted
    further evidence in accordance with Rule 15 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

12.  I gave both parties the opportunity  to  make  submissions.   Mr  Smart
    submitted that the evidence does not establish that the appellant would
    be questioned by the Taliban and, if he were,  and  he  told  them  the
    truth, nothing he would say would put him at risk.  Mr Vokes  submitted
    that Mr Smart's view was based on the Taliban behaving rationally.  The
    appellant would be at risk on return to Afghanistan given that he is  a
    conspicuous figure (he is disabled and uses  crutches).    He  will  be
    investigated by the Taliban and this will  put  him  at  real  risk  of
    serious harm when they try to find out where he has been.

13.  There is no country guidance case or reported  decision  that  supports
    Mr Vokes' submissions.   The  background  evidence  relied  on  by  the
    appellant does not support his assertion that he would be  at  risk  on
    return.  In these circumstances the appellant has  not  established  on
    the low standard of proof that  he  would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Afghanistan and therefore this appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

14.  The FtT considered the appellant's appeal under Article 8 at  [54]  and
    [55]. Despite having allowed the appeal on  asylum  grounds  the  Judge
    went on to dismiss the appeal  under  Article  8.   Mr  Vokes  did  not
    address me on this.  In any event, the appellant has  been  in  the  UK
    since 2008 and he has a cousin here, Mr Noori.  The  appellant  had  an
    injury whilst in the UK and walks with the aid of crutches.  He has not
    sought to submit any further evidence in relation to his asylum  appeal
    or his appeal under Article 8. In his witness statement on 29  November
    2013 his evidence is that he was having monthly  physiotherapy  and  he
    has friends here. His mother would not be able to support him should he
    return to Afghanistan and there  is  no  access  to  medical  treatment
    without funds.

15.   The  appellant  has  a  private  life  here  and  there  would  be  an
    interference with this should he be removed. However, the  interference
    is in accordance with the  law.  The  decision  is  necessary  for  the
    economic  well-being  of  the  country  through  the   maintenance   of
    immigration control and the decision is  proportionate.  I  have  taken
    into account that the appellant has an injury and mobility is a problem
    for him; however, the extent of this disability is not such that  would
    render removal disproportionate. I have taken into account the evidence
    from  his  GP,  Dr  Galloway,  and  note  that  he  was  taking  strong
    painkillers and according to the letter from his GP of 23 July 2013, he
    had become depressed and was taking antidepressants.  It  appears  from
    the correspondence that the depression was as a result of the  accident
    and his state of mind had improved since then. I have also  taken  into
    account the assertions made by the appellant in his  witness  statement
    at [17] in which he intimates suicidal thoughts. However, there  is  no
    detailed medical evidence about his mental health and there is no up to
    date evidence relating to the  appellant's  health  generally.  He  has
    family in his home area including his mother and two younger  brothers.
    His mother is reliant on income from land. The decision to  remove  him
    is proportionate.

Decision

16.  The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

17.   The appeal for humanitarian protection is dismissed.

18.  The appeal is  dismissed  under  Articles  2  and  3  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

19.  The appeal is dismissed under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.








Signed Joanna McWilliam                                   Date 4 June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


