
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal number: AA/10346/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated   |
|On December 11, 2014                 |On December 15, 2014        |
|                                     |                            |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                          MR MUHAMMAD KALEEM HAIDER
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Zahoor (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born April 26,  1952  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.  The
    appellant claimed to have entered the United Kingdom on  June  5,  2001
    for the purpose of a visit. He overstayed and applied  on  October  18,
    2011 for leave to remain outside of the Rules and this was  refused  on
    January 12, 2012. On September 26, 2012 he applied for leave to  remain
    on long residency grounds and this was refused on  June  28,  2013.  On
    August 6, 2013 he was detained for removal and whilst in  detention  he
    claimed asylum on September 30, 2013. He was  released  on  October  8,
    2013 and his application was refused on November 7,  2013  and  at  the
    same time a decision was taken to remove him as an illegal  entrant  by
    way of directions under paragraphs  8  to  10  of  schedule  2  to  the
    Immigration Act 1971.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  on  November  20,
    2013. On February 18, 2014 Judge of the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Ransley
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") heard his appeal.  She  refused
    his appeal on all grounds in a determination  promulgated  on  February
    22, 2014.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on March 6, 2014  and  on  March
    18, 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McDade refused permission  to
    appeal. The grounds were renewed to the Upper Tribunal and on April 28,
    2014 Upper Tribunal Judge C Lane granted permission to  appeal  finding
    it arguable the FtTJ may have erred but warned that any error  may  not
    be material.

 4. On the above date the appellant and his wife were in attendance and  an
    interpreter translated proceedings for the appellant's wife.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 5. Mrs Zahoor submitted  the  FtTJ  made  a  material  error  of  fact  in
    paragraph  [26]  of  her  determination.  She  wrongly   recorded   the
    appellant's wife's evidence and this materially affected  her  approach
    to the article 8 assessment.  She  confirmed  that  the  error  of  law
    related only to the FtTJ's approach to article 8 ECHR and there was  no
    challenge to the other decisions.

 6. Mr McVeety submitted the FtTJ erred in paragraph [26] but this was  not
    material. It was accepted the finding in paragraph [26] related  to  an
    answer given about the asylum claim. There  was  no  appeal  about  the
    asylum aspect of the claim and the FtTJ had  carefully  considered  the
    article  8  claim  and  made  no  reference  to  that  finding  in  her
    proportionality  assessment.  The  error  would  not  have   materially
    affected the decision.

 7. Mrs Zahoor responded to that submission and reiterated that the finding
    infected the FtTJ's approach to Mrs Haider and the decision  should  be
    set aside. She accepted the appellant's wife would  have  no  knowledge
    about the veracity of the asylum claim but she argued the error on  the
    date issue affected the FtTJ's decision making.

    DISCUSSION

 8. I raised with Mrs Zahoor the relevance of this error in  light  of  her
    submissions. I went through paragraphs  [45]  to  [58]  of  the  FtTJ's
    determination and invited Mrs Zahoor to identify  where  the  FtTJ  had
    taken the finding in paragraph [26] into account. Mrs Zahoor was unable
    to point out in the FtTJ's assessment  of  article  8  where  the  FtTJ
    relied on the earlier finding in paragraph [26] and accepted there  was
    nothing in the FtTJ's assessment of article  8  that  demonstrated  any
    reliance on the finding in paragraph [26].  I  am  satisfied  the  FtTJ
    carefully considered the evidence that was before her and made findings
    open to her on the evidence. Whilst the finding in paragraph  [26]  was
    erroneous I am not persuaded that there is any error.

 9. Mrs Zahoor invited me to remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal
    because more evidence had been submitted about the  appellant's  wife's
    condition. I indicated to her that I was  unable  to  do  this  as  the
    evidence she now relied on was not before the FtTJ and I had  found  no
    material error in law in her approach.

10. Upper Tribunal Judge lane gave permission to appeal but I am  satisfied
    that having gone through the determination with  Mrs  Zahoor  that  the
    error identified did not alter the outcome of this appeal.  The  asylum
    and associated claims were dismissed because the FtTJ did not find  the
    account credible and those findings are not challenged by Mrs Zahoor.

11. The FtTJ considered the evidence including  the  medical  evidence  and
    also had regard to the previous decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Levin when considering his article 8 claim. She made  findings
    open to her and I am satisfied there is no material error of law.

    DECISION


12. There was no material error of law. I dismiss the appeal and uphold the
    original decision.


13. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.



Signed:          Dated: December 15, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





TO THE RESPONDENT

No fee was payable and the appeal was dismissed in any event.



Signed:                Dated: December 15, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
