
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)          Appeal Number: AA/10163/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:   Columbus House,       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|Newport                           |                               |
|On: 14 July 2016                  |On: 21 July 2016               |
|                                  |                               |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                     JM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:   Mr A Swain, Counsel instructed by Augustine Clement
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


    1. This is an appeal against the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge B Lloyd in which he dismissed the appeal of the  Appellant,  a
       citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo, against  the  Secretary
       of State's decision to refuse asylum and set removal directions.


    2. The Appellant last arrived in the United Kingdom on 17 January  2015
       with leave to enter for business purposes and claimed  asylum  on  2
       March 2015. His application was refused by the Respondent on 1  July
       2015. The Appellant exercised  his  right  of  appeal  against  this
       decision and this is the appeal that was heard before Judge Lloyd on
       22  April  2016  and  dismissed.  The  Appellant's  application  for
       permission  to  appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge's
       decision was granted on 27 May 2016  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Kimnell in the following terms

          The Judge failed when reaching conclusions to pay  any  regard  to
          the Medical report from Dr Wickert BSc  MB  ChB  DRCOG  MRCGP,  or
          indeed mention it at all. The report was before the Judge  because
          his decision records a reference made to it during the evidence at
          paragraph 44, but the Judge simply did not engage with it.


    3. By a rule 24 response dated 14 June 2016 the Respondent opposed  the
       appeal submitting that despite not referring to the report the Judge
       directed himself appropriately.




    4. At the hearing before me Mr Richards appeared for the  Secretary  of
       State and Mr Paxton represented the Applicant and submitted a  small
       bundle containing no documentation that was not already on the Court
       file.




    Background


    5. The Appellant is a 54-year-old citizen of the DRC who claimed asylum
       some two months after his arrival in the United Kingdom. He  claimed
       to fear persecution in the DRC on account of his  political  opinion
       having been involved in  the  production  of  television  programmes
       concerning political issues in the DRC. Integral to the  Appellant's
       account was a claim of detention and torture prior to his  departure
       from the DRC.




    6. The Judge found that the Appellant was not a  credible  witness  and
       that his claim was based upon an entirely uncorroborated account and
       accordingly dismissed the appeal.




    Submissions

    7. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Richards said that having  considered
       the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  he  could  not  resist  the
       appeal. It was clear that the Judge had made  no  reference  to  the
       medical report and as such had not given any reasons for discounting
       it.




    8. I said that the appeal would be allowed and that my written decision
       was reserved. Both advocates agreed that due to the  nature  of  the
       error of law a full rehearing was necessary and that the appropriate
       course was remission to the First-tier Tribunal.


    Error of law

    9. The Appellant claims to fear persecution upon a return  to  the  DRC
       and to have suffered significant past persecution. The claim of past
       persecution is of course not only relevant but integral to his claim
       to fear persecution  on  return.  In  his  decision  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge describes the Appellant's account of what happened to
       him in the DRC as "at times horrifically graphic" (paragraph 73). In
       reciting the Appellant's account, the Judge notes his claim to  have
       been detained,  tortured  physically  and  verbally,  raped  by  his
       captors and fed the remains of his wife  and  daughter  having  been
       shown their heads in a food pan (paragraphs 25-28). In reaching  his
       credibility conclusions the Judge noted that the Appellant's account
       was "entirely uncorroborated".




   10. In making his findings the Judge makes no reference to  the  medical
       report of Dr Wickert of the Medical Foundation  a  report  that  was
       before the Tribunal being referred to by the Presenting  Officer  in
       cross examination (paragraph 44). This report is  detailed  and  the
       summary shows that the Appellant's scars are "highly consistent with
       the account given of his ill-treatment in detention and  in  keeping
       with the time scale  given"  and  that  he  suffers  from  PTSD  and
       depression caused in Dr Wickert's opinion by  "his  experiences  and
       ill-treatment in detention".  The  final  paragraph  of  the  report
       states


           "In my opinion  the  physical  and  psychological  findings  are
           entirely in keeping with the account given  by  (the  Appellant)
           and I can find no evidence of a false allegation of torture.  In
           addition, the overall physical  and  psychological  presentation
           does not raise any clinical suspicion of deliberately  inflicted
           injuries by self or proxy for  the  purposes  of  enhancing  the
           asylum claim".




   11. In my judgment the failure of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to  give
       any reasons for discounting the medical report or  for  his  finding
       that  despite  this  report  the  Appellant's  account  is  entirely
       uncorroborated is an error of law and one that is fundamental to the
       decision to dismiss the appeal. The  error  is  a  failure  to  take
       account of the evidence before him or to give adequate  reasons  for
       its exclusion. The nature of the error is  such  that  the  decision
       must be set aside with no findings preserved.



   Conclusion

   12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error of law for the reasons set out above.




   13. I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in
       accordance with the President's direction this  matter  is  suitable
       for and should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.











Signed:                                      Date: 21 July 2016

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
