
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10132/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30th June  2016                        |On 12th July 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     vpm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes of Counsel instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of  Judge  Jerromes  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 21st March 2016.





 2. The Appellant is a male Iranian citizen whose asylum claim was  refused
    on 30th June 2015.  The appeal was heard on 8th March  2016.   The  FTT
    found that the Appellant had not given a credible  account,  and  would
    not be at risk if returned to Iran.  The appeal was  dismissed  on  all
    grounds.

 3. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon four grounds which are summarised below;

      A. The FTT made a material misdirection of law at  paragraph  46.2  in
         imposing a duty of  corroboration,  and  misinterpreting  paragraph
         339L.  Reliance was placed upon KS (benefit of  the  doubt)  [2014]
         UKUT  552  (IAC)  and  it  was  contended  that  the  FTT  was  not
         constrained by paragraph 339L, and should apply the lower  standard
         of proof to the evidence.

      B. The FTT made a material error of law at paragraphs 46.2 and 51.6 in
         considering the Appellant's failure to claim asylum en route to the
         United Kingdom.  This was not a point taken by  the  Respondent  in
         the refusal decision.  The FTT failed to consider if the  Appellant
         had a  reasonable  opportunity  to  claim  asylum  in  the  unnamed
         countries through which he passed, and the FTT erred  in  believing
         that Turkey is a designated safe country in accordance with part  2
         of  schedule  3  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment   of
         Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 (the 2004 Act).

      C. The FTT failed to consider material evidence and failed to  provide
         proper reasons.  At paragraph 49 the FTT rejected  the  Appellant's
         contention that he was appointed chair to the Cultural Heritage Sub-
         Committee of the Institute but had  failed  to  consider  a  letter
         contained at A23 of  the  Respondent's  bundle,  addressed  to  the
         Appellant as the director of the Cultural Heritage Section  of  the
         Institute.  The FTT failed to  consider  the  explanation  for  the
         absence of a  witness  and  failed  to  explain  why  there  was  a
         sufficient basis to discount the witness statements  made  by  that
         witness.

      D. The FTT erred by failing to consider  material  matters.   The  FTT
         failed to consider that  on  return  the  Iranian  authorities  are
         reasonably likely to look at the Appellant's  Facebook  page  which
         links the Appellant to the Institute and to the monarchy  which  is
         an exacerbating risk factor.  The FTT failed  to  consider  AB  and
         Others [2015] UKUT 257 (IAC).

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Simpson who found it arguable
    that the FTT had placed too much emphasis on the need for corroborating
    evidence, and had failed to give sufficient weight to the  evidence  of
    the witness SM, and failed to consider AB  and  Others.  Following  the
    grant of permission the Respondent lodged a response pursuant  to  rule
    24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 contending  in
    summary that the FTT had not erred in law,  and  had  made  sustainable
    findings and provided adequate reasons.  It was not accepted  that  the
    FTT had erred in consideration of section 8(4) of  the  2004  Act,  but
    even if it was an error, that did not undermine the  remainder  of  the
    findings against the Appellant.

 5. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FTT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Oral Submissions

 6. Mr Vokes adopted and expanded upon the  grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal.  The Appellant's  solicitors  had
    submitted a bundle of documents including  a  notice  of  intention  to
    adduce further evidence that had not been before the FTT,  pursuant  to
    rule 15(2A) of the 2008 Procedure  Rules.   This  evidence  related  to
    further extracts from the Appellant's Facebook page.  Mr Vokes made  it
    clear that this application was to be considered only if  an  error  of
    law was found.  It was not suggested that at the error of law  hearing,
    evidence that had not been before the FTT should be placed  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, as it was not appropriate to suggest the FTT had  erred
    in law by  not considering evidence that had not been before it.

 7. In relation to Ground A I was asked to find that the FTT had  erred  by
    requiring corroboration, and that corroboration  was  not  required  by
    paragraph 339L.  The FTT was in fact  imposing  a  higher  standard  of
    proof.

 8. In relation to Ground B,  findings  made  by  the  FTT  undermined  the
    Appellant's credibility.  The FTT at paragraph  51.6  made  a  specific
    reference to the Appellant's failure to claim  asylum  before  reaching
    the United  Kingdom  and  stated  that  this  "further  undermines  the
    credibility of his claim that he  fled  Iran  in  fear  of  persecution
    following a raid on his house."  I was asked to note this point had not
    been made by the Respondent, and the FTT had not informed  the  parties
    at the hearing that section 8 of the 2004 Act was an issue.

 9. Regarding Ground  C  Mr  Vokes  accepted  that  the  FTT  had  in  fact
    considered the letter at A23 of the Respondent's bundle, but  submitted
    this letter had not been properly assessed, and there was  no  adequate
    explanation as to why the letter was not accepted.  Mr Vokes  submitted
    that  dismissing  this  letter  was  irrational.   There  had  been  no
    challenge to the authenticity of the letter in the Respondent's refusal
    decision.

10. With reference to Ground D the FTT had not taken into  account  AB  and
    Others, which although not a country guidance decision, is  a  reported
    decision of the Upper Tribunal.  The  FTT  had  acknowledged  that  the
    Appellant, when  he  returned  to  Iran  in  2006,  had  attracted  the
    attention of the authorities, and that he may attract similar attention
    on return on this occasion.   The  FTT  had  not  considered  that  the
    authorities may discover entries in the  Appellant's  Facebook  account
    that would put him at risk.





11. Mr McVeety relied upon the rule 24 response in contending that the  FTT
    had not erred in law.  With reference to Ground  A,  the  FTT  was  not
    requiring corroboration, but was simply setting out what was  contained
    in paragraph 339L.

12. With reference to Ground B, the FTT had described the Appellant passing
    through Turkey, but did not find that  he  could  have  claimed  asylum
    there.  As the Appellant had travelled overland to the  United  Kingdom
    he must have passed through safe countries and not claimed  asylum.   I
    was asked to find no error, but in the alternative, I was asked to find
    that this was a minor credibility point taken against the Appellant.

13. In relation to Ground C, Mr McVeety noted that it was now accepted that
    the FTT had in fact considered the letter at A23  of  the  Respondent's
    bundle.  The weight to be attached to evidence was  a  matter  for  the
    FTT.

14. With reference to Ground D the Appellant had not produced to  the  FTT,
    evidence of anything in his Facebook account, that would bring  him  to
    the adverse attention of the authorities.

15. By way of response Mr Vokes submitted that the judge had imposed a duty
    of corroboration, and  made  specific  reference  to  corroboration  in
    paragraph 52.  It was submitted that the judge had made a finding  that
    Turkey is a safe country and had therefore erred in that  respect,  and
    erred in making negative credibility  findings  against  the  Appellant
    because of his failure to claim asylum en route.  In  relation  to  the
    evidence of SM,  the  FTT  had  not  given  adequate  reasons  for  not
    attaching weight to this evidence.

16. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

17. I will consider the grounds as set out in the application.

Ground A

18.  I  do  not  accept  that  the  FTT  has  imposed  a   requirement   of
    corroboration.  In my  view  the  FTT  has  not  imposed  an  incorrect
    standard of proof.   At  paragraph  13.3  the  FTT  confirms  that  the
    standard of proof is lower than that of the normal  civil  standard  of
    the balance of probabilities, and describes the standard of proof as  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood.  That is not an error.

19. The FTT at paragraph 47 acknowledges "that great  care  must  be  taken
    before making adverse findings of credibility and should only  be  made
    where justified in the circumstances  of  the  case."   The  FTT  makes
    further reference in this paragraph to the lower standard of proof.

20. At paragraph 48, the FTT again refers to the lower standard  of  proof,
    and there is further reference  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof  in
    paragraphs 50, 51 and 52.

21. In my view the judge adequately considers credibility, and at paragraph
    46.1 does not accept the Respondent's suggestion that the fact that the
    Appellant's first asylum claim was rejected undermines his credibility.
     At paragraph 49 the FTT does not accept  the  Respondent's  suggestion
    that the fact that the Appellant was unable to state in interview  what
    UNESCO stands for, adversely affects his credibility.

22. At paragraph 46.2 the FTT refers to there being a duty on an  Appellant
    to substantiate the asylum claim, where statements are not supported by
    documentary or other evidence, those aspects will not need confirmation
    when all of the conditions in 339L are met.  This is setting  out  what
    is stated in paragraph 339L.

23. The FTT does make reference to there being no corroborative evidence in
    paragraph 52, and using the word 'corroborative'  may  be  unwise,  and
    leads to challenges that the wrong standard of proof has been  applied.
    However in paragraph 52, the FTT also makes specific reference  to  the
    lower standard of proof that is applicable.

24. The decision must be read as a whole.  Having read the  decision  as  a
    whole, I do not find that the FTT imposed a duty of corroboration,  nor
    do I find that the FTT imposed an incorrect standard of proof.  The FTT
    assessed the evidence in the round, and  made  findings  based  on  the
    lower standard of proof that applied.

Ground B

25. I find the FTT erred at paragraph 46.2(i) and 51.6 in making an adverse
    credibility finding because the Appellant did not claim  asylum  before
    reaching the United Kingdom.

26. It is common ground that this is a point which was  not  taken  by  the
    Respondent in the refusal, and while it is open to the FTT to  consider
    this issue, if raised at the hearing, both parties should be  given  an
    opportunity to make submissions.  There is no evidence to indicate that
    this issue was in fact raised at the hearing.  I find that the FTT  did
    regard Turkey as a safe country because of the reference to "other safe
    countries".  That is an error,  as  Turkey  is  not  one  of  the  safe
    countries designated under the 2004 Act.  I find that the FTT failed to
    consider if the Appellant had a reasonable opportunity to claim  asylum
    in the unnamed safe countries through which he must have passed.

27. Although I find an error, it is not material for the following reasons.
     The FTT made specific reference at  paragraph  46.2(ii)  to  paragraph
    339MA of the Immigration  Rules  which  states  that  applications  for
    asylum shall neither be rejected nor excluded from examination  on  the
    sole ground that they have not been made  as  soon  as  possible.   The
    error in making an adverse credibility finding is not material  because
    of the numerous other adverse credibility findings  made  by  the  FTT,
    which are sustainable and for which adequate reasons have  been  given.
    In my view it is apparent that  the  failure  to  claim  asylum  before
    reaching the United Kingdom was not a major credibility issue.

Ground C

28. As conceded at the hearing, the  FTT  did  not  fail  to  consider  the
    document at A23 of the Respondent's bundle.  This document is a  letter
    dated 18th May 2009 addressed to the Appellant from SM.  This letter is
    referred to at paragraph 41(iv) of the FTT decision,  and  specifically
    considered at paragraph 49.4.  The FTT notes  that  this  letter  makes
    reference to the  Appellant  being  in  an  official  position  at  the
    Institute and notes that the letter was written by SM, and records that
    little weight is placed on SM's evidence for the  reasons  set  out  at
    paragraph 49.4(i) and (ii).  The FTT recorded that the witness, SM, was
    unable to attend the hearing to give evidence in person and  be  cross-
    examined.  The FTT recorded at paragraph 40.1 the explanation given  by
    SM that he was studying in Germany and due to sit crucial exams.   That
    however is not the main reason why the FTT  did  not  regard  SM  as  a
    credible witness.  The reason for that finding is  the  claim  in  SM's
    first  statement  that  the  Appellant  had  been  "often  arrested  or
    threatened by the intelligence service or special  forces  of  cultural
    heritages through his activities and he has  many  different  kinds  of
    problems experienced in this period of time."  As the FTT pointed  out,
    the Appellant did not claim to have been often arrested or  threatened,
    his claim was that he had been detained only on one occasion, and apart
    from when he was released,  did  not  claim  to  have  been  personally
    threatened.

29. The FTT gave adequate  reasons  for  not  accepting  as  credible,  the
    evidence of SM.

Ground D

30. The FTT  did  not  fail  to  consider  the  Appellant's  Facebook.   As
    acknowledged in  the  grounds,  the  FTT  made  reference  to  this  at
    paragraph 51.4 noting that  the  Appellant  produced  in  evidence  his
    Facebook homepage, but that he had failed to produce any evidence as to
    what was on his Facebook account.   Therefore  the  Appellant  had  not
    produced evidence that his Facebook  account  contained  anything  that
    would put him at risk if that was inspected when he returned  to  Iran.
    The burden of proof is on the Appellant, and he did not  discharge  the
    burden.  It is apparent that this is why the Appellant's solicitors now
    wish to make an application to introduce evidence that was  not  before
    the FTT.  It is not appropriate to consider fresh evidence at an  error
    of law hearing, but if it is thought appropriate, such evidence  should
    form the  basis  for  making  a  fresh  claim  for  protection  to  the
    Respondent.

31. In conclusion, I find that Grounds A, C and D  display  a  disagreement
    with findings made by the FTT but do not disclose a material  error  of
    law.  I find that Ground B does disclose an error of law, but  for  the
    reasons I have given, it is not material.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT did not involve the making of an error  on  a  point
of law such that the decision must be set aside.  The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The FTT made an anonymity direction.  I continue that direction pursuant  to
rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   Unless  and
until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             5th July 2016




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the decision of the FTT stands, so does the decision not to  make  a  fee
award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             5th July 2016

