
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/10218/2010
     AA/10219/2010

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 29th July 2013                               |On 10th September 2013     |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                            C P (first appellant)
                        a r o m p (second appellant)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Pipe, Counsel instructed by J M Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. As the second Appellant is a minor and these appeals are concerned with
    family and private life, it is  appropriate  that  the  Appellants  are
    granted  anonymity  throughout  these  proceedings  unless  and   until
    directed otherwise.  No report of these proceedings shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify the Appellants or  any  members  of  their  family.
    Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  a  contempt  of
    court.  This direction is made pursuant to  rule  14  of  The  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. The Appellants appeal against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Somal promulgated following a  hearing  on  9th  November
    2010.

 3. The Appellants born 2nd June 1975 and 8th  February  2010  respectively
    are citizens of Nigeria.  The first Appellant  is  the  mother  of  the
    second Appellant.

 4.  The  first  Appellant  claimed  asylum  on  6th  January  2010   which
    application was refused on 1st July 2010.  On 7th July 2010 a  decision
    was made to remove the Appellants  from  the  United  Kingdom,  and  an
    appeal was lodged with the First-tier  Tribunal,  contending  that  the
    Appellants were entitled to asylum, or in the alternative  humanitarian
    protection, and that to remove  them  from  the  United  Kingdom  would
    breach Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the 1950  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 5. The appeals were heard by Judge Somal (the judge) on 9th November 2010.
     The appeals were dismissed on all grounds.

 6. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    contending that the judge erred in her consideration of  Article  8  of
    the 1950 Convention.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Storey in  the
    following terms;

         "I do not consider that there was any error in para 43 when the  IJ
         sought to assess the strength of the Appellants' private life  ties
         by reference by analogy to case law on  family  life  ties  between
         adult relatives.  It is sufficiently clear that what the  IJ  meant
         to convey was that the Appellants' private life relationships  with
         others in the UK were not  particularly  strong.   Nevertheless,  I
         consider  that  it  is  arguable  that  the  IJ  failed  to  attach
         sufficient  weight,  when  conducting  the  Article   8   balancing
         exercise, to the fact that the Appellant, as someone who  had  been
         trafficked, could not be regarded as a person  who  had  engineered
         her own illegal entry.  I do not see that since on return  she  and
         her daughter would return together that either LD or now the SC  ZH
         particularly helps the Appellants in this case, but  that  is  best
         left for further submissions.
         In view of the fact that the IJ  placed  reliance  on  the  country
         guidance case of PO (Nigeria) which in certain particulars has  now
         been found by the Court of Appeal to be wrong in law, I  have  also
         considered whether there is any legal error in the  IJ's  treatment
         of the asylum related grounds.  However, I can discern none  and  I
         note that no such grounds have been raised in the  context  of  the
         applications for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal."

 8. The appeals were considered by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  on  1st
    August 2012 who in finding an  error  of  law  and  setting  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal recorded, inter alia;

         "13. I cannot agree that there is any proper basis to criticise the
             finding that the Appellant would no longer risk  serious  harm
             at the  hands  of  her  former  traffickers.   I  accept  that
             references to gangs are emotive  and  imprecise.   It  is  not
             clear that  this  Appellant  was  trafficked  by  a  gang  who
             required her to achieve a certain target of earning.  However,
             the evidence that was accepted by the First-tier  Tribunal  is
             that,  having  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom,  effectively
             treated as a prisoner,  she  was  abandoned  when  she  became
             pregnant.  There is no evidence to support a finding that this
             is the kind of case where the Appellant would be of continuing
             interest in the  event  of  her  return.   Rather  than  being
             anxious to  make  more  money  from  the  Appellant  by  their
             shameful acts, the clear inference is that the  Appellant  had
             been abandoned by those who brought her to the United  Kingdom
             and left to look after herself.  There is nothing  that  would
             support a finding that she would be at risk from the  gang  in
             the event of her return.
         14.  Mr Smart submits that that ends the case.   The  Appellant  is
             not a refugee so it does not matter that the shelters may  not
             be available in the way found by the First-tier judge.
         15.  I do not agree with that.  It was an  essential  part  of  the
             Tribunal's reasoning, which had regard for the welfare of  the
             Appellant's child, that proper care and  protection  would  be
             available for the Appellant in Nigeria.  That may not be right
             because it was a finding based in  part  on  country  guidance
             that has been criticised.
         16.  It is for this reason and this reason only that  I  find  that
             the decision to dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds  to
             be unsatisfactory."

 9. Directions were  subsequently  issued  to  both  parties  that  written
    submissions should  be  submitted  by  the  Appellants  explaining  why
    removal of the Appellants would breach their rights  under  Article  8,
    and submissions should be submitted by the Respondent  explaining  why,
    if such be the case, it was  contended  that  removing  the  Appellants
    would not breach their Article 8 rights.

Re-making the Decision

Documents

10. We have taken into account the following documents;

      i) Respondent's bundle with Annexes A-D.

     ii) Appellants' bundle comprising 40 pages.

    iii) Appellants' supplementary bundle comprising 62 pages.

     iv) Appellants' skeleton argument dated 8th November 2010.

      v) Appellants' written submissions dated 18th October 2012.

     vi) Respondent's written submissions received 13th November 2012.

    vii) Extract of COI Report on trafficking in Nigeria dated  6th  January
         2012.

   viii) COI response regarding shelters for trafficked women  and  children
         dated 21st September 2012.

     ix) Extract from COI Report on trafficking in Nigeria dated  14th  June
         2013.

The Appellants' Case

11. The first Appellant's case is that her parents died when she  was  very
    young.  She thereafter lived with her brother in Nigeria until he  died
    in 2003.  She then moved to live with a woman to whom she  referred  as
    "mummy" and worked for her  by  selling  water  for  approximately  two
    years.

12. In 2004 she was introduced by "mummy" to two men who she referred to as
    "uncles" who she was told would take her  abroad  to  find  work.   She
    received 2,500 naira from  "mummy"  which  she  gave  to  the  men  who
    provided her with a passport.

13. She travelled to the United Kingdom with the two men on  21st  December
    2005 and on arrival she was taken by them to a house where she was kept
    and told that she must have sex with male visitors.  She was beaten and
    threatened and therefore complied.  She remained  at  the  address  for
    three years until  in  September  2008  she  was  taken  shopping,  and
    abandoned.

14. She attended a church and met a Nigerian national living in the  United
    Kingdom and entered into a relationship with him.  She became  pregnant
    in May 2009 and her partner wanted her to abort the child  as  he  then
    disclosed that he had a wife and children in Nigeria.  She ran away and
    has had no further contact with him.  She found employment as a cleaner
    and rented a flat.  In December  2009  the  landlord  of  the  property
    pushed her down the stairs.  In January 2010 the landlord assaulted her
    and the police were called.  The first Appellant did not press  charges
    but was admitted to hospital and informed  social  services  about  the
    events that had happened to her since she left  Nigeria.   She  claimed
    asylum on 6th January 2010.  The  first  Appellant  has  no  family  in
    Nigeria, and has had no contact with anybody in Nigeria since she left,
    and has no home or property there.

The Respondent's Case

15. The Respondent's case is set out in a letter dated 1st July 2010  which
    may be summarised as follows.  The Respondent accepted that  the  first
    Appellant is a national of Nigeria and that she was trafficked  to  the
    United Kingdom and her account of events  between  2003  and  2010  was
    accepted.  However the Respondent considered that the  first  Appellant
    would not be at risk if  returned  to  Nigeria,  and  that  substantial
    assistance would be available for her from the National Agency for  the
    Prohibition of Trafficking in Persons (NAPTIP), the Woman's Trafficking
    and Child  Labour  Extradition  Foundation  (WOTCLEF),  the  Anti-Human
    Trafficking Unit of the Nigeria police, and the  Nigerian  state  which
    has a legal framework to combat and assist victims of trafficking.



The Upper Tribunal Hearing- 29th July 2013

Preliminary Issues

16. The Appellant attended the hearing.  It was established that there  was
    no need for an interpreter,  and  proceedings  could  be  conducted  in
    English.

17. We ascertained that we had received all documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely, and each party had served the other with  any
    documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.  Mr Smart submitted
    an extract of the COI on Nigeria dated 14th June 2013, which related to
    trafficking, and both representatives indicated that they were ready to
    proceed and there was no application for an adjournment.

The first Appellant's Evidence

18. The first Appellant adopted her witness statement  dated  17th  October
    2012.  She now has two children.  Her youngest child was  born  on  9th
    June 2012.  Neither he nor the first Appellant have  any  contact  with
    his father.

19. In summary the first Appellant's witness statement  confirms  that  she
    enrolled in NVQ courses in children's and young people's workforce  and
    NVQ in supporting teaching and learning in schools,  functional  skills
    and literacy, and she began these courses in September 2012.

20. The first Appellant did not choose to come to the  United  Kingdom  but
    was trafficked here and wishes to remain in the  United  Kingdom.   The
    second Appellant is attending a cr�che and has made friends with  other
    children.  The first  Appellant  is  visited  every  fortnight  by  her
    community nurse and the psychiatric  treatment  she  has  received  has
    benefited her.  The first Appellant has support in the  United  Kingdom
    that she would not have in Nigeria, and  fears  that  if  returned  she
    would be targeted again, and also fears that her children would be sold
    on the streets or pushed into forced labour, and  she  is  fearful  for
    their  safety.   The  first  Appellant  still  attends  regular  church
    activities.

21. In answering  some  questions  put  by  Mr  Pipe  the  first  Appellant
    confirmed that she is still studying and she hopes to  eventually  find
    employment.  She does not keep in touch with anybody in  Nigeria.   She
    now sees her community psychiatric nurse every three weeks.  She  takes
    medication for depression and sleeping tablets.

22. The first Appellant confirmed that she has no family in Nigeria and has
    concerns about the lack of education for her children in  Nigeria,  and
    concerns regarding their security.  She confirmed that neither  of  her
    children have any contact with their fathers.

23. The first Appellant was cross-examined and  explained  that  the  2,500
    naira that she had paid the two men was money that  she  believed  that
    she had earned.  She was told that she would be  taken  to  the  United
    Kingdom to have a better life.    At that time she was 31 years of age.
     She confirmed that the education  she  is  currently  undergoing  does
    involve learning to look after children, and advising  parents  how  to
    look after children.

The Respondent's Submissions

24. Mr Smart in requesting that the appeals be dismissed, relied  upon  his
    written submissions and submitted that the first Appellant  was,  to  a
    degree, complicit in engineering her  illegal  entry  into  the  United
    Kingdom.  Both children are very young and their best  interests  would
    be served by being with their mother, and the evidence  indicated  that
    the first Appellant is a good mother and hardworking.

25. Mr Smart submitted that the background evidence  indicated  that  there
    would be  shelters  available  in  Nigeria  for  trafficked  women  and
    children, and that information  from  the  Danish  Immigration  Service
    indicated that some victims may stay for more than six  months  in  the
    shelters, depending  upon  their  individual  needs.   The  educational
    qualifications obtained  by  the  first  Appellant  would  enhance  her
    ability to obtain employment upon her return.  The background  evidence
    indicated that NAPTIP had 410  bed  spaces  available  for  victims  of
    trafficking.

26. In summary, Mr Smart submitted that  the  best  interests  of  the  two
    children would be  to  remain  with  their  mother,  and  it  would  be
    reasonable and proportionate for the family as a  whole  to  return  to
    Nigeria, where they would receive assistance and accommodation, and the
    first Appellant would be able to gain employment to support the family.

The Appellants' Submissions

27. Mr Pipe relied upon his written submissions dated 18th October 2012 and
    we were asked to note that the first Appellant had been in  the  United
    Kingdom since 21st December 2005, and that both children were  born  in
    the United Kingdom.

28. Mr Pipe confirmed that the only issue before us related to  Article  8.
    We were reminded that the Respondent accepted that the first  Appellant
    had been trafficked  into  the  United  Kingdom,  and  that  the  first
    Appellant's account of what had happened to her between 2003  and  2010
    was accepted.

29. The fact that the  first  Appellant  had  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally should not be held against her, as she had  been  trafficked,
    and Mr Pipe submitted that there was very little to weigh  against  the
    Appellants in the Article 8  balancing  exercise.   We  were  asked  to
    accept that there  is  a  public  interest  in  protecting  victims  of
    trafficking, and the Respondent  does  in  fact  have  a  policy  where
    discretionary leave can be granted to victims of trafficking,  although
    discretion had not been exercised in favour of the first  Appellant  in
    this case.

30. Mr Pipe submitted that the first Appellant had  no  family  support  in
    Nigeria and that she had previously been exploited  and  that  she  was
    vulnerable, and the first  Appellant  was  responsible  for  two  young
    children.

31. In the absence of an up-to-date country guidance case, we were asked to
    place weight upon the expert report prepared  by  Modupe  Debbie  Ariyo
    dated 8th November 2010 and in the light of that report, we were  asked
    to consider what the situation would be if the first Appellant and  her
    two children were returned to Nigeria.   Mr  Pipe  submitted  that  the
    first Appellant  might  not  even  qualify  for  accommodation  in  the
    shelters, but even if a shelter was available, the background  evidence
    indicated that this was only a short term measure  and  thereafter  the
    first Appellant would be fending for herself and her children,  and  we
    should take into account that she has mental  health  issues,  and  she
    would not have the support that she has in the United Kingdom.  We were
    asked to conclude that the background evidence indicated that it  would
    not be in the best interests of the children to return to  Nigeria  and
    therefore removal of the Appellants would be a disproportionate  breach
    of their Article 8 rights.

32. At the conclusion of oral submissions we reserved our decision.

Our Conclusions and Reasons

33. The only issue before us relates to Article 8 of the  1950  Convention.
    It is not contended on behalf of the Appellants, that they are entitled
    to asylum or humanitarian protection, nor is it  contended  that  their
    removal from the United Kingdom would breach Articles 2  or  3  of  the
    1950 Convention.  It is accepted that the Immigration Rules  introduced
    as from 9th July 2012 by HC 194 which  deal  with  family  and  private
    lives, do not apply to these appeals, as the Respondent's  decision  to
    remove was made in July 2010, two  years prior to the  introduction  of
    those rules.

34. We find that the first Appellant's account  was  accepted  as  credible
    both by the Respondent, and the First-tier Tribunal.  It  is  therefore
    accepted as a fact, that the first Appellant does not have  any  family
    in Nigeria.  Her parents died when she was young, and her brother  died
    in 2003.  The first Appellant was trafficked into  the  United  Kingdom
    for sexual purposes, and was effectively kept as a prisoner between her
    arrival in December 2005, and her abandonment in September 2008.

35. Article 8 of the 1950 Convention states;

         "(1) Everyone has the right to respect for his private  and  family
             life, his home and his correspondence.
         (2)  There shall be no interference by a public authority with  the
             exercise of this right except such as is  in  accordance  with
             the law and is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others."

36. In considering Article 8 it is appropriate that we follow the  guidance
    given in Razgar [2004] UKHL  27  which  indicates  that  the  following
    questions should be considered;

         "(1) Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?
         (2)  If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?
         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?
         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?"

37. The decision in Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39 means that if we  find  that
    family life exists which engages Article 8, then we must  consider  the
    family lives of all members of the family, not only the Appellants.  In
    this case, there are three in the family  unit,  those  being  the  two
    Appellants, and the first Appellant's  youngest  child  born  9th  June
    2012.

38. It is for the Appellants to prove that they have established family  or
    private life which engages Article 8, and if that is proved, the burden
    switches to the Respondent  to  prove  that  the  decision  is  lawful,
    necessary, and proportionate.

39. We are satisfied that the Appellants have  established  a  family  life
    together, but as it is proposed to remove the family as a unit,  we  do
    not find that the  Respondent's  decision  would  interfere  with  that
    family life.  We are satisfied that no family life which  would  engage
    Article  8  has  been  established  with  the  fathers  of  the   first
    Appellant's two children.

40. We conclude that Article 8 is engaged on the basis of the private lives
    of the family as a whole, and the Respondent's decision to remove would
    be an interference with this private life.

41. We are satisfied that the proposed interference is in  accordance  with
    the law, leaving aside the question of Article 8, as it is accepted  on
    behalf of the Appellants, that  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules cannot be satisfied, and  the  Appellants  are  not  entitled  to
    asylum.

42. We are satisfied that  it  is  necessary  for  the  state  to  maintain
    effective immigration control for the reasons set out in Article  8(2),
    and in this case it is necessary to consider the economic well-being of
    the country, and whether the Respondent can prove that the decision  to
    remove the Appellants, is proportionate in the interests of maintaining
    effective immigration control.

43.  The  first  Appellant  has  two   children,   and   when   considering
    proportionality it was confirmed in ZH (Tanzania) [2011]  UKSC  4  that
    the best interests of a child must be  a  primary  consideration.   The
    best interests of a child broadly means the well-being of a child,  and
    the best interests must be considered first, although  those  interests
    could be outweighed by the cumulative effect of other considerations.

44. In MK India [2011] UKUT 475 (IAC) the Tribunal explained that the  best
    interests of a child is a broad notion, and its assessment requires the
    taking into account and weighing up of diverse factors.   There  should
    be an objective assessment, although an important part of  ascertaining
    what are the best interests of a child  is  to  seek  to  discover  the
    child's own wishes and views, which  should  be  given  due  weight  in
    accordance with the age and maturity of the  child.   Consideration  of
    the best interests of a child is an integral  part  of  the  Article  8
    balancing exercise and not something apart from it,  and  is  a  matter
    which has to  be  addressed  first  as  a  distinct  inquiry.   Factors
    relating to  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control must not form part of the  best  interests  of  the
    child consideration.

45. In E-A Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315 (IAC) the Tribunal  confirmed  that  the
    correct starting point in considering the welfare and best interests of
    a young child would be that it is in the best interests of a  child  to
    live with and be brought up by his or her parents, subject to any  very
    strong contra-indication.

46. In this case the children are too young to be consulted about their own
    wishes and views, but we feel able to state  unequivocally  that  their
    best interests would be served by remaining with their mother.  This is
    accepted by the Respondent.  The issue is whether it would  be  in  the
    best interests of the children to  remain  with  their  mother  in  the
    United Kingdom, or to travel with her to  Nigeria.   The  children  are
    very young and although born in the United Kingdom, we find  that  they
    could adapt to life in Nigeria.  There are no relevant  medical  issues
    relating to the children.

47. The children would be supported by their mother, and we therefore  have
    to consider, when considering the best interests of the  children,  the
    position of their mother.  We accept that she has  some  mental  health
    issues in that she has been suffering from depression and is  receiving
    medication, and is receiving a visit from a nurse  every  three  weeks.
    There is little in the way of independent medical evidence  as  to  the
    first Appellant's mental health problems, save for a letter  dated  6th
    July 2012 from a community psychiatric nurse, confirming that the first
    Appellant has been referred to the community psychiatric team.

48. The first Appellant has no family members in Nigeria, and has no  home,
    assets or employment.  Before leaving Nigeria, the first Appellant, who
    had only received a basic education, had  worked  selling  water.   She
    became involved with a woman who was complicit in her being  trafficked
    to the United Kingdom for sexual purposes.

49. The first Appellant has undergone some education in the United  Kingdom
    but the evidence indicates that the only qualification she has achieved
    is a City and Guilds Level 1 Certificate in Adult Numeracy.   This  was
    awarded on 19th June 2012.  There is evidence within the  supplementary
    bundle, from Palfrey Community Association  that  the  first  Appellant
    commenced the courses that she referred to in  her  oral  evidence,  in
    September 2012.  There  is  no  evidence  to  confirm  that  the  first
    Appellant has achieved any qualifications in relation to those courses.
     We conclude  therefore  that  it  is  not  clear  that  the  education
    undertaken to date by the first Appellant in the United Kingdom,  would
    assist her in finding employment in Nigeria.

50. The background information  contained  within  the  Country  of  Origin
    Information Report on  Nigeria  dated  14th  June  2013  confirms  that
    government shelters for the victims of trafficking are  available.   At
    paragraph 25.27 of the report, there is evidence that there  are  eight
    NAPTIP shelters in Nigeria able to accommodate 410 people.

51.  There  is  also  some  NGO  assistance  as  confirmed  by  the  Danish
    Immigration Service fact- finding mission  report  published  in  April
    2008 and referred to in paragraphs 25.29 and 25.30 of the COI Report.

52. The COI response  dated  21st  September  2012  has  been  compiled  in
    relation to a question about shelters for trafficked women and children
    in  Nigeria.   In  summary  it  is  explained  that   little   specific
    information on this issue could be located but reference is made to the
    US State Department (USSD) Trafficking in  Persons  Report  2011  which
    noted that NAPTIP had eight shelters with  a  total  capacity  for  210
    victims, which constituted  a  50%  decrease  in  capacity  from  2010.
    NAPTIP was reported to  have  difficulty  in  adequately  staffing  and
    caring for victims in shelters.  The USSD  Report  confirmed  that  the
    NAPTIP shelters offered counselling, legal services and  basic  medical
    treatment and victims who required specialised care received  treatment
    from hospitals and  clinics  through  existing  agreements  with  those
    institutions.  Some shelter staff were described  as  lacking  previous
    training  or  professional  experience  in  treating  the   trauma   of
    trafficking victims,  and  victims  were  allowed  to  stay  in  NAPTIP
    shelters for up to six weeks, a limit which was extended by up to  four
    additional weeks in extenuating circumstances.  During this  time  they
    received informal education or  vocational  training  and  after  this,
    those who needed long term care were referred to a network of NGOs that
    could provide additional services, though few long terms  options  were
    available for adult victims.

53. The April 2008 Danish Immigration Service Report noted that the  normal
    time spent in such a shelter is about two weeks although if a victim is
    in need of an extended period of time, this would be granted.  The same
    report referred to WOTCLEF allowing victims to stay in  a  shelter  for
    six weeks, and some may stay for up to six months or more depending  on
    their individual needs.

54. The expert  report  prepared  by  Ms  Ariyo  dated  8th  November  2010
    considered the support available in Nigeria for  trafficked  women  and
    their  children.   We  are   satisfied,   taking   into   account   the
    qualifications and expertise of the report author, that weight  can  be
    attached to this report.  Unfortunately the paragraphs  in  the  report
    are not numbered but in the last paragraph on page 5 the  following  is
    stated;

         "The above analysis of NAPTIP and its inability to meet  the  needs
         of majority of victims of trafficking contradicts the assertion  by
         the Home Office that  NAPTIP  will  be  able  to  provide  returned
         victims like the Appellant with  adequate  support  on  arrival  in
         Nigeria.  The Appellant and her baby will be  able  to  access  the
         shelter for six weeks maximum and then will be referred to an  NGO,
         for a limited  period.   After  the  limited  period  expires,  the
         Appellant and her baby will have to join the mainstream life  in  a
         harsh country like Nigeria.  The Appellant and her baby will become
         homeless and destitute  since  they  have  no  family  support  and
         Nigeria does not provide a social  welfare  programme.   In  short,
         there is no safety net for young women  like  the  Appellant.   She
         will become prone to further exploitation as a  sex  worker  or  in
         other ways.  Her child will be very vulnerable to baby and  toddler
         trafficking which is a  growing  phenomenon  in  Nigeria  (Reuters;
         Nigeria police crack  illicit  baby  trafficking  ring,  12th  June
         2008)".

         The report considers WOTCLEF at page 6, and confirms that this is a
         nongovernmental organisation based in Abuja,  which  has  not  been
         able to increase the number of available spaces in its shelter  for
         victims since it was established in 1999.  The WOTCLEF  website  as
         at 20th September 2010 stated that the waiting list for  access  to
         the rehabilitation centre is always long due to  limited  capacity.
         Ms Ariyo is of the opinion that it  would  be  impossible  for  the
         Appellant and her baby to be rehabilitated by WOTCLEF.   We  should
         mention at this stage that when  the  report  was  prepared  by  Ms
         Ariyo, the first Appellant's youngest child had not been born.

55. In the penultimate paragraph on page 6 Ms Ariyo states;

         "Thus to conclude this question in regard to services provided  for
         victims of trafficking, NAPTIP and NGOs in Nigeria are making  good
         progress.  However, they are all facing serious funding  challenges
         and capacity issues that make it impossible for them to  offer  the
         Appellant  and  her  child  long-term  and  sustainable  help   and
         assistance which is needed to enable  successful  reintegration  in
         Nigeria."

56. We set out below Ms Ariyo's conclusions;

         ".   NAPTIP and other NGOs will be able  to  provide  only  minimal
             care for the Appellant and her baby.  The idea  that  Nigerian
             agencies  are  able  to  provide   them   with   a   long-term
             rehabilitation programme and meet their health and other needs
             is a mirage.  NAPTIP, the key agency in Nigeria is hampered by
             lack of adequate funds, and cannot  meet  the  needs  of  many
             victims in Nigeria as well as those being returned.

           . Due to the socio-economic and political state of Nigeria,  and
             the level of skills and education of the Appellant,  she  will
             find it very difficult to secure employment that will help  to
             provide for her and the baby thus  jeopardising  a  successful
             return and re-integration of a victim of trafficking.

           . Returning the Appellant and her baby to survive on  their  own
             in Nigeria is a life sentence.   This  is  because  they  will
             become very vulnerable to all sorts of negative forces seeking
             to harm or exploit them as indigent, homeless single  mum  and
             her baby.  The Appellant may well be forced into  prostitution
             or other exploitative labour in order to survive."

57. Having considered the background evidence we conclude  that  there  are
    limited facilities in Nigeria, to cater for the  needs  of  victims  of
    trafficking.  It is possible that  the  first  Appellant  and  her  two
    children would be accommodated in a shelter but we can put it no higher
    than that.  Background evidence indicates that the  number  of  victims
    far exceeds the limited number of places available in shelters.

58. Even if the family were able to obtain a place in a shelter, it is  our
    opinion that this would only be available for a very limited period  of
    time, and the evidence indicates that it is only in the WOTCLEF shelter
    in Abuja, that victims may stay for up to six months or more.  This  is
    the shelter which according to the  background  evidence,  has  a  long
    waiting list.

59. After the limited stay in a shelter, the family would be in a  position
    whereby they would have to find accommodation.  The first Appellant has
    no familial support and we do not find that she has qualifications that
    would enable her to  obtain  employment  other  than  in  an  unskilled
    position.  The first Appellant would have to provide  for  herself  and
    two very young children.  The Respondent has the burden of proving that
    it would be proportionate, and in the best interests of the children to
    be returned with  their  mother  to  Nigeria.   We  conclude  that  the
    Respondent has not discharged that  burden  in  relation  to  the  best
    interests of the children, as on the evidence presented to  us,  we  do
    not believe that it would be in the best interests  of  the  two  young
    children to return with their mother to Nigeria.

60. Having found that the best interests of the children would be to remain
    with their mother in the United Kingdom,  we  have  to  decide  whether
    those interests are  outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect  of  other
    considerations.

61. We do place significant weight upon the right,  and  the  need  of  the
    state to maintain effective immigration  control.   Although  effective
    immigration control is not of itself referred to in Article 8(2) it  is
    relevant to the considerations set out therein.  We take  into  account
    that the Appellants cannot satisfy the Immigration Rules  in  order  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, and at present the first Appellant is not
    able to support herself and her children  without  recourse  to  public
    funds.  We also take into account that  the  first  Appellant  did  not
    enter the United Kingdom legally,  although  we  make  the  point  that
    although an illegal entrant, we do not make an adverse finding  against
    her, as we accept that she was the innocent victim of traffickers,  and
    we find that there was no deliberate attempt on her part to  enter  the
    United Kingdom illegally and subsequently fabricate an asylum claim.

62. Overall, our conclusion is that the  best  interests  of  the  children
    outweigh the  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration
    control, on the facts of  this  particular  case,  and  to  remove  the
    Appellants would be disproportionate, and therefore a breach of Article
    8 of the 1950 Convention.

Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of      law and  was  set  aside.   We  substitute  a  fresh
    decision as follows.

    We dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

    The Appellants are not entitled to humanitarian protection.

    We allow the appeal on human rights grounds in relation to Article 8 of
    the 1950 Convention.

Anonymity

    We remind the parties that an anonymity direction has been made.






Signed                              Date 6th September 2013


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or is payable.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date 6th September 2013


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
