
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number: AA/10392/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:    Columbus House, Newport |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On:              14 July 2016        |On 19 July 2016                |
|                                     |                               |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                            AHMAD REZA AHADI POUR
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:      Mr A Joseph, Counsel instructed by NLS solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Rourke in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  a  citizen
    of Iran, against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse asylum and
    issue removal directions.


 2. The application under appeal was made on 22 March 2015 and was  refused
    on 17 July 2015.  The Appellant exercised his right of  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  This  is  the  appeal  which  came  before  Judge
    O'Rourke on 19 January 2016 and was dismissed.  The  Appellant  applied
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The  application  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen on 18 February 2016 in  the
    following terms

       The notice complains that  the  judge  failed  to  apply  the  lower
       standard of proof, and expresses in  [4-17]  numerous  disagreements
       with the judge's findings on credibility.


       Apart from the complaint about the  lower  standard  of  proof,  the
       notice merely expresses  disagreement  with  the  judge's  decision.
       However, the lower  standard  of  proof  is  not  mentioned  in  the
       decision and for that reason only I find it to be arguable that  the
       judge erred in law.




 3. By a rule 24 response dated 1 March 2016  the  Respondent  opposed  the
    appeal arguing that the judge gave adequate reasons for his credibility
    findings.




 4. At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Richards  appeared  to  represent  the
    Secretary of State and Mr Joseph represented the Appellant.


Background

 5.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 3 March
    1989.  He left Iran in late 2014 arriving in the United Kingdom  on  21
    March 2015 using a false passport and applied for asylum the next  day.
    His application was refused and in  dismissing  his  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds  the  Judge  found  that  the  core  of  his   account   lacked
    credibility.




 6. The grounds of appeal are summarised in the grant of permission. It  is
    suggested that the Judge failed to apply the lower  standard  of  proof
    and that as such his credibility findings are undermined.


Submissions

 7. For the Appellant Mr Joseph referred to paragraph 4 of the statement of
    reasons and said this is the only mention of  the  standard  of  proof.
    There is no reference to the applicable standard of proof at  paragraph
    22 where  the  findings  of  fact  commence.  This  lack  of  reference
    indicates that too high a standard was  applied.  At  paragraph  23  in
    dealing with the Appellant's claim  to  face  danger  having  committed
    adultery the Judge takes adverse inference over discrepancies in dates.
    Arguably these discrepancies were neither material or  substantial  and
    this indicates that too  high  a  standard  was  applied.  Equally  the
    finding that the Appellant's partner would not have told her husband of
    the affair was not sufficient to make an adverse finding. Similarly, in
    paragraph 24 when dealing with  the  Appellant's  claimed  atheism  the
    Judge took adverse inference from immaterial  matters  despite  finding
    that the Appellant preferred to live a secular  lifestyle.  Again  this
    indicates that too high a standard was applied.




 8.  On behalf the Secretary of State Mr Richards said that  there  was  no
    material error of law. The Judge refers appropriately to  the  standard
    of proof at paragraph 4 and there is nothing to suggest that  he  loses
    sight of that self-direction. He did not find the  Appellant's  account
    of adultery credible and so far as his claimed atheism was concerned he
    found the Appellant's account wholly implausible. There is no sense  of
    imposing a high threshold.  There  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  the
    Appellant came anywhere near to persuading the Judge that  his  account
    was true or that he was at risk on return.


Error of law

 9. In my judgement the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not
    disclose a material error of law. The appeal was dismissed because  the
    Judge did not believe  the  Appellant.  He  gives  cogent  reasons  for
    reaching his conclusion. Contrary to what  is  said  in  the  grant  of
    permission the standard of proof  is  mentioned  in  the  statement  of
    reasons. It is not incumbent upon a judge to recite the lower  standard
    of proof in an asylum decision and where the judge does  refer  to  the
    standard of proof it is not an error of law for him not to  repeat  it.
    The Immigration and Asylum  Chamber  is  an  expert  tribunal  and  the
    'lower' standard of proof is deeply ingrained within the culture of the
    judiciary. Where it is asserted that a First-tier  tribunal  Judge  has
    nevertheless applied a higher  standard  of  proof  there  need  to  be
    substantial reasons for such an assertion. In this case  there  are  no
    such substantial reasons, the grounds of appeal reveal no more  than  a
    disagreement with credibility findings that were manifestly open to the
    Judge on the evidence that was before him.


10. My conclusion from all of the above is that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contains no error of law  material  to  the  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal


  Summary

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law. I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.




Signed:                                      Date: 15 July 2016


[pic]


J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
