
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA106532015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th June 2015                     |On 14th June 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                     T B
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MAINTAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C Ryan, Solicitor; Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer,


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Malins dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision  to  refuse  to  grant  refugee  status  and/or   humanitarian
    protection and to give protection on the basis  of  his  human  rights.
    The Appellant appeals against that decision and was granted  permission
    to appeal by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray.

 2. The grounds upon which permission was granted were somewhat unclear  to
    me.  The judge granted permission in the following terms:
         "The judge finds the Appellant was trafficked, (paragraph 11.1(d)).
          The judge goes on to narrate parts of the Appellant's evidence and
         explains why he does not find that the Appellant is of any interest
         to the authorities in  Vietnam.  The  judge  then  deals  with  the
         demonstrations attended by the Appellant and finds the Appellant is
         not politically driven or  that  he  has  been  identified  by  the
         Vietnamese authorities. The judge then deals with credibility.  His
         comments on the 'nail  technician'  industry  could  be  considered
         derogatory but at paragraph 12.6 he finds the Appellant's claim  to
         be a political activist to lack credibility.  The judge then  deals
         with the expert report.  He explains why he finds  the  Appellant's
         religion will not be a problem for him on return  to  Vietnam.  The
         judge's error at paragraph  8(g)  is  not  significant.   There  is
         however an  error in the  judge's  decision  in  that  he  has  not
         considered what will happen to the Appellant on return  to  Vietnam
         having previously been trafficked.
         There is an arguable error of law in the judge's decision."

 3. In considering  the  extent  of  the  grant  of  permission  I  invited
    submissions from both Mr Mills for the  Respondent  and  Miss  Ryan  on
    behalf of the Appellant.   I drew to their attention that I was  minded
    to follow the guidance in  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in  Ferrer
    (Limited appeal grounds; Alvi) [2012] UKUT 00304 (IAC) which states  as
    follows at head notes (1) and (2):
         "(1) In deciding an application for permission to appeal the  Upper
             Tribunal against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
             Immigration and Asylum Chamber, a judge of that Chamber should
             consider carefully the utility of granting permission only  on
             limited grounds. In practice, such a limited grant is unlikely
             to be as helpful as a  general  grant,  which  identifies  the
             ground or grounds that are considered by the judge to have the
             strongest  prospect  of  success.  In  this  way,  the   judge
             identifies the likely ambit of the forthcoming Upper  Tribunal
             proceedings, which - if that Tribunal concurs - can then  form
             the  backdrop  for  the  Upper  Tribunal's   subsequent   case
             management directions.
         (2)  Where the First-tier Tribunal judge  nevertheless  intends  to
             grant permission only in respect of certain of the applicant's
             grounds, the judge should make this abundantly plain, both  in
             his or her decision....and by  ensuring  that  the  Tribunal's
             administrative staff send out the proper notice, informing the
             applicant of the right to apply  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
             permission to appeal on grounds on  which  the  applicant  has
             been  unsuccessful  in  the  application  to  the   First-tier
             Tribunal."

 4. Having heard from Mr Mills and Miss Ryan on the ambit of the  grant  of
    permission my view was that Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray
    did not intend to limit the grant of permission.  This  is  plainly  so
    because to my mind she  has  identified  the  grounds  upon  which  she
    considers  there  may  be  a  stronger  prospect  of  success  and  has
    identified the likely ambit of the proceedings  to  assist  as  far  as
    possible, and it is not abundantly plain from  her  decision  that  she
    intended to limit  the  grant  of  appeal.   Furthermore  the  Tribunal
    administrative staff have not at any rate sent out any notice informing
    the applicant of a right to apply to the Upper Tribunal for  permission
    to appeal on grounds on which the applicant had  been  unsuccessful  in
    the application to the First-tier Tribunal.  These factors all lead  me
    to my conclusion that the grant of permission was not a limited one and
    permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

Error of Law

 5. At the close of submissions,  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision which I shall now give.  I find that there were errors of  law
    in the decision, such that it should be set aside. My  reasons  for  so
    finding are as follows.

 6. In respect of ground 1, the Secretary of State has already conceded  in
    her Rule 24 response that the assessment  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was flawed as she failed to have regard to  the  risk  on  return
    that may result as a consequence of her finding that the Appellant  had
    been trafficked.

 7. In respect of ground 2 and the  commentary  on  witnesses  being  "nail
    technicians", as already stated by Judge Murray in granting permission,
    these terms and comments  could  be  considered  derogatory,  which  is
    something that the Tribunal should guard  against.   Whilst  the  judge
    granting permission thought that the ground related to  credibility  it
    also plainly extended to an appearance of fairness.  Any error that may
    arise  from  that  commentary  was  not,  on  its  own,  fatal  to  the
    determination but in my view  has  added  to  the  materiality  of  the
    overall error of law outcome.

 8. In respect of ground 3 and the treatment of  religion,  it  is  correct
    that the judge has failed to consider that the Appellant was  a  member
    of the UBCV (United Buddhist Church of Vietnam)  and  the  effect  that
    that  membership  of  an  unregistered  religion  would  have  for  the
    Appellant upon return to Vietnam.

 9. Finally in respect of ground 4 and the expert report it is correct that
    the judge has dealt with the expert report at paragraphs 12.7 and 12.8.
     However, given the error identified at  12.8(c)  in  relation  to  the
    extent of the Appellant's religious past and beliefs, it cannot be said
    that the judge was fully apprised of all the facts when  she  made  her
    finding at paragraph 12.8(c).

10. In those circumstances I find that there were  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision such that it should be set aside.  In light of my findings  on
    the above grounds of complaint, I set aside the decision  and  findings
    of the judge in their entirety.

Decision

11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  heard  by  a  differently
    constituted bench.


Signed                                  Date 10 June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
