
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10486/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 17 February 2016                  |On 19 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                    [I G]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Monaghan promulgated on 26  November  2015,  which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on [ ] 1995 and is a national  of  Afghanistan.
On 18 June 2015 the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's  application
for asylum.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge Monaghan ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

5.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 23 December 2015  Judge  Davidson
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "The grounds are arguable when they complain that having found that the
    Appellant is at targeted risk from the Taliban in his  home  area,  the
    Judge has failed to correctly self-direct in accordance with  the  case
    of RQ(Afghanistan) v SSHD [2008] UKAIT."

The Hearing

6.    (a) Mr Khan adopted the terms of the grounds of  appeal.  He  took  me
straight to [77] of the decision. There, he told me, the  Judge  found  that
there is a real risk of serious harm  to  the  appellant  from  the  Taliban
because of the appellant's imputed political opinion. He  then  took  me  to
[86] where the Judge considered the case of AK (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan
CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC), and then  found  that  the  appellant  does  not
establish that there is anything about the general  situation  in  Kabul  or
the appellant's own circumstances  which  would  entitle  the  appellant  to
humanitarian protection. He told me that there is an inherent  contradiction
between those two paragraphs.

      (b)   Mr Khan relied on the cases of PM and Others  (Kabul  -  Hizb-i-
Islami) Afghanistan CG [2007] UKAIT 00089 and RQ  (Afghan  National  Army  -
Hizb-i-Islami - risk) Afghanistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00013, and  told  me  that
those country guidance cases are fully supportive of the  appellant's  case.
He told me that, at 20 years of age,  the  appellant  is  the  head  of  his
family and, because he has been targeted by  the  Taliban,  he  cannot  seek
employment or find accommodation in Kabul because of the  cultural  need  to
make  enquiry  into  his  background  from  those  who  would  offer  either
accommodation or employment.

      (c)   Mr Khan reminded  me  that  between  [77]  and  [79]  the  Judge
accepts that the appellant gives a credible  account.  He  argued  that  the
nature of the threat from the Taliban is such that  internal  relocation  is
not  a  viable  option  for  the  appellant,  and   that   the   appellant's
circumstances are such that there is not a  sufficiency  of  protection  for
the appellant in Kabul.

8.    Mr Bramble, for the respondent, relied on the terms  of  the  rule  24
response, dated 20 January 2016. He told me that the focus in this  case  is
on the Judge's  findings  at  [76]  to  [79],  where  the  Judge  finds  the
appellant to be a credible witness. He told me that between  [80]  and  [86]
the Judge correctly enquired into any risk there may be to the appellant  on
return to Afghanistan by considering the  appellant's  profile  against  the
background materials and against the country guidance offered  in  the  case
of AK. He told me that at [85]  the  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  has
family members in Afghanistan who can assist him on return. He told me  that
that was  a  crucial  aspect  of  the  appellant's  overall  profile,  which
indicated that he would  not  be  the  subject  of  scrutiny  on  return  to
Afghanistan and that there is a network of protection for the  appellant  in
Afghanistan. He told me that the decision as whole is a  carefully  reasoned
decision which does not contain errors of law,  material  or  otherwise.  He
urged me to dismiss the appeal and to allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

9.    Permission to appeal was granted in 23 December 2015  specifically  on
the basis that the Judge had  "...  failed  to  correctly  self-  direct  in
accordance with the case of RQ  (Afghan  National  Army  -  Hizb-i-Islami  -
risk) Afghanistan CG [2008] UKAIT." There is no mention of the  case  of  RQ
in the decision. It is clear from [86] that the  Judge  places  reliance  on
the case of AK.

10.   In AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00163  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that whilst when assessing a claim in the context  of  Article
15(c) in which the respondent asserts that Kabul  city  would  be  a  viable
internal relocation alternative, it is necessary to take into account  (both
in assessing "safety" and reasonableness") not only the  level  of  violence
in that city but also the difficulties experienced by that city's  poor  and
also the many  Internally  Displaced  Persons  (IDPs)  living  there,  these
considerations  will  not  in  general  make  return  to  Kabul  unsafe   or
unreasonable.

11.   At [77] the Judge finds that the appellant has a well-founded fear  of
persecution because of his imputed political opinion, and  that  the  agents
of persecution are  the  Taliban.  The  crucial  questions  are,  therefore,
sufficiency of protection and internal relocation.

12.   Between [80]  and  [86]  the  Judge  grapples  with  the  question  of
internal relocation and, to an extent, sufficiency of  protection.  At  [85]
the Judge finds that the appellant has  family  members  in  Afghanistan  to
whom he can return. At [86], placing reliance on AK, the  Judge  finds  that
the appellant is not entitled to humanitarian  protection.  What  the  Judge
does not do is consider whether or not it  is  safe  for  the  appellant  to
return to Kabul in the face of  continuing  threat  from  the  Taliban.  The
Judge does not take guidance from the extant country guidance  cases  of  PM
and RQ.

13.   In PM and Others (Kabul - Hizb-i-Islami) Afghanistan CG  [2007]  UKAIT
00089 the Tribunal held (i) Those returned  from  the  United  Kingdom  will
not, without more, be at real risk  at  the  airport  or  after  arrival  in
Kabul. (ii) Those returned from the United Kingdom are  not  at  real  risk,
without more, of being suspected by the  authorities  as  insurgents.  (iii)
The past of an  individual  seeking  accommodation  or  work  in  Kabul,  or
elsewhere, may be discovered and mentioned to the  authorities.   Similarly,
the authorities may become aware of someone newly arrived in an area.   That
may result in a person being  detained  for  questioning  but  there  is  no
satisfactory evidence that such questioning gives rise to  a  real  risk  of
serious harm. (iv) Subject to an individual's personal circumstances, it  is
unlikely to be unduly harsh (or unreasonable) to expect them to relocate  to
Kabul if they  have  established  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  in  (and
restricted to) areas outside Kabul.

14.   In RQ (Afghan National Army - Hizb-i-Islami  -  risk)  Afghanistan  CG
[2008] UKAIT 00013 the Tribunal held (inter alia) that (v)  Where  the  risk
to a particular appellant is confined to his home area, internal  relocation
to Kabul is in general available. It would not be unduly harsh to expect  an
appellant with no individual risk factors outside his home area to  live  in
Kabul and assist in the rebuilding of his  country.  (vi)  If  an  appellant
establishes  a  wider  risk,  extending  beyond  the  home  area,   internal
relocation is not necessarily available and sufficiency of  protection  will
depend on his individual circumstances and  characteristics.  In  particular
(a) internal relocation outside Kabul is unlikely to provide sufficiency  of
protection as the areas outside Kabul remain  under  the  control  of  local
warlords, and the population is suspicious of strangers; and (b) the  safety
of internal relocation  to  Kabul  is  a  question  of  fact  based  on  the
particular history of an individual appellant and of the warlord or  faction
known to be seeking to harm him.

15.   At [77] the  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant's  older  brother  was
kidnapped by the Taliban, and that  the  family  left  their  home  area  to
conceal themselves  in  Jalalabad,  only  to  find  that  the  Taliban  were
persisting in their efforts to find them. The appellant is  originally  from
Shamshapour, in Nangahar province.  Jalalabad  is  approximately  100  miles
from Kabul.

16.   Between [80] and  [84],  the  Judge  considers  the  respondent's  COI
report. The guidance given there is similar to the  guidance  given  in  RQ.
The  determinative  factor  is  whether  there   are   specific   individual
circumstances which increased the risk against the appellant or which  could
lead to continued targeting.

17.   The case of PM makes  it  clear  that  Afghani  culture  demands  that
enquiries be made about the background  of  anyone  entering  an  integrated
life in Afghan society. It is beyond dispute that the appellant will be  the
head of his family in Afghanistan because he is the oldest male. It  is  not
seriously disputed that, as the head of  the  family,  the  appellant  would
have to seek employment and accommodation. At [85] the Judge finds that  the
appellant has family members in Afghanistan who can assist  financially  and
emotionally on return, but the Judge's findings do not amount to  a  finding
that the appellant will resort  to  being  treated  as  either  a  child  or
dependent of his family.

18.   In R and Others v SSHD  (2005)  EWCA  civ  982  the  Court  of  Appeal
endorsed Practice Direction 18.4 which stated (then)  that  any  failure  to
follow a clear, apparently applicable country guidance case or to  show  why
it does not apply to the case in question is likely  to  be  regarded  as  a
ground for review or appeal on a point of law.  The  Court  of  Appeal  said
that it represented a failure to take a material matter  into  account.   In
OM (AA(1) wrong in law) Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT  00077  the  Tribunal  said
that country guidance stands until it is replaced or found to  be  wrong  in
law. Where a country guidance case is replaced because  of  changed  country
conditions or because further evidence has emerged, that will not mean  that
it was an error of law for an immigration judge to have followed  it  up  to
that point. Where, however, a country guidance case is found to  be  legally
flawed the reasons for so finding will have existed both  before  and  after
its notification. It is a determination inconsistent  with  other  authority
that is binding on the Tribunal.  In  those  circumstances,  which  will  be
encountered  only  rarely,  any   determination   of   an   appeal   decided
substantially on the basis of that country guidance will be  legally  flawed
also and cannot stand.

19.   Although the Judge writes a detailed decision, it  is  beyond  dispute
that the Judge does not take guidance from  either  PM  or  RQ.  Neither  of
those cases are recent cases but they are extant country guidance.   Failure
to refer to country guidance is a material error of law.  I  therefore  have
to find that the decision is tainted by a material error of law and  I  must
set the decision aside.

20.   No challenge is taken by either  party  to  the  Judge's  findings  of
fact. I therefore find that I can rely on the Judge's findings of  fact  and
substitute my own decision.

21.   The facts in this case are that the appellant has, in the  past,  been
targeted by the Taliban and, if he returns to Afghanistan, there is  a  real
risk that he will face persecution from the Taliban because of  his  imputed
political opinion. The determinative question in this  case  is  whether  or
not it is safe for the appellant to  return  to  Kabul.  The  appellant  has
family members in Afghanistan. Their last known location was Jalalabad.

22.   The case of RQ  tells  me  that  the  availability  of  safe  internal
relocation to Kabul is a question of fact based on  the  particular  history
of this appellant & the faction known to be seeking to harm  him.  PM  tells
me that there is every chance that soon after the appellant participates  in
any form of ordinary public life in Kabul  his  background  and  his  family
history will become known and will be circulated. I have to  decide  whether
or not the reach of the Taliban extends into Kabul. The  First-tier  Judge's
findings of fact are that the appellant remains at risk from the Taliban.

23.   In AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00163  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that whilst when assessing a claim in the context  of  Article
15(c) in which the respondent asserts that Kabul  city  would  be  a  viable
internal relocation alternative, it is necessary to take into account  (both
in assessing "safety" and reasonableness") not only the  level  of  violence
in that city but also the difficulties experienced by that city's  poor  and
also the many  Internally  Displaced  Persons  (IDPs)  living  there,  these
considerations  will  not  in  general  make  return  to  Kabul  unsafe   or
unreasonable. But that case does not address the risk from the Taliban to  a
young man who has previously been identified as one of the targets.

24.   In the reasons for refusal letter dated 18 June  2015  the  respondent
sets out her position in relation to internal relocation. She relies on  the
cases of PM and RQ and provides generalised comments  on  the  circumstances
in Kabul. The reach of the Taliban is not addressed by the respondent.

25.   I remind myself of  the  comparatively  low  standard  of  proof.  The
appellant's overall claim  has  been  accepted.  It  is  accepted  that  the
appellant is at  risk  of  persecution  from  the  Taliban.  The  background
materials indicate that although the government  is  in  control  of  Kabul,
even the most protected areas of Kabul are  not  beyond  the  reach  of  the
Taliban. The Taliban have carried out recent violent attacks in  the  centre
of Kabul. Their targets included the  Parliament  buildings  there  in  June
2015.

26.   The weight of  reliable  evidence  indicates  that  if  the  appellant
returned to Kabul his identity will be known. The  Taliban's  violent  reach
extends into Kabul. It has  already  been  judicially  determined  that  the
appellant would face  a  real  risk  of  persecution  from  the  Taliban  if
returned to Afghanistan. In the particular circumstances  of  this  case,  I
find that returning the appellant to Kabul would place him within the  reach
of the Taliban. I therefore find the appellant establishes a  well  -founded
fear of persecution for a convention reason, and  that  for  this  appellant
there is not a sufficiency of protection in Afghanistan.  I  find  that  for
this appellant relocation to Kabul is not a viable option.

Decision

27.   The determination of First Tier Tribunal  Judge  Monaghan  promulgated
on 26 November 2015 contains a material error of law.  I  set  the  decision
aside. I substitute the following decision.

28.   The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


Signed      Date 18 February 2016

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
