
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10462/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 22nd July 2019                             |On 6th August 2019           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Haji [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tan, a Senior Home Office Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr P Draycott of Counsel instructed by Hoole & Co
                    Solicitors (Brighton Street)


                    REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW.

1.   The respondent  is  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  and  he  appealed  the
    decision of the respondent taken on 14th July 2015 to refuse  to  grant
    leave to remain having claimed asylum.  The appeal was heard by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mark Davies on 30th  January  2019  in  Manchester.
    The judge refers to  the  respondent's  immigration  history  as  being
    "somewhat complicated".  Apparently, the  respondent  had  entered  the
    United Kingdom on a visit visa and subsequently  returned  to  Pakistan
    from where he had exited.  He then arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on
    24th June, 2014 and claimed asylum.  That  claim  was  refused  on  8th
    July, 2014 and his appeal was dismissed on 17th July, 2014.  His appeal
    rights were exhausted by 28th July, 2014.

2.   The respondent was  then  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  on  18th
    August, 2015.  Application was made on his behalf for  judicial  review
    on 7th October, 2014.  On 19th February 2017 Gilbart J  held  that  the
    respondent's removal had been unlawful and the respondent was  returned
    to the United  Kingdom  on  31st  March  2015  when  submitted  further
    evidence.

3.   The judge says at paragraph 15 of his determination that the  basis  of
    the respondent's case is set out in extensive  documentation  submitted
    by his representatives with letters dated 22nd January  2019  and  18th
    July 2018.  The judge indicates that he has taken  account  of  witness
    statements of the respondent and additional witnesses.  In paragraph 16
    of his determination, the judge says that he has also taken account  of
    the  medical  evidence  of  Professor  Cornelius   Katona,   consultant
    psychiatrist, dated 15th April, 2016 and the medical evidence  of  Gary
    Walker, cognitive behaviour therapist, dated 30th March, 2016.  He also
    says that he has read and considered a skeleton argument  submitted  by
    the respondent's representative comprised in two documents  dated  20th
    July, 2018 and 30th January, 2018.  At paragraphs 17, 18 and 19 of  the
    determination the judge said this:

         "17. This matter first came before me on 24th July 2018 when it had
             to be adjourned on the basis that the Presenting  Officer,  Mr
             Dillon, had prepared  the  case  with  regard  to  removal  to
             Afghanistan whilst removal  to  Pakistan  was  an  alternative
             raised by [Appellant].  The hearing  was  then  adjourned  and
             reserved for myself and Mr Dillon.  Mr Dillon was not able  to
             be present at the hearing on 30th January 2018  and  the  Home
             Office was represented by Mr Richardson.


         18.  After discussions between the representatives  and  myself  it
             was agreed that the hearing will proceed on the basis that the
             [respondent] who was a vulnerable witness, would not give oral
             testimony but would simply rely on his witness statements.  Mr
             Richardson on behalf of the Home Office did not wish to cross-
             examine any of the  additional  witnesses  and  indeed  I  was
             content  that  they  should  simply  rely  on  their   written
             testimony.


         19.  Mr Richardson  was  content  that  he  simply  relied  on  the
             contents of the refusal letter.  Similarly Mr Draycott bearing
             in  mind  our  discussions,  simply  relied  on  his  skeleton
             argument."


4.   The judge was thereby put on notice, therefore, that  the  contents  of
    the refusal letter were relied upon by the  Secretary  of  State.   The
    judge made his findings at paragraphs 20 to 23.  It is important that I
    set them out in full:-

         "20.  In  particular  in  this  appeal,  in  reaching   conclusions
             regarding Article 3, I have taken  into  account  the  medical
             evidence previously referred to but, I have  read  the  up-to-
             date medical evidence contained in the  [respondent's]  latest
             bundle  which  included  a  further  psychiatric   report   by
             Professor Katona, a letter from Dr Dakashina-Murthi, a copy of
             the [respondent's] latest prescription and medical letters  by
             Dr Ashraf, Dr Khan and CBT Therapist Walker.


         21.  I am satisfied, considering all the evidence that has been put
             before me and in particular the  medical  evidence  previously
             referred to, that the lower standard of proof is satisfied  in
             this appeal by the [respondent].  The evidence  overwhelmingly
             indicates  that  if  the   [respondent]   were   returned   to
             Afghanistan or Pakistan he will or may be subject to treatment
             which engages Article 3 in that it  is  reasonably  likely  he
             will be subjected to inhumane or degrading treatment.  I reach
             that  conclusion  taking  into  account   the   [respondent's]
             immigration  history.   I  take  into  account  that  he   has
             previously been returned to Afghanistan and  brought  back  by
             order of a High Court Judge.  The evidence  contained  in  the
             medical  reports  before  me   clearly   indicate   that   the
             [respondent] has severe mental health difficulties  and  is  a
             substantial suicide risk.  I can envisage no circumstances  in
             which the [respondent]could therefore be  easily  returned  to
             Afghanistan or Pakistan taking into account his mental  health
             and the support he receives from his  family  members  in  the
             United Kingdom.


         22.  I am also satisfied that the  [respondent's]Article  8  rights
             are engaged in  this  matter  which  makes  the  [appellant's]
             decision unlawful.  In coming to that decision  I  have  taken
             into account the questions raised by Lord Bingham in the  case
             of Razgar.  The [respondent]  has  established  a  family  and
             private life in the United Kingdom.  That is particularly  the
             case taking into account his mental health.  The [appellant's]
             decision does interfere with the  [respondent's]  private  and
             family life and it would have consequences of such gravity  as
             to engage Article 8.


         23.  Whereas the [appellant's] decision may be in  accordance  with
             the law and for one of the reasons set  out  in  Article  8  I
             would have found  it  not  to  be  proportionate  taking  into
             account the [respondent's] state of health."


    The judge allowed the appeal under  Article  3.   The  judge  makes  no
    finding at all in respect of  the  asylum  or  humanitarian  protection
    claims raised by the respondent, although it seems clear that the judge
    intended to allow it.

5.   The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  raised  four  main
    grounds of challenge.  The first suggesting that the  consideration  is
    inadequate and fails to properly  engage  with  issues  raised  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter and at the hearing in submissions.  It makes
    reference to the fact that there was an earlier determination by  Judge
    Walker and suggests that Devaseelan (Second Appeals  -  ECHR  -  Extra-
    Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka *  UKIAT  00702  was  not  applied.   The
    second claim suggests that various findings of fact have not been made.
     They are largely in respect of the respondent's asylum claim.   It  is
    also unclear what the judge's conclusions were in respect of  the  risk
    of inhumane and degrading treatment and how it led to him reaching  the
    conclusions he did.  The judge has failed to take into account  any  of
    the arguments put forward  by  the  respondent.   The  third  challenge
    suggested that the judge  does  not  acknowledge  that  in  respect  of
    medical claims the threshold is significantly high  as  established  by
    the cases of D and N and at no time does the judge identify that he has
    applied the higher  threshold  in  his  consideration  of  the  medical
    evidence or that  the  case  of  J  was  considered  applying  the  six
    principles in relation to claims relying  on  suicide  the  risk.   The
    fourth challenge suggests that in relation to Article 8 the  judge  has
    failed to identify the basis on which the assessment was made  and  not
    demonstrated that the balancing exercise  has  been  completed  showing
    what factors fall on which side of the balancing exercise.  I need  not
    concern myself any further ground because the judge did not  allow  the
    appeal under Article 8.  He simply said in paragraph 23 that  he  would
    have found it not proportionate but he goes  on  simply  to  allow  the
    appeal under Article 3.  Quite why the judge did not allow  the  appeal
    under Article 8 is not clear but that has not been  challenged  by  the
    respondent.

6.   Mr Draycott addressed me at some length and  accepted  that  the  judge
    has failed to deal with the  respondent's  asylum  claim  or  make  any
    findings relevant to it.  He suggested however that there was no reason
    why the judge's decisions in respect of the Article  3  and  Article  8
    appeals should not stand.  The judge makes it  clear  in  paragraph  16
    that he has read and considered Counsel's skeleton  argument.   Counsel
    said that he had dealt in the skeleton argument with J and it is  quite
    clear that the judge had considered and applied J.  He again  suggested
    that the Article 8 and Article 3 findings should stand.

7.   Mr Tan reminded me that the Presenting Officer at  the  hearing  before
    Judge Mark Davies had been content to rely on the  refusal  letter  but
    the judge nowhere deals with the refusal letter.   There  has  been  no
    consideration  at  all  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  view  of   the
    respondent's asylum claim or his human rights claims.  The  tests  that
    the judge is required to apply when considering J may  well  have  been
    set  out  in  Counsel's  skeleton  argument,   but   nowhere   in   his
    determination does the judge indicate that he  has  applied  them.   In
    relation to Article 3 it is not clear whether the Article 3  claim  has
    been allowed by the judge on the basis of the risk to the appellant  in
    respect of his treatment on return, or risk to the appellant because of
    his medical condition.

8.   Mr Draycott relied on KU (Pakistan) [2012] EWCA Civ 107 and in
    particular on paragraphs 17 to 22 and suggested that the judge's
    findings were perfectly safe and should be preserved.  So far as the
    first challenge is concerned the determination of Judge Walker was
    following an appeal which was heard in the Fast Track.  He relied on R
    (detention action) v First-tier Tribunal (Court of Appeal) [2015] 1
    WLR.  He submitted that Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR - Extra-
    Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * UKIAT 00702 was irrelevant because the
    Fast Track system was found to be unfair and illegal and that the judge
    should have made his own findings in respect of the previous claim.  In
    relation to ground 2, insofar as the respondent's protection claim was
    concerned Mr Draycott accepted that there were no findings but, he
    submitted that part of the respondent's appeal could be remitted for a
    fresh hearing whilst at the same time preserving the judge's findings
    in relation to Articles 3 and 8.  In respect of the third ground he
    told me that the skeleton argument contained reference to J and the
    test to be applied in suicide cases and the judge very clearly had
    regard to them.

9.   I reserved my determination.

10.  I have concluded having read and re-read  the  determination  of  Judge
    Davies cannot stand.

11.  The judge has not demonstrated that he has given any  consideration  to
    the Secretary of State's view of the respondent's claims as set out  in
    the reasons for refusal letter.  The  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    indicated that he relied specifically on it and it was  incumbent  upon
    the judge to consider it and explain why he disagreed.

12.  The judge has simply failed anywhere  to  deal  with  the  respondent's
    asylum claim and he has made no findings of fact in respect of it.   So
    far as the respondent's Article 8 claim is concerned the judge  appears
    to have stopped short of allowing the appeal under Article 8,  although
    he was content that it was engaged in respect of both the  respondent's
    family and private life on the basis of the respondent's mental health.
     He found that the  decision  would  interfere  with  the  respondent's
    private and family life and would have consequences of such gravity  as
    to engage Article 8.  He believed that the decision might very well  be
    in accordance with the law and for  one  of  the  reasons  set  out  in
    Article 8, but says, "I would have found it  not  to  be  proportionate
    taking into account the appellant's state of health."  What he did  not
    do was to go on and actually allow  the  appeal.   I  believe  that  he
    intended to do so.

13.  Nowhere does the judge refer to the decision of the Court of Appeal in
    J [2005] EWCA Civ 629. The judge has failed anywhere to remind himself
    of the six tests set out in that decision to apply them.  I accept that
    Counsel may very well have set out J in full in his skeleton argument,
    but without actually saying he has considered and applied it I do not
    believe that it can be implied that he has considered and applied it.
    Similarly, he nowhere sets out the Secretary of State's position in
    respect of the respondent's claims.  He does not say what the up-to-
    date medical evidence contained nor what the further letters and
    reports he had received say. He does not refer to the evidence which he
    says overwhelmingly indicates that if returned to Afghanistan or
    Pakistan the respondent "will or may" be subject to treatment which
    engages Article 3, nor is it clear from paragraph 21 of the
    determination what the risk is.  Whilst later he refers to the medical
    reports indicating that the respondent has severe mental health
    difficulties and is a substantial suicide risk it is not clear whether
    this is the only risk to him or whether there might be other risks.

14.  In relation to the Article 8 claim the judge does not demonstrate  that
    he has actually conducted the proportionality exercise.

15.  I have concluded that the determination should  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety and the matter remitted for hearing afresh before a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mark
    Davies.

Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal

26th July 2019
