
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10780/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 February 2015                   |On 26 February 2016                  |
|Extempore                            |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                 ENKELEID S.
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Kadic, in structed by A de Ruano
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Oakley promulgated on 24 November 2015,  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision to refuse him asylum.  That appeal  was
    against a refusal to vary leave and also considered human rights.

 2. The appellant's case is, in summary, that he is likely to be  a  victim
    in a blood feud in Albania between his family and the Tonaj family  who
    live nearby. The initial problems began around 1997 and in 1999 the the
    appellant's father's paternal uncle was killed by the Tonaj family.

 3. The dispute continued and in 2010 escalated when Zef Tonaj was  wounded
    and his son Ndue was murdered; the Tonaj family  then  sent  word  that
    should any male aged 16 or over be seen  outside  then  they  would  be
    killed. Attempts at reconciliation were not possible and eventually the
    appellant's family decided that it would be better as he was turning 16
    to leave Albania and seek sanctuary, which he did.

 4. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom and later  claimed  asylum.
    That  application  was  refused  but   he   was   nonetheless   granted
    discretionary leave to remain on account of his age.  As the length  of
    time of discretionary leave given was short he was not  entitled  to  a
    right of appeal against that decision.  He then made an application for
    further leave to remain before that leave expired. That was refused and
    it was against that decision that the appeal came before the First-tier
    Tribunal.

 5. The Secretary of State's case is set out in the refusal letter dated 22
    July 2015. In summary, she did not accept the  appellant's  account  of
    events in Albania and considered that his account was not credible.

 6. The matter then came before Judge Oakley who found that:

      i) the evidence regarding the appellant's mother being able to collect
         an identity card issued to him in 2013 was  inconsistent  with  the
         background evidence which showed that an identity card could   only
         be picked up by an applicant in person at the application office;

     ii) the appellant's  evidence  regarding  his  father  being  in  self-
         confinement after 1999 and despite there being in effect  no  blood
         feud declared until 2010 was inconsistent with the appellant  being
         in self confinement;

    iii) although there was reference  to  alleged  killings  there  was  no
         evidence of this as a result of online searches;

     iv) the applicant had made no attempts to contact his family  which  he
         would have expected him to have done were his claims genuine;

      v) following the decision in EH (Blood feuds) Albania CG  [2012]  UKUT
         00348 he was not satisfied that the relevant tests were  made  out,
         noting in particular that the killings were not notorious; that the
         last killing was in fact in 2011; that the appellant has  an  elder
         brother and uncle and father who are still alive and  therefore  he
         would not be the immediate target; that it could not  be  the  case
         that the Tonaj family observed  the  appellant  wherever  he  went,
         given that he would not otherwise be able to collect  his  identity
         card and that the criteria in force in  EH  were  not  met  as  the
         appellant's father had been able to take the land dispute which  it
         is said gave rise to a blood feud court; and  that  Zef  Tonaj  had
         been convicted of the father's paternal  uncle  and  that  his  own
         uncle had been convicted of using weapons illegally  and  therefore
         it was his  evidence  that  the  family  had  been  prosecuted  for
         involvement in any dispute.

 7. Having found that the appellant  was  not  credible  he  dismissed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds as well as asylum grounds.

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that the adverse
    credibility findings were not properly reasoned and were unlawful.   It
    is averred that:

      i) making credibility findings based solely on plausibility were wrong
         and that there were no discrepancies in the appellant's evidence.

     ii) an unfair inference was drawn adverse to  the  appellant  from  the
         fact that he had not appealed against the first decision; that  the
         Tribunal placed undue weight on what the general practices  of  the
         canon covering blood feuds were.

    iii) the Tribunal erred in making  plausibility  findings  unsustainable
         due to the lack of evidence;

     iv) the Tribunal placed weight on immaterial  matters  and  applied  an
         unduly high standard of proof; and,

      v) the Tribunal had failed to take into account any  land  dispute  on
         the basis of the appellant's young age at the time of the  material
         events.

 9. Permission was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers  on  16
    November 2015 whoa stated:

         "Overall there is sufficient in the grounds  to  make  a  grant  of
         permission appropriate but the appellant should not take this grant
         of permission as any indication that the appeal will ultimately  be
         successful. In the last analysis it may be decided that  there  are
         no errors of law in  the  decision  under  consideration.  Even  if
         errors of law are established, they may be errors that  would  have
         made no difference to the result."

10. I heard submissions both Ms Kadic on behalf of the appellant and by  Mr
    Wilding on behalf of the Secretary of State.

11. The first point that raised by Ms Kadic is that the judge did not  take
    into account the appellant's age which is material given that he was 12
    in 2010, one of the material times.

12. Mr Wilding submitted that this was not a matter which  was  in  fact  a
    factor taken adversely and that in any  event  it  is  clear  from  the
    judge's determination at several places, in  particular  paragraph  31,
    that the judge was fully aware of the the appellant's  age  at  various
    times and had made this clear. In response Miss  Kadic  submitted  that
    whilst the judge had mentioned his age it did not follow  that  he  had
    given proper account to this if he had not said so.

13. I considered that, allied to the averred failure to take  into  account
    age at the relevant time, is the fact that the judge records  that  the
    appellant did not challenge the original decision.  Mr Wilding  submits
    that that is at best neutral and  that  on  a  proper  reading  of  the
    judge's comments at paragraph [30], no real inference was taken.

14. It is not a requirement for a judge to set out all the  self-directions
    which apply in assessing evidence.  It is established law that the  age
    of an appellant if a minor both at the time of the hearing and the time
    of material events is a factor which should be taken into account.   It
    is evident from the decision that  the  judge  was  aware  of  the  the
    appellant's date of birth, was aware  that  he  was  16  in  2013  (see
    paragraph 31), and I am not satisfied that there is any indication from
    the decision that the judge was unaware of the need  properly  to  take
    account of the age and that he  did  not  do  so.  Further,  I  do  not
    consider that it  can  properly  be  said  that  in  fact  any  adverse
    inference was taken as to the failure to appeal.

15. Turning to the other findings, Mr Wilding submitted  that  the  judge's
    findings at paragraphs 32 and 33 are of particular relevance and  would
    not be explained  by  the  appellant's  age.  The  judge   found  that,
    contrary to the objective evidence the appellant's  evidence  was  that
    his mother had picked up an identity card when he  would,  on  his  own
    account, have been in confinement.

16. I consider that there is in fact no real challenge to that  finding  by
    Ms Kadic.  It was clearly open to the judge to make that finding  given
    the nature of the objective evidence put before him and I consider that
    as Mr Wilding submits, any explanation as to  age  is  not  in  reality
    capable of affecting this point.

17. Further, I consider that the finding that the appellant  was,  contrary
    to his case that he was being watched by the Tonaj family, and that  he
    was in self-confinement, is significantly and substantially  undermined
    by the finding that he was able to go out and obtain an  identity  card
    in person. The judge was clearly entitled to draw  such  a  conclusion,
    and whilst it is not determinative, if he was not  in  self-confinement
    as this finding shows, the rest of his case is undermined.

18. Whilst it is clear that  there  was  some  qualification  of  being  in
    confinement  from  the  appellant's  statement  in  his  interview,  in
    particular at questions 83 to 85, it is clear that the judge  did  take
    that into account from what he said at paragraph 34. The  challenge  to
    that is, I consider, a disagreement without any proper  explanation  of
    why the judge's analysis was one which was not open to him.

19. I accept that there is an apparent discrepancy at paragraph 24  of  the
    decision in that as Ms Kadic pointed out,  the  appellant's  uncle  had
    left Albania and that  his  brother  was  on  the  appellant's  account
    disabled and self-confined, as was the father.  But this is simply  one
    factor which has to be taken into account in assessing the  case  under
    the criteria set out in EH.

20. Ms Kadic submitted that the judge's approach to lack of evidence of the
    killings is speculative.  Whilst it is to a degree speculative in  that
    it rests on an assumption firstly, that  the  killings  of  the  nature
    described are reported, and, secondly, that these would be available on
    line, that observation must be considered in the context  of  what  the
    judge said at [38] to [39]. It  was  open  to  him  to  find  that  the
    appellant simply had provided no evidence from his family.  It was also
    open to him to have expected documents and  information  to  have  come
    from the family as there would in theory have been no  reason  why  the
    family could not have kept in contact with him.  It is  not  said  that
    the female members of the family were in self-confinement  and  in  the
    circumstances, I consider that noting that matters  were  not  reported
    was a factor the judge was entitled to take into account.

21. Whilst reliance is placed, challenging that, on what was  said  by  the
    expert in EH, that is Dr Schwandner-Sievers, I  do  not  consider  that
    that evidence is of great assistance. The evidence the expert refers to
    is as to whether false stories could have been placed in the media.  It
    is of little or no assistance in assessing whether  particular  stories
    would or would not be properly reported.

22. Further, with respect to the alleged failure to comply  with  what  was
    said in Dr Schwandner-Sievers's  evidence  as  cited  in  the  skeleton
    argument, the ground that is put  forward  is  that  undue  weight  was
    placed on the general practices of the Kanun  require.  As  Mr  Wilding
    submitted, that is in reality a perversity challenge. I find  no  basis
    on which it could be said that the judge has  placed  undue  weight  or
    weight which no other judge could possibly have  put  on  the  evidence
    before him. Weight is primarily a matter for a judge and unless it  can
    be shown that the weight placed was perverse, then it does  not  amount
    to an error of law.

23. For these reasons I consider that when the decision is considered as  a
    whole  the  judge's  findings  were  properly  reasoned,  adequate  and
    sustainable.  I am  not  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  judge
    involved the making of an error of law capable of affecting the outcome
    of the decision and I therefore uphold that decision.

    SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error of law and I uphold it.

      2. I make no anonymity direction. None was made  below  and  none  has
         been requested.


Signed   Date: 23 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

