

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10839/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester IAC                       |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31st March 2016                            |On 8th April 2016            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                              GILBERT TOH ANGWA
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk, counsel, instructed by Broudie Jackson
& Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on the grounds  it  was
      arguable that the appellant did not receive the notice of hearing.


   2. The First-tier Tribunal judge recorded that the appellant, who was not
      legally represented, did not attend the CMR or the final hearing.  The
      Notice of Hearing was sent to an address with a different postcode  to
      that given on the appeal form.  The  appellant  was  required  by  the
      respondent to live at the address on his appeal form and  was  signing
      on every day. The refusal decision had the correct  address.  Although
      he states he was given the First-tier Tribunal decision by  the  SERCO
      staff he states he was not given the Notice of hearing.


   3. The respondent in her Rule 24 response casts doubt upon  his  asserted
      non  receipt.  The  fact  remains  however  that  the  post  code  was
      incorrectly recorded on the Notice of Hearing. As such  it  is  simply
      not possible to conclude that he was properly served.


   4. The respondent further asserts in her Rule 24  response  that  in  any
      event the appellant cannot overcome the findings made  by  the  First-
      tier Tribunal. With respect to the respondent, unless  and  until  the
      appellant gave his evidence, such a conclusion cannot  be  drawn  with
      such certainty.

   5. Mr Harrison very sensibly did not pursue  either  of  these  lines  of
      argument.


   6. The appellant has been denied a hearing and as such there has  been  a
      material error of law such that  I  set  aside  the  decision  in  its
      entirety for it to be re-heard by the First-tier Tribunal.

     7. When we have set aside a  decision  of  the  first  tier  tribunal,
        s.12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires us to remit the case to the First
        tier with directions or remake it for ourselves. Where the error of
        law is such as in this case and the facts are disputed or unclear I
        conclude that the decision should be remitted to a First-tier judge
        to determine the appeal.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remit the appeal to be heard afresh  by  a
    First-tier Tribunal judge (not judge Gladstone), no  findings  of  fact
    preserved.



[pic]

                                    Date 31st March 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
