
                                    [pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/10260/2014
                                                               AA/10573/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th October 2016                 |On 2nd November 2016                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             a (FIRST RESPONDENT)
                            B (SECOND RESPONDENT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   In person, assisted by the court interpreter


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify  the  original   Appellant/parties   in   this   determination
    identified as A and B.  This direction applies to, amongst others,  all
    parties.  Any failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to  the  Secretary  of
    State as the Respondent and A as the Appellant (on  behalf  of  herself
    and B ) reflecting their positions as they were in  the  appeal  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Both Appellants are citizens of Pakistan, the Second Appellant  is  the
    minor child of the First Appellant.

 4. The First Appellant's immigration history can  be  briefly  summarised.
    She arrived in the United Kingdom in 2009 with leave to enter as a Tier
    4 (General) Student Migrant and was granted  further  leave  to  remain
    until 2011.  She applied for further leave in  that  category  but  her
    application was refused as was her appeal against that decision,  which
    was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  and  subsequently  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 11th January 2013 she  became  appeal  rights  exhausted.
    She later made a human rights claim which was refused with no right  of
    appeal.

 5. On 22nd October 2013 the Appellant claimed asylum which was refused  on
    10th October 2014.

 6. The basis of the Appellant's claim for asylum was that she was at  risk
    of persecution in Pakistan from her family and relatives for being  the
    mother of child born out of wedlock.  She had claimed to have undergone
    an arranged marriage in Pakistan to another man and she had lived  with
    her husband for two months before  he  left  for  the  UK.   They  were
    divorced thereafter and she had had no further contact with  him.   She
    had come to the UK  to  complete  her  education  and  entered  into  a
    relationship with another man, C, in or  about  2012  in  the  UK.   By
    November of  that  year  she  discovered  she  was  pregnant  and  upon
    informing her family of this, they were unhappy about the pregnancy  as
    she was not married.  The relationship with C ended when she  told  him
    he had to marry her after the birth of their child.  She has had little
    contact with him thereafter and he has never seen the Second  Appellant
    or provided any financial support for him.  As a result of the birth of
    her child, her family told her not to contact them and it was  asserted
    that her father had threatened to kill her and her son  when  she  said
    she was returning to Pakistan.  It was also said that threatening  text
    messages had been received by her from her father.

 7. The Respondent in a decision letter refused her claim for asylum.   Her
    account of divorce and her relationship with C was not accepted by  the
    Secretary of State nor was her account of the  threats  being  received
    from her family.  It was considered that she would be  at  no  risk  on
    return and that there was a sufficiency of state  protection  available
    to her and that she could relocate to another part of Pakistan.  It was
    considered that it would not be unduly harsh for her to relocate,  even
    if she were at risk in her home area.

 8. The Appellant appealed that decision and the appeal was  heard  in  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  reached   the
    conclusion at paragraph [19] of the decision  that  the  Appellant  had
    demonstrated to a reasonable degree of likelihood the central  core  of
    her claim, which is outlined in the preceding paragraph.   Having  made
    that positive credibility finding, he made reference  to  the  relevant
    country guidance and also to an expert report filed on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, and found, the basis of that report that the Appellant could
    not access sufficiency of protection  in  Pakistan  and  that  internal
    relocation would be unduly harsh.  Thus he allowed the appeal on asylum
    grounds.

 9. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the grounds that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give  proper
    consideration to the  country  guidance  in  KA  and  Others  (domestic
    violence - risk on return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216.  In particular,
    that he  had  failed  to  take  into  account  the  Appellant's  unique
    characteristics and relevant factors, as set out  at  paragraph  [223],
    when considering her ability to relocate within  Pakistan.   Permission
    to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State on 27th May 2015.

10. The hearing came before the Upper Tribunal on 17th  March  2016  before
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede.  Having heard submissions of the  parties,
    she reached the decision that the judge had made an error of  law  such
    that it had to be set aside and remade.

11. The Upper Tribunal's reasons for reaching that  view  are  set  out  at
    paragraph [10], where the Upper Tribunal said this:-

         "10.  There  has  been  no  challenge  to  the   judge's   positive
             credibility  findings  and  accordingly  those  findings   are
             preserved.  However the judge plainly  fell  into  error  when
             making his decision on risk on return.  Although he was  aware
             of, and referred to, the relevant country  guidance  [20],  he
             did not give any consideration to that  guidance  when  making
             his findings on risk on return.  The decision in  KA,  and  in
             particular [223] and [239], makes it clear that  consideration
             must be given to the individual circumstances of a  particular
             Appellant and are factors which affect her access  to  various
             services,  such  as  class,  age,  health,   educational   and
             financial means.  That was  the  matter  to  which  the  judge
             appeared to give no consideration and upon which  he  made  no
             findings.  What he did was simply to accept the views  of  the
             expert, who in turn  based  her  conclusions  largely  on  the
             availability of shelters for vulnerable women, and  failed  to
             give any reasons for departing from the  country  guidance  in
             favour of the expert.  The Appellant, however is  an  educated
             woman who has studied in the  UK,  but  no  consideration  was
             given to that by the judge when  considering  her  ability  to
             relocate to another part of Pakistan.

           11.    Accordingly the judge's decision  in  regard  to  risk  on
             return cannot stand and needs to  be  remade,  with  full  and
             proper  consideration  given  to  the  Appellant's  individual
             circumstances and the relevant  factors  referred  to  in  the
             country guidance.  I therefore set aside the Judge's  decision
             on risk on return."

12. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, the parties  were  not  in  a
    position to re -make the decision thus it  was  listed  for  a  resumed
    hearing to be remade on the question of risk on return.  The judge also
    observed that there had been further relevant country  guidance  namely
    the case of SM (lone women - ostracism)  Pakistan  [2016]  UKUT  00067,
    which need to be addressed.

13. On 28th April 2016, a transfer order was made on the basis that it  was
    not practicable for Judge Kebede to give  a  decision  without  further
    delay, and thus the appeal was transferred to be heard by a differently
    constituted Tribunal.

14. Thus the appeal returned to the  Upper  Tribunal  to  be  remade.   The
    hearing that was listed on 6th June 2016 but could not go ahead and was
    relisted for hearing on 13th October 2016.  Before the Upper  Tribunal,
    the Appellant appeared in person and the Respondent was represented  by
    Mr Bates, a Senior Presenting Officer.  The Appellant  did  have  legal
    representation in the form of solicitors acting on her behalf, although
    not appearing, who had provided for  the  purposes  of  the  hearing  a
    bundle of documents, including a skeleton argument (A-K),  and  country
    information and guidance dated 3rd February 2016.  The bundle  referred
    to  the  Appellant  representing  herself  but  that  the   documentary
    evidence, including the skeleton argument  and  witness  statement  was
    evidence that she sought to  rely  on.   The  Appellant  therefore  was
    present and gave oral evidence before me in Urdu with the assistance of
    an  interpreter.   I  note  that  during  the  hearing  there  were  no
    difficulties with the interpretation of the evidence  and  no  concerns
    were raised  at  any  time  during  the  hearing  in  relation  to  the
    interpretation.

15. I reminded myself of paragraph 6 of the Surendran guidelines that it is
    a judge's duty to give  every  assistance  when  an  Appellant  is  not
    represented.  To ensure that the duty was complied with, I ensured that
    each stage of the proceedings I explained  the  procedure  to  her  and
    ensured that she understood what was happening at each stage.   Further
    I attempted to put the Appellant at ease and told her that at any  time
    of the proceedings that if she wanted to ask a question or if  she  did
    not understand, then she must say so.  I also provided breaks to her as
    necessary.

16. The Appellant confirmed that she relied on the documents that had  been
    prepared by her solicitors and she provided a legible copy of  document
    6 of the bundle.  After  her  written  statement  (document  2  of  the
    bundle) the Appellant confirmed that that was her witness statement and
    further confirmed that it was read to her  in  own  language  that  she
    confirmed that the contents of that statement were true.

17. In addition she gave oral evidence which  was  the  subject  of  cross-
    examination, which is set out in my record of proceedings and to  which
    I will make reference in my analysis of the relevant issues.

18. At the conclusion of the evidence I heard a summary from  each  of  the
    parties.  Mr Bates relied on the original  refusal  letter  of  October
    2014.  He  began  his  submissions  by  acknowledging  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal would begin from the starting point of the  findings  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal which her account of persecution by her  family
    was found to be credible.  He submitted that there  was  no  suggestion
    however that either partner would have anything to do  with  either  of
    the children.  However the issue related to whether or  not  she  could
    relocate to a different area.  In  this  context  he  referred  to  her
    background that she came from an upper-middle class family and that she
    had been educated.  He submitted that she had played  down  her  degree
    and that she would be able to obtain employment.  He submitted that she
    came from a city and not a rural area and that there was no  reasonable
    likelihood of her family being able to track her down if  she  were  to
    internally relocate.   In  this  context  he  submitted  there  was  no
    reference in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  about  any  political
    influence held by her family but even if her evidence were true in this
    respect, at its highest it was a local politician and thus she would be
    able to relocate.

19. He made reference to the expert report in  the  light  of  the  country
    guidance decisions of  KA  and  SM  (previously  cited)  and  that  the
    headnote at paragraph [3] referred to most sexual offences and children
    being born out of wedlock being dealt with  under  the  Pakistan  Penal
    Code which is contrary to the findings of the expert at  page  72.   He
    further made reference to  the  report  and  honour  killings  and  the
    reference in KA to the authorities having made efforts in this respect.



20. He also made reference to the most recent country guidance  of  SM  and
    the relevant headnote 4 in conjunction with paragraphs [56]  and  [72].
    On the basis of the headnote, he submitted that the Appellant fell into
    the more favourable category by reason of her education.

21. In terms of credibility he submitted that whilst he  accepted  she  did
    not live with the father of her second child, there was a concern  that
    the relationship was  still  continuing  and  thus  she  would  not  be
    returning as a lone woman.  He made reference to the application  being
    made to include him as a dependent but then the relationship ended.  He
    further submitted that  there  was  an  inconsistency  in  her  witness
    statement as to why the relationship broke down and it was  unclear  at
    paragraph [9] if  it  was  a  genuine  separation.   Thus  the  obvious
    inference is that the relationship was not over and that she would  not
    be returning as a lone woman.

22. However if she was returning as a lone  woman,  the  following  factors
    were of relevance, first of all her family would not be in  a  position
    to locate her, she came from a middle class background,  she  had  work
    experience and her medical condition would  not  be  so  severe  as  to
    prevent  any  form  of  work  thus  she  could  relocate  and  form  an
    independent life along with her children.  Thus he submitted she  could
    relocate to a different area.

23. The Appellant relied upon the skeleton argument that had been  provided
    by her legal representatives from A to K which  included  reference  to
    the expert report, and the most recent country  information  report  of
    2016. The submissions dealt with the issues of  credibility,  that  the
    Appellant is a single mother with her two children; she has  no  family
    support either in the UK or Pakistan and that the Appellant relied upon
    the expert report dated 4th February 2015.  At paragraph  [9]  extracts
    from the report were cited to demonstrate that she would face the  risk
    of persecution if she returned to her local area by her family.  As  to
    internal relocation, it was submitted that she was a single, vulnerable
    woman who would not be able to access public or  private  shelters  for
    any length of time and thus  as  a  single,  vulnerable  woman  without
    financial aid or familial support with two young children would not  be
    able to internally relocate and to do so would be "unduly harsh".

24. There was reference at paragraphs [10] onwards to the country  guidance
    case of KA and Others and also the more recent country guidance case of
    SM and MH.  At paragraph [11] the issues of state  protection  was  set
    out and internal relocation was further considered at  paragraphs  [12]
    to [12.4].  Again it was submitted that she was a young, divorced  lone
    woman in Pakistan with two young children (see KA at  paragraph  [221])
    and feared that her family  would  trace  her  when  she  attempted  to
    register her children as they have reported her as  a  missing  person.
    In the alternative, whilst she was educated, it was said she was of low
    class and would not be able to make ends meet with two  young  children
    and would have to cope with  the  stigma  of  having  two  illegitimate
    children.  She had no family support, no access  to  accommodation  and
    even if she managed to obtain a shelter it would be time limited.   She
    would fact ostracism and discrimination and that young adult women such
    as the First Appellant would find  it  difficult  to  live  alone  than
    others [paragraph 137 and 240 of KA].

25. As to the shelters, it was submitted they were not designed  for  women
    like the Appellant and that they  have  a  purpose  to  provide  family
    reunification.  It referred to the shelters being under  resourced  and
    the lack of care and rehabilitation and therefore it was not reasonable
    to  expect  the  First  Appellant  to  relocate  and  that   when   her
    circumstances   were   considered   alongside   the   likely   societal
    discrimination she would face internal relocation would be unduly harsh
    and unreasonable.

26. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination,  which  I
    now give with my reasons.

Discussion:

27. The starting point for my consideration are the findings of the  First-
    tier Tribunal which were preserved by the decision  of  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Kebede.  The findings are set out at  paragraphs  [13]-[19].   In
    essence they are  reflected  at  paragraph  [19]  by  which  the  judge
    accepted her account of events  in  their  entirety  and  rejected  the
    credibility points raised by the Respondent.  Those  findings  included
    the acceptance of her account of  having  been  previously  married  in
    Pakistan and having been subsequently divorced (paragraph  [4]  of  the
    determination),  that  this  had  caused  a  strain   on   the   family
    relationships and that she had sold her jewellery and personal items to
    raise funds to study in the UK.  The judge further  accepted  that  she
    had met C in the UK in or about 2011  and  the  relationship  began  in
    2012.  By 2013 when the family were informed of her  circumstances  and
    pregnancy, the judge found that they were hostile to her and that   the
    relationship between herself and her parents had completely broken down
    and they considered she had dishonoured them.  The judge accepted  that
    she had been the victim of serious threats to cause her harm.

28. From the submissions made by Mr Bates,  it  is  not  the  Secretary  of
    State's case that she would not be at risk of persecution in  her  home
    area.  In my judgment and against the background  of  the  findings  of
    fact made by the First-tier Tribunal, there is a reasonable  likelihood
    that if she returned to her home area that  she  would  be  faced  with
    further threats from her family members.  In the light of  her  current
    circumstances in that she would be returning  with  two  children,  the
    risk of harm would be greater.

29. It is not suggested by the Secretary  of  State  that  against  such  a
    background that there would be any sufficiency of  protection  for  her
    and in the light of her own  particular  circumstances  (see  paragraph
    [63] of the most recent country guidance case of  SN  and  MH  and  the
    country material annexed thereto at page 42 and the OGN dated  2016  in
    the Appellant's bundle Section 10).

30. The issue in this case relates to whether it would be unduly harsh  for
    the Appellant and her two children to relocate to a different  area  of
    Pakistan.

The Law

31. Article 8 of the Qualification Directive reads as follows:-

         "Article 8

         Internal protection

         1.   As part of the assessment of the application for international
             protection, Member States may determine that an  applicant  is
             not in need of international protection if in a  part  of  the
             country of origin there  is  no  well-founded  fear  of  being
             persecuted or no real risk of suffering serious harm  and  the
             applicant can reasonably be expected to stay in that  part  of
             the country.

         2.   In examining whether a part of the country  of  origin  is  in
             accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall at  the  time
             of taking the decision on the application have regard  to  the
             general circumstances prevailing in that part of  the  country
             and to the personal circumstances of the applicant.

         3.   Paragraph 1 may apply notwithstanding technical  obstacles  to
             return to the country of origin."

32. Paragraph 339O of the Immigration Rules sets out as follows:-

         "339O.   Internal relocation

                (i)    The Secretary of State will not make:

                    (a)    a grant of asylum if in the part of  the  country
                        of origin a person would not  have  a  well-founded
                        fear  of  being  persecuted,  and  the  person  can
                        reasonably be expected to stay in that part of  the
                        country; or

                    (b)    a grant of humanitarian protection if in part  of
                        the country of return a person  would  not  face  a
                        real risk of suffering serious harm, and the person
                        can reasonably be expected to stay in that part  of
                        the country.

                (ii)   In examining whether a part of the country of  origin
                    or country of return meets the requirements in  (i)  the
                    Secretary of State when making his decision  on  whether
                    to grant asylum or humanitarian  protection,  will  have
                    regard to the general circumstances prevailing  in  that
                    part of the country and to the personal circumstances of
                    the person.

                (iii)  (i) applies notwithstanding  technical  obstacles  to
                    return to the country of origin or country of return."

    As it can be seen the paragraph refers  to  a  different  part  of  the
    country where that person would not have a well-founded fear  of  being
    persecuted and the person can reasonably be expected to  stay  in  that
    part of the country.  In  making  that  assessment  sub-paragraph  (ii)
    directs the decision maker to have regard to the general  circumstances
    prevailing  in  that  part  of  the  country  and   to   the   personal
    circumstances of the person.

    In Jasim v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 342 Sedley LJ said:-

         "16. The possibility of internal relocation is relevant to  refugee
             and human rights claims because it may demonstrate that a fear
             of persecution or harm though  warranted  by  the  applicant's
             experience in his place of  origin,  is  not  well-founded  in
             relation to other parts of the  state  whose  duty  it  is  to
             protect him.  But while the two issues - fear and relocation -
             go ultimately to the single question of safety, they cannot be
             decided in the  same  breath.   Once  the  judge  of  fact  is
             satisfied  that  the  applicant  has  a  justified   fear   of
             persecution or harm if returned to his home  area,  the  claim
             will ordinarily be made out unless the judge is satisfied that
             he can nevertheless be safely returned to another part of  his
             country of origin.  Provided the second issue has been flagged
             up, there may be  no  formal  burden  of  proof  on  the  Home
             Secretary (see GH [2004] UKIAT 00248); but this does not  mean
             that the judge of fact can reject  an  otherwise  well-founded
             claim  unless  the  evidence  satisfies  him   that   internal
             relocation is a safe and reasonable option.

         17.   It  is  necessary  to  stress  both  adjectives  -  safe  and
             reasonable.  It is well established that relocation to a  safe
             area is not an answer to a claim  if  it  is  unreasonable  to
             expect the applicant to settle there.  There may be no work or
             housing.   He  may  not  speak   the   language.    Similarly,
             relocation to an area may be  perfectly  reasonable  by  these
             standards but unsafe, for  example  because  of  the  risk  of
             continued official harassment or - as in this case -  revenge-
             seeking."

33. Thus if a person is at risk  in  his  home  area,  internal  relocation
    should be considered as a potential means of affording him  protection.
    The decision of the House of Lords in AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49 related
    to three Appellants all of whom were in their  30s  and  were  Sudanese
    nationals.  The judicial committee considered the position  of  members
    of black African tribes who formerly  lived  in  Darfur.   Two  of  the
    Appellants were subsistence farmers.

34. It is clear from the opinion of  Lord  Bingham  of  Cornhill  that  the
    enquiry has  to  be  directed  to  the  situation  of  each  particular
    applicant whose age, gender, experience, health, skills and family ties
    may all be relevant in the enquiry.   It  is  said  that  there  is  no
    warrant for excluding  or  giving  priority  to  consideration  of  the
    applicant's way of life in the place of persecution or for excluding or
    giving priority to consideration of conditions generally prevailing  in
    the home country.  Instead there has  to  be  a  consideration  of  all
    circumstances of the case.  That conclusion  is  to  be  found  between
    paragraphs 12 and 14 of his opinion.

35. The scope of the consideration was also dealt with by Baroness Hale  in
    paragraph  20  of  her  opinion.   In  referring  to  Lord  Bingham  of
    Cornhill's opinion in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5, Baroness Hale recorded this
    passage from Lord Bingham's thinking in the earlier appeal:

         "The decision maker taking account of  all  relevant  circumstances
         pertaining to the claimant and his country of  origin  must  decide
         whether it is reasonable to expect  the  claimant  to  relocate  or
         whether it will be unduly harsh to expect him to do so."

36. In approaching that task Baroness Hale also drew upon a UNHCR  document
    which also considered that the task was a holistic exercise  where  the
    decision maker looks at the individual personal circumstances including
    past  persecution  or  the  fear  of  it,  psychological   and   health
    conditions, family and social situations and survival  capacities.   In
    setting out those categories there was not meant to be  any  limitation
    on the scope of what must be considered.

37. Both parties rely upon the most recent country guidance case of SM  and
    MH (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan CG [2016] UKUT 00067  (IAC).   The
    Tribunal summarised its findings from the country materials as follows:-



          1) Save as herein set out, the existing country  guidance  in  SN
             and HM (Divorced women - risk on return)  Pakistan  CG  [2004]
             UKIAT 00283 and in KA and Others (domestic violence - risk  on
             return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC) remains valid.

          2) Where a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in her home
             area for a single woman or a female head of  household,  there
             may be an internal relocation  option  to  one  of  Pakistan's
             larger cities, depending on the family, social and educational
             situation of the woman in question.

          3) It will not be normally be unduly harsh  to  expect  a  single
             woman or female  head  of  household  to  relocate  internally
             within Pakistan if she can access support from family  members
             or a male guardian in the place of relocation.

          4) It will not normally be unduly harsh for educated, better off,
             or older women to seek internal  relocation  to  a  city.   It
             helps if a woman has qualifications enabling her to get  well-
             paid employment and pay for  accommodation  and  childcare  if
             required.

          5) Where a single woman, with or without children, is  ostracised
             by family members and other sources of possible social support
             because she is in an irregular situation, internal  relocation
             will be more difficult and whether it is unduly harsh will  be
             a question of fact in each case.

          6) A single woman or female head of household  who  has  no  male
             protector or social network may  be  able  to  use  the  state
             domestic violence shelters for a short time, but the focus  of
             such shelters is  on  reconciling  people  with  their  family
             networks, and places are in short  supply  and  time  limited.
             Privately run shelters may be more flexible, providing  longer
             term support while the woman regularises her social situation,
             but again, places are limited.

          7) Domestic violence shelters are available for women at risk but
             where they are used by women with children, such  shelters  do
             not always allow older children to enter and stay  with  their
             mothers.   The  risk  of   temporary   separation,   and   the
             proportionality  of  such  separation,  is  likely  to  differ
             depending on the age and  sex  of  a  woman's  children:  male
             children may be removed from their mothers at the age of 5 and
             placed in an orphanage or a madrasa until the family situation
             has been regularised (see KA  and  Others  (domestic  violence
             risk on return) Pakistan  CG  [2010]  UKUT  216  (IAC)).  Such
             temporary separation will not always  be  disproportionate  or
             unduly harsh: that is a question of fact in each case.

          8) Women in Pakistan  are  legally  permitted  to  divorce  their
             husbands  and  may  institute  divorce  proceedings  from  the
             country of refuge, via a third party  and  with  the  help  of
             lawyers in Pakistan, reducing the risk of family reprisals.  A
             woman who does so and returns with a new  partner  or  husband
             will have access to male protection and is  unlikely,  outside
             her home area, to be at  risk  of  ostracism,  still  less  of
             persecution or serious harm.

38. As the country guidance decision makes plain, I am required to consider
    this particular Appellant's circumstances and to make  a  "careful  and
    fact-specific assessment".  In reaching that decision, I confirm that I
    have considered all the evidence before me and if I do not particularly
    refer to a piece of evidence it does not mean that I have not taken  it
    into consideration.

39. I therefore turn to the relevant factors.  There is no doubt  that  she
    does not have family support in the light of the findings of the First-
    tier Tribunal (which were preserved), given their hostility towards her
    and the threats that were made.  It is even  less  likely  now  in  the
    light of her present circumstances and the birth  of  a  second  child.
    Thus I find that the Appellant would be returning as a  woman  with  no
    family support.

40. I have considered whether or  not  she  has  a  male  protector.   This
    involves the issue as to whether she will be returning as a lone  woman
    with two children or whether she will be returning  as  a  family  unit
    with her second partner.  There can be  no  dispute  that  she  is  the
    mother of two children as their birth certificates have been  provided.
    The father of the first child is not named  and  on  the  second  birth
    certificate there  is  the  name  of  the  father.   Therefore  as  the
    documentation demonstrates she has two children.  Her  marriage  status
    is single and the First-tier Tribunal did not find that she was a party
    to any existing marriage as the Secretary of State had  suspected  (see
    paragraph [16]).  The First-tier Tribunal accepted that she had been in
    a relationship with C and that he had neglected her and failed  to  see
    the child (see [17]).  Since that determination, the Appellant has been
    involved in a second relationship with a man and  as  a  result  has  a
    second child.

41. The evidence before me in the witness statement at page 2 sets out  how
    the parties met and this was at a time that her claim  was  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.  It is right to observe from  the  documents  that  she
    informed the court about her  change  of  circumstances.   There  is  a
    letter in the court file dated 4th January 2006 referring to  her  then
    partner informing her solicitors that this was a relationship  akin  to
    marriage and that she was pregnant. That information had been  provided
    before the Upper Tribunal hearing in March  2016  at  which  the  Upper
    Tribunal set aside the decision.  However prior to the last hearing  on
    6th June,  it  had  been  reported  that  she  was  no  longer  in  the
    relationship.  That information  had  only  been  communicated  to  the
    Secretary of State on the day of the hearing and in those circumstances
    the case was adjourned for further enquiries to be  made.   However  no
    further evidence was produced by the Secretary of State (whether by way
    of an interview with the man concerned who had made his own application
    at an earlier stage for leave to remain)  to  confirm  his  account  of
    events.

42. The account in the witness statement is  that  the  relationship  broke
    down in later in 2016 when he said he would not accept the second child
    and at paragraph [9] of the statement  she  made  a  reference  to  the
    following "I do not know why he left me at  the  time".   In  her  oral
    evidence she gave an account having met him in March  the  relationship
    really starting in September of that year.  They never  lived  together
    but saw each other regularly and spoke over the phone.   She  described
    finding out she was pregnant  and that the parties were  happy  in  the
    beginning but he came under pressure from his  family,  who  were  Shia
    Muslims and his family told him that he was in a  relationship  with  a
    divorced woman who had a child out  of  wedlock  and  the  family  were
    against this.  However the relationship still continued and she  stated
    that she trusted him, however the relationship broke down and she  said
    that he was trapped and his family were "saying things".

43. In cross-examination a number of matters were put to  her  relating  to
    her statement and in particular an inconsistency at paragraph [9] where
    she said she did not know why he had left her. Mr  Bates  suggested  to
    her that in her evidence she had given a number of reasons.  In  answer
    to that question, she stated that she had said she did not know why  he
    had left because he had never given her the impression that he would in
    fact leave her.  She said that he had told her that whether his  family
    would agree or not, he would not leave her.

44. Mr Bates submits that  she  did  give  inconsistent  evidence  and  the
    witness statement therefore was unclear and that this led to  the  real
    possibility that this was not a genuine separation.  I have  considered
    that point made on behalf of the Secretary of State.  However I do  not
    find that this  evidence  is  inconsistent  with  what  was  previously
    submitted.  It was a short statement drafted at a  time  when  she  was
    heavily pregnant.  Whilst she had given no reason as to why her partner
    was under pressure  from  his  family  (relating  to  her  status)  her
    consistent evidence was that throughout this time,  they  still  had  a
    relationship and indeed that is consistent with  the  letter  from  the
    solicitors  dated  January  2016  which   made   reference   to   their
    relationship continuing.  The  relationship  ended  later.  Whilst  the
    Appellant said she did not know why he left her at this difficult time,
    she was referring to  the  period  where  they  still  appeared  to  be
    together even though his family were against their union.  The birth of
    the child ensued which she said he had no part of thus at paragraph [9]
    she was describing why she could not understand why he had left at that
    time.

45. The Secretary of  State  did  have  the  opportunity  to  make  further
    enquiries with her prior partner. The only enquiry that  was  made  was
    that there was no evidence that they were living together.   Whilst  it
    might be seen as a convenient  separation  I  consider  that  any  such
    inference could only be speculative and there is no evidence  in  which
    to support the view that this was not  a  genuine  separation.   It  is
    plausible against the given background that the relationship  with  her
    second partner got into the difficulties as described by the Appellant.
    I therefore find that she is a lone woman returning with two  children.



46. I have considered whether there  is  a  risk  of  her  extended  family
    locating her if she were to live in a different part of  Pakistan.   In
    her  oral  evidence  she  had  said  that  her  father  had   political
    connections and therefore would  be  able  to  track  her  down.   That
    contrasts with the evidence given in her asylum interview at  questions
    122 to 136 where she was questioned about  that  particular  issue.   A
    careful examination of those questions reveals that she  did  not  make
    any reference to her father or members of the  extended  family  having
    any political connections and the thrust of the replies were  that  her
    family would find out that she would  have  returned  from  the  United
    Kingdom see (question [132] and questions [133]  and  [135]).   However
    there was no reference as to any method or means as to how her extended
    family would find where  she  was.   Whilst  the  expert  report  makes
    reference to  documents  that  might  lead  to  her  whereabouts  being
    ascertained by her family (see paragraph [120]) it seems to me that  it
    would only be if her details were flagged up by database that it  would
    be possible for them to find her and that I do not consider  that  that
    is a reasonable likelihood  on  the  evidence.   At  its  highest,  her
    account was that her father had  a  link  to  a  local  politician.   I
    therefore do not find that it has been demonstrated  that  there  is  a
    reasonable likelihood that her family would be able to relocate her  if
    she returned to Pakistan.

47. I also find that she would be returning to Pakistan  as  a  lone  woman
    with two children born out of wedlock.  This is a factor to  take  into
    account when assessing risk and whether to  relocate  would  be  unduly
    harsh.  The birth certificate of  her  first  child  does  not  have  a
    father's name on it, and as the expert report observes, it is usual for
    a child to be registered in the father's name and would be mentioned in
    all important documents.  The certificate of the second child does give
    the father's name but they are not married and are not living together.
     I consider that this is an additional factor which contributes to  her
    vulnerability and that there is a likelihood that she could  not  avoid
    the attention of the  authorities  in  Pakistan  against  the  unwanted
    advances of those who became aware of her circumstances.  In the expert
    report there is refer to the term of  "izzat"  meaning  "status"  which
    when set against the society, gives rise to her vulnerability as a lone
    female with two children born out of wedlock.

48. Furthermore  the  status  of  the  children  has  importance.   As  the
    Respondent's country information sets out at paragraph [9.2.1],  sexual
    relations outside the marriage is  strictly  prohibited  and  having  a
    child outside marriage causes huge social stigma.  The  children  could
    not be registered with the NADRA without providing  the  father's  name
    and not having an  ID  card  causes  difficulties  in  accessing  vital
    government-run services such as education and healthcare  (although  it
    is right that that does not affect  private  provision).   I  therefore
    find that those are additional vulnerabilities which  should  be  taken
    into account.

49. As to her social status, I reject the skeleton argument whereby  it  is
    asserted that she is of a "low class" (see paragraph [12.1]) as that is
    inconsistent with the Appellant's  own  evidence  where  she  described
    herself as middle class to upper-middle class and I find that  that  is
    likely to be the position.

50. As to her education, I find that she undertook a degree (question [15])
    and from 2004 to 2007 worked in administration (question [18]).   I  am
    also satisfied that she did not work after that (see question [27]) and
    thus in terms of employment she  has  not  worked  for  a  considerable
    period.  Whilst she came to the  UK  to  study  she  had  to  sell  her
    personal jewellery as her family did not help her (question  [43])  and
    this gives some understanding to  her  background  that  whilst  middle
    class she could not be described as wealthy.  She did  not  complete  a
    qualification in the UK as a result of her college shutting  down.   As
    to the type of work that she did in cross-examination she  referred  to
    it being "office work" and that her degree did not help her in her job.
     She also made reference to her circumstances confirmed by the  medical
    evidence in the bundle.

51. I am satisfied that she has a degree but I do not find, as suggested by
    Mr Bates, that she was seeking to play down her qualification.  She has
    not used that in her employment and was employed in a totally different
    field than the degree that she  had  obtained  and  had  worked  in  an
    office.  She has had past employment of three to four  years  and  last
    worked in 2007 some nine years ago.  She has not completed any  studies
    in the UK although I  would  accept  that  she  has  had  some  further
    education whilst here.

52. A further factor I take into account is that she was born in a city  as
    opposed to being brought up in a rural area and that  is  reflected  in
    her upbringing and her education.

53. I have to consider her prospects of employment  as  this  is  necessary
    when looking at the availability  of  long-term  provision  outside  of
    shelters.  I find that the prospect of employment has to be seen in the
    light  not  only  of  her  education   but   against   her   particular
    circumstances that she is a woman with two small children  and  in  the
    light of her health. The medical evidence at page 8 confirms her health
    difficulties.

54. The availability of shelters  is  set  out  in  the  expert  report  at
    paragraphs [102]-[119] and in the country guidance report at  paragraph
    [15] where it sets out the previous guidance in  SN  and  HM  (Divorced
    women - risk on return) Pakistan CG [2004] UKIAT 00283 and FS (Domestic
    violence - SN and HM - OGN) Pakistan  CG  [2006]  UKIAT  00023  remains
    valid.  The network  of  women's  shelters  (comprising  government-run
    shelters (Dar Ul Amans) and private and Islamic women's crisis centres)
    in general affords effective protection for women victims  of  domestic
    violence, although there are significant shortcomings in the  level  of
    services and treatments of inmates in such centres.   Women  with  boys
    over 5 face separation from their sons.  The more recent information in
    the up-to-date country guidance  is  set  out  at  paragraph  [50]  and
    reference is made at paragraph [61] to the evidence before the Tribunal
    in KA.

55. The country evidence summarised in the  most  recent  country  guidance
    case is similar to that set out in the expert report and reference  was
    made to similar sourced material such  as  the  COI  Report  and  human
    rights reports.

56. At paragraph [68] the  panel  accepted  the  evidence  of  the  limited
    availability of shelters  and  the  scarcity  of  places.   Whilst  the
    Appellant has two male children, by reason of their ages I do not  find
    that they would fall within the category identified at paragraph  [68].
    However I am satisfied that on  the  evidence  and  on  the  particular
    factual circumstances as outlined in the preceding paragraphs that as a
    lone woman with no  male  protection  and  no  family  support  network
    available, that even if she were able to find provision  in  a  shelter
    for a short  time,  that  she  would  not  be  able  to  find  suitable
    accommodation and employment in the longer term for the reasons that  I
    have set out which concern her particular vulnerabilities.

57. Consequently having considered the particular factual circumstances  of
    this Appellant and in the light of the country guidance  case  and  the
    factors set out,  I  am  satisfied  that  she  falls  in  the  category
    identified by the Tribunal in  SN  as  a  single  woman  with  children
    ostracised by her family with no male support.  Whilst she has had some
    education, she  last  worked  in  2007  and  has  further  identifiable
    vulnerabilities having two children and continuing health problems.

58. Thus on the particular factual circumstances of her case I find it that
    it would be unduly harsh for her to relocate to a different area.

59. As a result of my findings and assessment in the light of  the  country
    guidance case referred to, the Appellant has demonstrated a  reasonable
    likelihood that it would be unduly harsh to relocate and therefore  her
    appeal succeeds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, having been set aside by the  Upper
Tribunal on 23rd March 2016 is set aside and remade as follows, the  appeal
is allowed.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds



Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant/parties in  this  determination  identified  as  A  and  B.   This
direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any  failure  to  comply
with this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

