
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10903/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2015                   |On 30 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               DECENT MAPHOSA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Byrne, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co.,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss S Aitken, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 21 September 1984.   The
    respondent rejected his asylum claim for reasons explained in a  letter
    dated 22 November 2014.

 2. The appellant says  that  he  operated  a  truck  delivery  service  in
    Zimbabwe.  He had a contract to  deliver  foodstuffs  on  behalf  of  a
    European charity organisation (unidentified).   His  main  contact  for
    this work was a significant figure in the MDC, and distribution was  to
    identifiable MDC supporters.  This resulted  in  attacks  upon  him  by
    people on the side of Zanu-PF.  He reported one incident to the police,
    but they told him not to expect any result.  In a  further  attack  men
    purported to hire his truck but then  kidnapped  and  blindfolded  him,
    stabbed him and beat him unconscious, then abandoned him in the cab  of
    the truck which had been  set  on  fire.   He  arranged  to  leave  the
    country.

 3. The respondent refused the claim for reasons  set  out  in  a  decision
    dated 22 November 2014.  The respondent did not  find  the  appellant's
    account of key incidents to be  credible  (paragraphs  9-15).   Medical
    evidence added little.  The police  had  shown  themselves  willing  to
    investigate, and despite problems with the  police  force  in  Zimbabwe
    there was legal sufficiency of protection.  The case was  alternatively
    considered "at highest" and was found to be defeated,  under  reference
    to country guidance, by availability of internal relocation (paragraphs
    27-36).

 4. Judge Dennis dismissed the appeal by determination  promulgated  on  31
    March 2015.  Unlike the respondent, the  judge  found  the  appellant's
    account of 3 incidents from 2010 to 2012 to be credible,  supported  by
    the medical report, and that he had  suffered  2  beatings  by  unknown
    assailants.  However, the judge did not accept that  the  attacks  were
    linked to his deliveries for a charity organisation, or to the MDC,  or
    that they had any political element.  He considered  the  events  arose
    from business competition and from criminality.  There was no political
    element, direct or imputed,  to  bring  the  case  within  the  Refugee
    Convention.  There was no threat entitling the appellant to a grant  of
    humanitarian protection, and he made no claim under Article 8 of  ECHR.
    Finally, the judge said:

         "Reliance is also placed upon  the  Country  Guidance  case  of  CM
         [2013] UKUT 00059 ... confirming that there is "significantly  less
         politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe" and that the return  of
         a failed asylum seeker with "no significant MDC profile" would  not
         create a real risk of persecution ... and  that  one  returning  to
         Bulawayo [the appellant's home area] "will not  in  general  suffer
         the adverse attention of Zanu-PF even if he had a  significant  MDC
         profile."

 5. The appellant submits in his grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    that inconsistencies should be put to an appellant if not apparent from
    the respondent's decision or from  cross-examination  and  submissions:
    the judge reached his conclusion  partly  because  of  the  appellant's
    inability to state details of the types of food  distributed,  amounts,
    packaging and locations but he had never been asked to  provide  these.
    That was procedurally unfair.  The judge failed to  take  into  account
    the appellant's evidence that during the attacks  he  was  interrogated
    about involvement with the MDC, his truck was vandalised with the words
    "sell out" painted thereon, and that unknown  men  came  to  his  house
    asking his family about his  relationship  with  the  MDC.   The  judge
    thought that the appellant  had  belatedly  sought  to  politicise  his
    claim, but allegations regarding war veterans  and  Zanu-PF  supporters
    had been contained at his initial interview and initial statement.

 6. For the error in  law  hearing  the  appellant  offered  an  additional
    statement explaining that he could specify the main foodstuffs  he  was
    asked to deliver,  locations,  regularity,  and  the  identity  of  the
    recipients as MDC supporters.

 7. Miss Aitken sought to raise as a preliminary matter that if  any  error
    of law was shown it could not be material given  the  country  guidance
    governing the appeal, particularly CM, and given paragraph  41  of  the
    determination.

 8. Mr Brown submitted that the respondent having failed to file  any  Rule
    24 response should not be permitted to raise the point stated  by  Miss
    Aitken.  He further submitted that paragraph 41 was in any  event  tied
    to the finding that the attacks on the appellant  were  criminal  only,
    and  not  linked  to  political  persecution.   As  the  appellant  had
    experienced his  difficulties  while  in  Bulawayo,  the  principle  of
    internal relocation would not apply to his specific case.   If  he  had
    been found credible, Rule 399K of  the  Immigration  Rules  would  have
    applied: past persecution is a serious indication  of  a  well  founded
    fear, unless there are good reasons to consider that  such  persecution
    or serious harm would not be repeated.  The judge had gone wrong on the
    facts by finding that the appellant had no significant link to the  MDC
    and that his difficulties were related only to business competition and
    criminality.   The  appellant  was  criticised  in  the   determination
    paragraph 33 for inability to give certain details, but he had not been
    asked about them.  Issues of fair notice were fact sensitive.  This was
    not a fair criticism, as the matter was not  one  crying  out  for  the
    appellant to explain in advance of being asked.  The judge went  astray
    from that point on.  His second substantial error  began  at  paragraph
    35, in finding the political element to  be  an  embellishment.   There
    were passages in the  appellant's  interview  record  and  his  initial
    statements which clearly described his problems with  Zanu-PF  and  war
    veterans.  The criticism that he was  adding  on  a  political  element
    simply got the evidence wrong.  Those were errors of such  significance
    as to require a rehearing of the case.

 9. Ms Aitken in response pointed out that the principle in paragraph  339K
    of the Rules applies unless there are good  reasons  to  consider  that
    persecution will not be  repeated.   Here,  there  were  such  reasons,
    firmly grounded in  country  guidance.   CM  was  not  avoided  by  the
    appellant coming from Bulawayo, as a principal finding was that even  a
    person with significant MDC profile could safely return there.  Even if
    the judge had attached a political element to  the  case,  the  outcome
    would have been the same.  Every individual point did not require to be
    put an appellant, and the absence  of  information  might  properly  be
    founded upon.

10. Mr Byrne in reply provided further references to  the  information  put
    forward by the appellant in his claim.  He also pointed to the argument
    on internal flight at paragraph 27 of  the  skeleton  argument  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

11. I reserved my determination.

12. The point raised by Miss Aitken at  the  outset  is  decisive  of  this
    appeal.  It is not one which required prior notice  to  the  appellant.
    It goes to the issue which is always before the Upper Tribunal: whether
    any error is material, so as to require the  determination  to  be  set
    aside.

13. The argument on internal flight in the skeleton argument from the First-
    tier Tribunal is that since it was in Bulawayo that the  appellant  was
    persecuted in the past, "it cannot be suggested that he would  be  safe
    there now."   That is simplistic.  It does not follow from CM, or  from
    the facts of this case.

14. The judge may have gone wrong in thinking that the appellant failed  to
    include obvious details in his evidence, and in thinking  that  he  did
    not make the political element clear  from  the  outset.   However,  he
    found the appellant generally truthful regarding the assaults upon him,
    and the distinction drawn between political and criminal elements makes
    no difference to the eventual outcome.

15. Criminality and political violence are inextricably linked in Zimbabwe,
    and the attempt to distinguish between them does not seem to me to have
    been a particularly useful one; but I do not think that it matters.

16. The critical aspect of the case is that the appellant was  not  in  the
    MDC, but associated with it only for particular business reasons.   The
    judge was correct to apply country guidance so as to  find  no  bar  to
    return to Bulawayo.  Further, if he had  to,  the  appellant  could  go
    anywhere else in Zimbabwe.  His claim failed even taken at highest.

17. The judge made no error  which  would  require  or  entitle  the  Upper
    Tribunal to set aside the determination, so it shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




                    [pic]


                    Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
                    29 October 2015


