
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10265/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 December 2016                   |On 13 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     OO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R O'Ryan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of 3 July 2015 refusing her  claim  for  asylum,  the  respondent  also
    finding that there was no other basis on which she  should  be  granted
    leave to remain.


Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  4  November  1976.   She
    has made a number of visits to the UK since 2005.  Her most recent visa
    was issued on 26 September 2012 valid until 26 September 2014  and  she
    travelled to the UK on 3 October 2012 for medical  treatment  returning
    at the end of February 2013.  She last entered the UK on 8  April  2013
    and claimed asylum on 25 June 2013.  She  claimed  to  be  at  risk  in
    Nigeria because of her sexual identity as a  bisexual.   However,  save
    for accepting that bisexuals constituted a particular social  group  in
    Nigeria, the respondent did not believe the appellant's claim which was
    to all intents and purposes rejected in its entirety.

3.   At the hearing  of  her  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    appellant  and  her  partner  gave  oral  evidence  and  there  was   a
    substantial bundle of documentary evidence indexed and paginated 1-416.
     In her witness statement the appellant said that she wished to clarify
    that she was not a bisexual but a lesbian and accepted  that  confusion
    had arisen accordingly.  The documentary evidence  included  a  medical
    report prepared by Dr Goldwyn of the Helen Bamber Foundation  dated  11
    February 2015.  Its main purpose was to provide an  opinion  about  the
    scarring the appellant has on various parts of her body.

4.   It was the appellant's case that her husband had discovered her in  bed
    with another woman when he returned home unexpectedly  on  18  November
    2011 and this provoked a violent reaction.  He was  carrying  a  medium
    sized kitchen knife and tried to stab her but she twisted away and  the
    knife cut her badly just above the left knee.  He then got a hot  metal
    rod which his brother had been  heating  up  on  an  electric  hob  and
    attempted to burn her. She managed to twist away and was burnt  on  the
    inside of her right thigh and her left buttock.  She was then  able  to
    run out of the house but was hit  by  a  truck  and  was  knocked  out,
    regaining consciousness in hospital.  The medical report describes  the
    various scars and sets out Dr Goldwyn's opinion on the  consistency  of
    the injuries with  the  appellant's  account  in  accordance  with  the
    criteria set out in the Istanbul Protocol.

5.   Having reviewed the evidence, the judge did not find the  appellant  to
    be a credible witness.  He found  that,  when  the  available  evidence
    relating to the core of the claim was considered in the round,  it  was
    reasonable to conclude that the appellant's claimed sexual identity was
    devoid of credibility [49].  The appellant and her partner could not be
    relied  upon  to  provide  an  honest  account   of   the   appellant's
    circumstances.  He then went on to consider the medical evidence in the
    light of the fact the appellant did have scars on her body.  The  judge
    commented on the fact  that  the  medical  report  concluded  that  the
    appellant had demonstrated meaningful suicidal ideation but  said  that
    this conclusion was not based on any discernible evidence or  statement
    made by the appellant and amounted to no more than speculation  on  the
    part of the author and this unfounded conclusion caused  him  to  doubt
    her objectivity.

6.   The judge said that, despite the extremity of the appellant's  injuries
    prior to the alleged road traffic accident, the doctor had not  engaged
    in any meaningful consideration of the appellant's ability to escape as
    claimed and that, whilst she concluded  the  appellant's  scar  on  her
    right thigh was consistent with a road traffic  injury,  she  expressed
    surprise at the extent of the scarring which was most likely the result
    of severe trauma rather than the likelihood of her being dragged  under
    a truck.  The judge then commented that it  was  reasonable  to  expect
    that other lasting skin traumas would result from  being  struck  by  a
    moving truck whether on tarmac, gravel or other road surface,  but  the
    report was silent on that matter.  For these reasons, it was  his  view
    that the expert report was of  limited  probative  value.   Whilst  the
    appellant had sustained scars, the judge did not accept her account  of
    how they came into existence.

The Grounds and Submissions.

7.   The grounds raise three grounds of appeal.  Firstly, it is argued  that
    the judge failed to  take  all  relevant  evidence  into  account  when
    assessing credibility and erred in law by forming a concluded  view  of
    the appellant's credibility before taking  into  account  the  relevant
    medical evidence.  The grounds refer to the Court of Appeal judgment in
    Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ  367  and  the  AIT  decision  in  HH  (medical
    evidence; effect of Mibanga) Ethiopia [2005] UKAIT 164.   Secondly,  it
    is asserted that inadequate reasons were given for treating the medical
    report as being of limited probative value and in particular at  ground
    2.10 it is said that the  appellant  did  not  comprehend  the  judge's
    reference to the doctor being silent on  the  issue  of  whether  being
    struck by a moving truck would result in other lasting skin traumas and
    did not see the point that the judge was making.  Thirdly, it  is  said
    that the judge proceeded under a mistake of fact or an  incorrect  note
    of  the  evidence  relating  to  issues  arising   from   discrepancies
    identified by the judge about the  number  of  occasions  she  and  her
    partner had been out to clubs and who knew about the relationship.

8.   Permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted by the Upper Tribunal  identifying  specifically  ground  2.10.
    Further clarification of whether the application was limited to  ground
    2 resulted in confirmation that, whilst permission had been granted  on
    that ground, it would be open to the appellant to raise at the  hearing
    issues relating to grounds 1 and 3.

9.   At the hearing before me Mr O'Ryan indicated that he wished to rely  on
    all the grounds particularly grounds 1 and 2.   Mr  Harrison  expressed
    concerns about the way the judge had treated the medical  evidence  and
    whether adequate reasons were given for his  finding  that  the  expert
    report  was  of  limited  probative  value.   After   hearing   further
    submissions from Mr O'Ryan, and, taking into account my  concern  about
    whether the judge had compartmentalised  the  evidence  and  reached  a
    decision on credibility without fully considering the medical evidence,
    Mr Harrison very fairly indicated that he was prepared to concede  that
    there were material errors of law, such that the decision should be set
    aside.


The Error of law.

10.  I agree that this concession is properly made.   I  am  satisfied  that
    the judge did fall into the error identified in  Mibanga  of  resolving
    the issue of credibility without fully taking into account the  medical
    evidence, which was capable of affecting the appellant's credibility in
    that the doctor found that the scars attributed by the appellant to  an
    injury caused by her husband with a knife was  highly  consistent  with
    that account and that the injuries said to be caused by a burn  with  a
    hot metal rod were described as typical of such an injury.  In  respect
    of the injuries attributed to the serious road  accident,  it  was  the
    doctor's opinion that they were typical of such severe injuries.

11.  Secondly, I am satisfied that the second ground is  made  out  in  that
    inadequate reasons were given for treating the medical report as  being
    of limited probative value.  At paras 68-70 of her  report  the  doctor
    did consider whether the injuries attributed by the  appellant  to  the
    actions of her husband could have been caused in the  traffic  accident
    and I agree with the point made in ground 2.10 that  it  is  not  clear
    what the judge meant by saying that the report was silent on the  issue
    of whether it was reasonable to expect that other lasting skin  traumas
    would have resulted from being struck by the truck.

12.  Both Mr O'Ryan and Mr Harrison agreed that, in the event  of  an  error
    of law being found and the decision being set aside,  that  the  proper
    course would be for  the  appeal  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a full rehearing.  I agreed with this proposed course.  In
    these circumstances, I need not deal with ground 3.

Decision.

13.  In summary, I am satisfied that the judge erred in law, such  that  the
    decision should be set aside and that the  proper  course  is  for  the
    appeal  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   for   further
    reconsideration by way of a full rehearing by a different  judge.   The
    anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal remains in force  until
    further order.


Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 12 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
