
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10280/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 December 2015                   |On 14 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                               HUSSEYIN PEHLUL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Miller promulgated  on  30  March  which  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision dated 12 November 2014 to  refuse
    his claim for asylum and issue removal directions from the UK.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 10 February 1980 and is a national of Turkey.
    The App arrived in the UK  in  June  2006  and  claimed  asylum  on  14
    November 2013.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the Appellant's application. The refusal
    letter gave a number of reasons:
      a) The Appellant's account of the circumstances  in  which  he  became
         involved in the DHKPC are vague  and  lacking  in  detail  and  not
         accounted for by the Appellant's medical evidence suggesting he has
         symptoms of PTSD.
      b) The Appellant has given inconsistent accounts of a central  feature
         of his claim, his detention by the authorities.
      c) There are discrepancies between the history given by the  Appellant
         to the Respondent and that given in the Medical Foundation report.
      d) It was not accepted that the Appellant was active in supporting the
         DHKPC and detained and tortured because of this  and  therefore  it
         was not accepted that the Appellant would be  of  interest  to  the
         authorities on return.
      e) Even if it were accepted that the Appellant had  been  detained  by
         the authorities because of his involvement with the DHKPC there was
         nothing to suggest that they were still interested in him.
      f) If the Appellant had difficulties in Istanbul, he could relocate to
         another part of Turkey.
      g) There is a healthcare system in Turkey and suitable medication  for
         the Appellant's mental health issues. The problems did  not  engage
         Article 3.
      h) The Appellant did not  qualify  for  leave  under  Appendix  FM  or
         paragraph 276 ADE(1) and there were no exceptional circumstances.

The Judge's Decision

 5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Miller  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge found :
      a) The Judge identified a number of inconsistencies and  discrepancies
         in the Appellant's account (paragraph 30 (i)-(xi)) that led him  to
         find that the Appellant had not given a  credible  account  of  his
         history.
      b) The Judge did not find the medical report of  Dr  Gibson  dated  23
         December 2011 particularly helpful finding that  the  diagnosis  of
         PTSD was largely dependent on what the Appellant  had  reported  to
         the Doctor.
      c) There was no up to date medical evidence postdating the  report  of
         Dr Gibson to suggest the Appellant still had anything significantly
         wrong with him.
      d) Given that the events alleged occurred 11 years  ago  even  if  the
         Appellant were detained briefly on return there was no evidence  to
         suggest that he would still be of interest to the authorities.
      e) Mr Neale conceded that there was no Article 3 or 8 claim.

 6. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing  that  the  Judge  had  erred  in
    questioning the diagnosis of PTSD in 2015 because there was  no  up  to
    date medical evidence given that the  diagnosis  was  accepted  by  the
    Respondent in their refusal letter in November 2014; it was also argued
    that the Judge placed too much weight on  the  inconsistencies  in  the
    Appellant's account failing to take into account the  medical  evidence
    of the impact of an accepted diagnosis of PTSD on his recollection.

 7. On 5 August 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Coker gave permission  to  appeal
    on all grounds.

 8. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Neale  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that
      a) He relied on the two sets of grounds and skeleton argument.
      b) In relation to the first ground he argued that the Judge's approach
         to the medical evidence was flawed. The Judge was not  entitled  to
         conclude that  there  was  nothing  significantly  wrong  with  the
         Appellant because he was able to work and  there  was  no  evidence
         postdating that of Dr Gibson given that the Respondent had conceded
         that the Appellant suffered from PTSD and  had  been  detained  and
         tortured although they did not accept the reasons he gave for  that
         detention and torture.
      c) The Judge went  behind  the  medical  evidence  and  made  his  own
         clinical assessment. There was no basis on which he could find that
         the ability to work was inconsistent with PTSD. The Judge  was  not
         entitled to draw an adverse inference from the failure  to  produce
         up to date medical evidence when the Respondent explicitly accepted
         the diagnosis. The Judge failed to address the  argument  that  the
         fact that the Appellant suffered from  PTSD  could  impact  on  his
         recollection of events given that there was documentary evidence in
         the bundle to that effect.
      d) If the Judge intended to go  behind  the  concession  made  by  the
         Respondent the parties should have been given  the  opportunity  to
         address the matter.
      e) In relation to the second ground it was  argued  that  the  Judge's
         credibility findings were not clear in that  he  failed  to  engage
         with his explanations given for the alleged discrepancies.
      f) The Judge in making the finding that there was  no  evidence  of  a
         continuing interest in the Appellant  failed  to  engage  with  the
         background material about the renewed interest in the  DHKPC.  This
         went to the core of the Appellant's claim.

 9. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Melvin submitted that :
      a) He relied on the Rule 24 Notice of 2 September 2015.
      b) The Judge gave adequate reasons for finding that the Appellant  was
         not credible and attaching little weight to the expert report given
         that there was no up to date medical evidence and the Appellant had
         failed to register with a GP.
      c) In relation to the credibility findings the grounds are  simply  an
         attempt to re argue the case.
      d) The Judge was required to assess the risk on return and given  that
         the events occurred over 10 years ago and that the Appellant had no
         recent links with  the  organisation  the  Judge  was  entitled  to
         conclude he would not be of interest to the authorities.

10. In reply Mr Neale on behalf of the Appellant submitted that  the  Judge
    failed to engage with  the  argument  that  the  discrepancies  in  the
    Appellant's account were plausibly attributed to PTSD, a diagnosis that
    the Respondent had accepted.

Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law.

12. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address and determine, as was
    argued by Mr Neale, whether the diagnosis of PTSD could have  accounted
    for the discrepancies that the Judge found undermined  the  credibility
    of the Appellant's  account  of  the  circumstances  in  which  he  was
    detained and tortured constitutes a clear error of law.

13. I also accept that the parties, as a  matter  of  procedural  fairness,
    should have been given an opportunity to address  the  Judges  decision
    (paragraphs 32-33) to go behind the  diagnosis  of  PTSD  made  in  the
    report of Dr Gibson  given  that  this  diagnosis  had  been  expressly
    conceded by the Respondent.

14. These errors I consider to be material since had the Tribunal conducted
    this exercise the outcome could have been different. That in my view is
    the correct test to apply. I therefore set aside the  decision  of  the
    Judge.

15. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Statement
    of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First
    Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
         (a)      the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
         the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity  for
         that party's case to be put to and  considered  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal; or
         (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

16. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted because
    the Appellant did not have a fair hearing due to the Judges failure  to
    engage with a central feature of his claim, that the diagnosis of  PTSD
    could have explained the apparent discrepancies in  his  account.  This
    decision I am satisfied infected all of the findings and therefore none
    of the findings of fact are to stand and the matter will be a  complete
    re hearing.

17. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal sitting
    at Taylor House to be heard on a date to be fixed before any First-tier
    Immigration judge other than Judge K S H MIller.


Signed      Date 3.1.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

