
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10709/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 August 2015                    |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    S_ S_
                         (anonymity directioN Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel instructed by Vasuki
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Adio which was promulgated on 2 April 2015.  The appellant is the
    Secretary of State and the grounds of appeal are narrowly stated.

2.   Ground 1 which was not pursued with any vigour before me was  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to take into account  the  appellant's
    behaviour as was required by the statutory provision under Section 8 of
    the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act  2004  as
    expanded judicially in the judgment of Y v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1223.

3.   Ground 2 was where Mr Walker, Presenting Officer for the  Home  Office,
    concentrated his argument. It maintains that the judge failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for the findings which he made  and  at  paragraph  32
    there is reference to the appellant  facing  problems  with  his  first
    interview, a matter which the judge accepted. That point is repeated in
    the determination at paragraph 36.  The written ground ran as follows:

         "It is respectfully submitted that the Judge fails to identify what
         these problems were seen to be and what they were accepted as such.
          Whilst it is accept that the Judge does not have to  give  reasons
         it  is  respectfully  submitted  that  in  the   absence   of   any
         explanation, however brief, the Respondent is unable to  understand
         why the  propriety  of  the  first  interview,  something  of  some
         significance, was seen to be materially diminished."

4.   When permission to appeal was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cruthers on 28 April 2015, the judge specifically made reference to the
    fact that the initial determination had used the  expression  "problems
    with his first interview" on more than one occasion without  explaining
    what that problems may have been.  The  short  reasons  for  permission
    concluded as follows:

         "The grounds are arguable.  It may be that  the  judge  would  have
         reached the same result irrespective of the matters referred to  in
         the  respondent's  current  grounds.   But  because  I  cannot   be
         sufficiently  confident  that  the  same  result  would  have  been
         reached, it is appropriate to grant permission at this stage."

5.   The  facts  of  this  case  can  he  shortly  stated.   The  individual
    concerned is  a  Sri  Lankan  citizen,  born  on  11  July  1985.   The
    determination sets out his history both in Sri Lanka and subsequent  to
    coming to the United Kingdom.  I need not read into this  determination
    any of that factual history.  The determination at paragraph 15 records
    the evidence put before the First-tier Tribunal at  that  hearing.   It
    makes reference to the respondent to this appeal  confirming  his  name
    and address, to relying on his witness statement and interview records,
    and to "the corrections made to the interview record".

6.   In opening this matter before  me  this  morning,  Mr  Walker  properly
    indicated that it may well have been that whoever settled  the  grounds
    of appeal may not have had complete access to the paperwork  which  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  I have been taken  to  that  paperwork
    and I have been assisted by Counsel for the respondent to  this  appeal
    in directing me to a number of relevant pages.

7.   As Mr Walker quite properly indicates the  record  of  interview  which
    appears at page B1 and following of the Secretary of State's bundle  of
    documentation that was before the First-tier Tribunal records a  number
    of questions during the answering  of  which  the  respondent  to  this
    appeal became visibly upset and distressed and reference is made to the
    interpreter not properly communicating the answers given in Tamil in an
    accurate English translation.  Comments to that effect  appear  in  the
    answers to questions 16 and 17 in particular as well as in  the  answer
    to question 20 overleaf.  In fact the answer to question 20  states  in
    clear terms: "applicant is crying I want a different interpreter".

8.   It would appear that shortly after the  completion  of  that  interview
    the solicitors then acting for the respondent to this appeal  wrote  to
    the Home Office indicating their disquiet with the record of the asylum
    interview and the quality of the translation.  There is a letter signed
    by the respondent to this appeal bearing a  date  12  June  2013  which
    states that there were mistakes in the interview statement and that the
    translations were not correct and that various matters had not properly
    been dealt with.

9.   It seems to me, and I think it is accepted  by  Mr  Walker,  that  that
    letter amounts to the corrections made to the  interview  record  which
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted as part of the appellant's  case
    as is recorded at paragraph 15 of the determination.  In  paragraph  32
    of the determination, the First-tier Tribunal Judge makes reference  to
    the interview and says:

         "I am prepared to accept that the appellant faced problems with his
         first interview and that there have been a number of points made in
         the refusal letter concerning this interview  which  the  appellant
         has attempted to correct in the statement that he has provided."

    Similarly, in paragraph 36 of the determination it is stated:

         "All in all the appellant has given a credible account with regards
         to his past activities and in view of the problems faced during his
         first interview I am not willing  to  attach  much  weight  to  the
         consistencies found by the respondent in this case." [I think  that
         should probably read 'inconsistencies' but it matters not].

10.  Clearly in the ideal world the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  would  have
    made more detailed reference to the  interview  questions  and  to  the
    corrected statement which I have been taken to this  morning  but  when
    the determination is read the context in which the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge came to his conclusion is clear. The context in which the  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  made  findings  as  to  weight,  credibility  and
    consistency is equally clear.

11.  Mr Walker has quite properly advanced this appeal  with  circumspection
    and with moderation, he not having instructions to abandon it.  But  on
    my reading of those additional papers, no error of law is  apparent  on
    the face of the determination either in relation to ground  2  which  I
    have summarised at some length or ground 1  which  was  not  separately
    argued.

12.  I can find no fault with the manner in which  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  reviewed  the  evidence,  applied  the  law  and  came  to   the
    conclusions which he did and in all of those circumstances  the  appeal
    brought by the Secretary of State must be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date 4 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
