
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10371/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date sent                    |
|On 8 April 2013                               |On 24 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                              ZAFAR AHMED KHAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Finch from Thompson & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan. He is an Ahmadi. It is not  in
    dispute that on 8 November 2012 the respondent  refused  him  leave  to
    enter having rejected his asylum claim. On 23 January  2013  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) Judge  M  A  Khan  dismissed  his  appeal  against  that
    decision.  The appellant's  success  in  being  granted  permission  to
    appeal brings the matter before me.

2.   I am not persuaded that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  erred  in  law.
    When he heard this case he had before him the latest  country  guidance
    case MN and others (Ahamdis - country conditions -  risk)  Pakistan  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC) and it is clear that he adhered closely to  its
    guidance when hearing and assessing the evidence.

3.   The first ground contends that the judge failed to consider  adequately
    material evidence in the form of an  Ahmadiyya  Muslim  Association  UK
    (AMA UK) letter dated 10 December 2012 submitted by  the  appellant  as
    evidence of his religious activities. The  judge  found  this  evidence
    unreliable because there was a discrepancy between the dates it gave as
    to when the appellant said he had served as  a  Nazim  in  Pakistan  as
    compared with the dates he had given in his screening interview.  It is
    argued that the judge's dismissal of this evidence was at odds with the
    positive comments made about the bona fides of the AMA in  MN  at  [66]
    and [122].   However, nothing said in MN sought  to  pre-judge  whether
    any particular AMA evidence was credible and indeed [122] of MN  (cited
    by the judge at [46]) makes clear that at its highest AMA evidence  was
    "[e]vidence likely to be relevant".  It is argued  that  the  appellant
    had  provided  an  explanation  for  the  discrepancy;  but  the  judge
    considered the reliability of the AMA letter  in  the  context  of  the
    evidence as a   whole  and  was  entitled  to  reject  it.   Given  his
    rejection of it he was not  obliged  to  attach  weight  to  its  other
    observations about aspects of Ahmadi activities.

4.   The second ground advanced was  that  the  judge  failed  to  correctly
    apply the guidance given in MN  when  it  came  to  assessment  of  the
    appellant's evidence that in Pakistan "he would speak  to  friends  and
    colleagues  about his religion and that  he  would  invite  friends  to
    watch the  Ahmadi channel at a house" [34].   Miss  Finch  pointed  out
    that these activities clearly come within what  MN  defined  as  [2(i)]
    behaviour[1] and its observation at [122]  of  the  need  to  establish
    whether it is of particular importance to the religious identity of the
    Ahmadi concerned  to  engage  in  [2(i)]  behaviour.   However  on  the
    appellant's own evidence he did not consider he was under any  kind  of
    threat until the September 2012 incident and the burden  of  his  claim
    was that he had been persecuted for preaching  his  religion.   It  was
    open to the judge to find that insofar as the appellant relied on  such
    activities as described in [34] he had provided "no  evidence  to  show
    that  he  was  targeted  by  the  non-Ahamdis  specifically  for  these
    activities despite his claim that he belonged  to  a  prominent  Ahmadi
    family, and live[d] in a  large  house,  in  a  prominent  position  in
    Lahore".  It is sufficiently clear that the judge considered  that  the
    activities described in [34] did not  establish  his  level  of  actual
    religious activity caused him any problems or was likely to.   I  would
    observe that on the appellant's own evidence he had chosen to return to
    Pakistan in December 2012 and had only claimed asylum  because  of  the
    events that, he claimed, took place in September 2012.

5.   The third ground challenges the judge's finding  that  the  appellant's
    account of the September 2012 event was not credible.  It is  submitted
    that (i) the appellant had described two incidents, a heated  workplace
    argument with two Hafiz boys regarding the preaching of his father  and
    a separate incident relating to a discussion  the  appellant  had  with
    another boy who had been caught stealing; and that (ii) the  judge  has
    confused the two incidents.   It  is  submitted  that  the  appellant's
    witness statement makes no reference to any  argument  with  the  Hafiz
    boys.   However  the  crux  of  the  appellant's  claim  was  that  the
    subsequent attack on him by three men in an area outside Lahore  was  a
    direct result of "the fact that he had a heated argument with two  boys
    who were Hafiz .. about his faith" [26]; see also Q53 and Q4 and Q39 of
    the SEF.  He had had to reprimand two boys for items going missing  and
    had had a heated argument at his workplace with them; they  were  Hafiz
    [25]. If there was any confusion of two incidents at  the  factory,  it
    stemmed from the appellant's own evidence and in any event, whether two
    separate incidents or not, the appellant clearly staked  his  claim  on
    his having become a target because of arguments at his  workplace  with
    two Hafiz boys.  The judge did not disbelieve his account  through  any
    confusion about  different  workplace  incidents  but  because  of  the
    appellant's different account of what his attackers had said to him and
    what he had said to them: "I find that the  appellant  added  the  fact
    about the confirmation of his name [Zafar] in his second interview  and
    his oral evidence was different to both of the  interview  statements".
    That  was  an  entirely  sustainable   assessment   and   involved   no
    misunderstanding.

6.   The fourth and final ground challenges the  judge's  treatment  of  the
    appellant's evidence about his claimed  Ahmadi  activities  in  the  UK
    which relied on what was said in the AMA UK letter of 10 December  2012
    to which reference has already been  made.  It was submitted  that  the
    judge failed to make adequate findings  on  the  appellant's  religious
    activities in the UK and  had  not  considered  the  evidence  that  he
    participated in a dedicated preaching stall.  I consider this challenge
    founders in face of the evident fact that the  judge  clearly  did  not
    consider that this letter, taken together with the evidence as a  whole
    (particularly the appellant's own  evidence  about  these  activities),
    withstood scrutiny.  He noted that despite stating he spent two  and  a
    half hours at the mosques, the appellant did not know the name  of  the
    Imam who led the prayer.  The grounds do not dispute that the appellant
    was unable to furnish this information and, as already noted, the judge
    was entitled to find the AMA letter unreliable.

7.   For the above reasons I consider that the grounds fail to identify  any
    error in the judge's findings of fact or  in  his  application  of  the
    relevant  country guidance to the evidence produced by the appellant.

8.   Accordingly, the judge's decision to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal
    must stand.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
-----------------------
[1] [2(i) of MN reads: " The background to the risk faced by Ahmadis is
legislation that restricts the way in which they are able openly to
practise their faith. The legislation not only prohibits preaching and
other forms of proselytising but also in practice restricts other elements
of manifesting one's religious beliefs, such as holding open discourse
about religion with non-Ahmadis, although not amounting to proselytising.
The prohibitions include openly referring to one's place of worship as a
mosque and to one's religious leader as an Imam. In addition, Ahmadis are
not permitted to refer to the call to prayer as azan nor to call themselves
Muslims or refer to their faith as Islam. Sanctions include a fine and
imprisonment and if blasphemy is found, there is a risk of the death
penalty which to date has not been carried out although there is a risk of
lengthy incarceration if the penalty is imposed.  There is clear evidence
that this legislation is used by non-state actors to threaten and harass
Ahmadis. This includes the filing of First Information Reports (FIRs) (the
first step in any criminal proceedings) which can result in detentions
whilst prosecutions are being pursued. Ahmadis are also subject to attacks
by non-state actors from sectors of the majority Sunni Muslim population."

