
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10279/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 August 2016                     |On 15 Septemeber 2016                |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                          W--- M--- N--- T--- S---
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person (representative did not appear)
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1) Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
      matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the  public  to  identify   the
      respondent. Breach of this order can be  punished  as  a  contempt  of
      court. I make this order because of the need for  extreme  caution  in
      international protection cases. It is possible  that  publicising  the
      identity of an asylum seeker could result in an application succeeding
      which would otherwise have been unmeritorious.

   2) This is an appeal by a citizen of Sri Lanka against  the  decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  of
      the Secretary of State  that  he  is  not  entitled  to  international
      protection. He was supposed to  be  represented  before  me.   It  was
      convenient to hear the case at about 12.15 pm and his Counsel had  not
      appeared by that time. He had left a message with  the  usher  to  say
      that he would not be here until about 12.50 pm.  I  do  not  say  that
      that is the complete message.  It would be surprising if the member of
      the Bar concerned was late for other than a very good  reason  but  no
      good reason was given to me.

   3) Mr Norton had had an opportunity of preparing the case  and  indicated
      that it was a case where he could not resist sensibly a find that  the
      First-tier Tribunal had erred in law and the appeal should be  allowed
      to the extent that it be set aside and order to be heard again in  the
      First-tier Tribunal.  I agree.

   4) I also take the view that it would be  irresponsible  to  do  anything
      more than send back the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  It is  not
      a case that ought to be allowed now and it is not a case that ought to
      be heard in the Upper Tribunal when the  essential  complaint  is  the
      appellant has not had a fair hearing.

   5) The appellant before me explained that his English  was  imperfect.  I
      certainly would not expect him to be able to have managed  without  an
      interpreter if he had  had  to  make  submissions  or  give  evidence.
      However I am satisfied that he understood what  I  was  proposing  and
      understood that it was not a decision that was unfair to him  although
      I do not suggest that he would be bound to take that view  if  he  was
      advised to the contrary.  That is a matter for him and  his  barrister
      to sort out.     I decided therefore that on the particular  facts  of
      the case it was right to go ahead without Counsel and  to  dispose  of
      the appeal as I have indicated.

   6) There are two points  made  in  the  grounds.  The  first  relates  to
      documents produced by the appellant indicating that he  is  wanted  by
      the authorities in Sri Lanka.  They are court documents and  they  are
      of a kind of document that are very often seen in  Sri  Lankan  cases.
      They are not always found to be reliable and this is a case where  the
      Secretary of State indicated she wanted to make enquiries and tried to
      make enquiries but there was no result.  Mr Norton  has  explained  to
      me, and I accept, that it was not a  case  where  the  Respondent  was
      indifferent.  He had evidence to show that the  Respondent  had  tried
      but simply could  not  find  anything  to  support  or  undermine  the
      documents.

   7) The First-tier Tribunal does not seem to have appreciated this. Rather
      it seems to have dealt with the case without making a  proper  finding
      or  having  proper  regard  to  the  documentary  evidence.  This   is
      potentially a rather troubling mistake  because  if  the  evidence  is
      reliable then it is of considerable assistance to the appellant.

   8) The second point concerns the consideration of medical  evidence.  The
      appellant claims to have been beaten by the Sri Lankan authorities and
      refers to two marks on his body, one the result of a punch by  a  ring
      and the other the result of a blow to the leg.

   9) The First-tier Tribunal has not shown proper regard to this strand  of
      evidence.  The judge has not appreciated that the medical opinion  was
      that the injuries  were  consistent  or  highly  consistent  with  the
      claimed mechanism. This is generally regarded as very strong  evidence
      that the given mechanism is correct. The Tribunal  has  not  evaluated
      the evidence in the round with the rest but appears to have used it as
      a precursor to an adverse credibility finding. Whether or not that  is
      what the judge did, it looks as though it was what the judge  did  and
      that is not good enough.

Notice of Decision

It  follows  therefore  that   the   First-tier   Tribunal's   decision   is
unsatisfactory for these reasons  and  has  to  be  set  aside  and  in  the
circumstances I set it aside and direct the  case  be  heard  again  in  the
First-tier Tribunal.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 14 September 2016              |





