


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA103052014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On : 14 June 2016                 |On : 16 June 2016                       |
|                                  |                                        |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                            suthakaran rajaratnam

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Wells of Maliks & Khan Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a Sri Lankan national of Tamil ethnicity born  on  28  July
1979. He has been given permission to appeal against the decision of  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Watson dismissing his appeal  against  the  respondent's
decision to remove him from the United Kingdom following the refusal of  his
asylum claim.

The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  2  September  2009  with  a
student visa valid until 31 December  2010.  Following  the  refusal  of  an
application for an extension of his visa, he was subsequently granted  leave
to remain as a Tier 4 student until 25 August 2014. However  his  leave  was
curtailed to expire on  12  August  2013  when  his  sponsor's  licence  was
revoked, and his subsequent application for further leave as a  student  was
refused  on  13  September  2013.  His  appeal  against  that  decision  was
dismissed on 28 February 2014 and he became appeal rights  exhausted  on  31
March 2014. He then claimed asylum on 8 May 2014. His claim was  refused  on
10 November 2014 and on 11 November 2014 a decision was made to  remove  him
from the UK. The appellant appealed against that decision.  His  appeal  was
dismissed in the First-tier Tribunal. Permission has been granted to  appeal
to the Upper Tribunal.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant worked as a teacher in Sri Lanka from 2005 to 2009. He  claims
to have been involved with the LTTE since 2001. He claims to have  acted  as
a courier for the LTTE in Jaffna from 2001 until  2005  and  then  elsewhere
until 2009. He gathered intelligence information for the LTTE. He was  never
a member of the LTTE. His photograph was  taken  during  training  with  the
LTTE and kept on their records, but the records were  later  seized  by  the
government forces. His brother Sureshkaran was forced to become a member  of
the LTTE in 2006 and he did not see him from that time, but later found  out
that he had been detained in 2009 and then left Sri Lanka and went to  Italy
in 2012. His brother returned to Sri Lanka in October 2013 and was  arrested
and tortured and detained. During his detention his brother  was  shown  his
photograph. His brother was released from detention  through  payment  of  a
bribe and left Sri Lanka  and  returned  to  Italy  in  December  2013.  The
appellant came to the UK in September 2009 because he was  scared  of  being
arrested on suspicion of involvement with the LTTE. He managed to  obtain  a
student visa for the UK with the assistance of an agent. He  did  not  claim
asylum on arrival to the UK as he had not suffered direct  problems  in  Sri
Lanka at that stage, but when his brother was detained in  October  2013  he
realised that the situation was more serious than he  had  imagined  and  he
started to suffer from depression. The CID started  visiting  his  home  and
harassing his mother, asking questions about him and his  brother,  and  she
then moved to a different area. He  had  another  brother,  Subaskaran,  who
came to the UK in 2000 and was granted  asylum.  The  appellant  joined  the
British Tamil Forum (BTF) in the UK and also took  part  in  demonstrations.
As a result, he was at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's  claim,  accepted  that  he  had
attended demonstrations in the UK and that he had been a member of  the  BTF
since May 2014 (but not since 2010 as he had claimed).  The  respondent  did
not accept the appellant's claim to have been of interest to the Sri  Lankan
authorities since October 2013 and did not accept that he had been  involved
with the LTTE as claimed. The respondent considered that the  appellant  was
at no risk on return to Sri Lanka.

The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard by  Judge  Watson  in
the First-tier Tribunal on 30 March 2016 and was  dismissed  in  a  decision
promulgated on 19 April 2016. The grounds of appeal before  the  judge  were
amended, with permission, to  include  Appendix  FM  on  the  basis  of  the
appellant's marriage to a person with refugee status on 28  September  2015.
The judge heard from the appellant  and  his  wife,  as  well  as  from  the
appellant's friend Rajeevan Balibaskaran, who had  been  granted  asylum  in
the UK and who claimed to have worked with the appellant as  a  courier  for
the LTTE in Sri Lanka and claimed, at the hearing only, to  have  given  the
appellant's name to the authorities when he was detained and  tortured.  The
judge had a psychiatric report before her from Dr Lawrence referring to  the
appellant's depression and PTSD, as well as other medical evidence  relating
to the appellant and his wife and other documentary evidence. The judge  did
not accept that the appellant's brother Sureshkaran had  been  detained  and
tortured in Sri Lanka, she accepted that he had been a  member  of  the  BTF
since May 2014 and had attended some meetings  and  demonstrations  but  she
did not accept that the appellant had been involved with  the  LTTE  in  Sri
Lanka prior to 2009. The judge found that the appellant would be at no  risk
on return to Sri Lanka and that his removal would not breach his  Article  3
and 8 human rights on medical or other grounds.

Permission was sought on behalf of the appellant  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal, on several grounds: that the judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
appellant's wife's statement, recording that there was no statement when  in
fact there was one; that the judge had failed to  consider  the  appellant's
relationship under Appendix FM of the immigration rules  and  the  relevance
of the fact that his wife was a refugee; that the judge had erred in law  in
her approach to the medical evidence; and that the judge had failed to  give
adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  evidence  of  the  witness  Rajeevan
Balbaskaran.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on  13  May  2016  on
all grounds, but primarily on the ground relating to the appellant's  wife's
statement.

Mr Wells, in his submissions,  relied  and  expanded  upon  the  grounds  of
appeal He submitted that the judge's failure  to  consider  the  appellant's
wife's statement was a material error,  particularly  as  it  supported  his
claim as to insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Sri  Lanka
since his wife was a refugee and could not return to that country, and  also
since it referred to her mental health and her reliance upon the  appellant.
Mr Wells submitted that the judge made a Mibanga v Secretary  of  State  for
the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367 error, by disregarding  the  medical
report from Dr  Lawrence  on  the  basis  that  he  had  already  found  the
appellant not credible. Finally there was an error in the  judge's  approach
to the evidence of the witness Rajeevan Balbaskaran.


Mr Wilding accepted that the judge had been wrong to say that there  was  no
statement from  the  appellant's  wife,  but  he  submitted  that  that  was
immaterial as she had heard oral evidence from her and her  statement  added
nothing to that evidence. The judge had not committed a Mibanga  type  error
but had considered the evidence in the round.  The  judge  was  entitled  to
place no weight on the witness' evidence.

Consideration and findings.

It is accepted  that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  state  at  [49]  that  the
appellant's wife had not prepared a statement, when it is clear  that  there
was a  written  statement  at  pages  8  to  11  of  the  appellant's  third
supplementary appeal bundle, which formed part of the evidence  before  her,
and that the witness  adopted  that  statement  as  part  of  her  evidence.
However I find myself  entirely  in  agreement  with  Mr  Wilding  that  any
failing on the part of the judge in that respect is immaterial,  given  that
the judge heard directly from the appellant's wife and had  the  benefit  of
oral evidence which she was able to consider. Mr Wells  submitted  that  the
oral evidence was not sufficient for the judge to make the adverse  findings
that she did without having regard to the witness statement, given the  lack
of cross-examination, which he later clarified as a lack of in-depth  cross-
examination. However, it is clear from the  judge's  record  of  proceedings
that there  was  a  lengthy  cross-examination.  That  evidence  is  briefly
summarised by the  judge  at  [49].  The  judge  gave  various  reasons  for
concluding that the appellant's marriage was not a  genuine  and  subsisting
one, including  a  lack  of  documentary  evidence  of  a  joint  life,  the
significant matter of the absence of any reference to  the  relationship  in
the appeal  grounds  and  in  particular  in  Dr  Lawrence's  report  (which
confirmed, to the contrary, the absence of any relationship), and the  vague
nature of the appellant's wife's evidence and  her  inability  to  give  any
details of joint activities. I agree with Mr Wilding  that  the  appellant's
wife's statement, which is little  more  than  an  account  of  her  claimed
feelings for the appellant, adds nothing  of  material  value  to  the  oral
evidence and does nothing  to  undermine  the  adverse  inferences  properly
drawn from the oral evidence.

Accordingly I find no merit in the first ground of appeal. Any  omission  by
the judge in regard to the appellant's wife's written statement was  clearly
immaterial and she was  fully  entitled  to  make  the  adverse  credibility
findings that she did from the oral evidence.  That  also  disposes  of  the
second and third grounds of appeal, since  the  question  of  insurmountable
obstacles to family life continuing in Sri Lanka and the  relevance  of  the
appellant's wife's refugee status was immaterial if  there  was  no  genuine
and subsisting marriage in the first place.


With regard to the fourth ground, I am again in agreement with  Mr  Wilding,
that the judge's findings on the medical report and the evidence as a  whole
was entirely consistent with the principles in Mibanga. At [27] to [35]  the
judge considered  the  documentary  evidence  at  length,  and  at  [30]  he
considered Dr Lawrence's  report.  He  gave  careful  consideration  to  the
report,  noting  the  doctor's  conclusion  that  the  appellant   was   not
simulating his symptoms but also commenting that the doctor was  unaware  of
inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence provided to  him  in  regard  to
his relationship and that the doctor's opinion was based on the  appellant's
own account of events. At [36] to [39]  and  [41]  the  judge  made  adverse
credibility findings on matter which could not have  been  assisted  by  the
doctor's conclusions on the appellant's mental health. It is clear that  the
judge considered all the evidence in the  round,  and  not  on  a  piecemeal
basis as the grounds suggest, and provided full and proper reasons  at  [44]
for according the limited weight that he did to the  psychiatric  report.  I
therefore find no merit in the fourth ground of appeal.


Likewise there is no merit at  all  in  the  fifth  ground.  The  judge  was
perfectly  entitled  to  reject  the  evidence  of  the   witness   Rajeevan
Balibaskaran for the reasons that she did at [41], namely on the basis  that
he  had  changed  his  evidence  significantly  at  the  hearing  from  that
initially given in his written statement. Contrary to Mr  Wells'  submission
before me, the judge gave consideration to the witness' explanation for  the
change  in  his  evidence  and  provided  a  reason   for   rejecting   that
explanation.

For all of these reasons I find that the appellant's grounds  of  appeal  do
not disclose any errors of law in the judge's decision. The judge  undertook
a full and careful assessment of all the evidence and gave clear and  cogent
reasons for making the adverse findings that  she  did.  The  weight  to  be
attached to the evidence was a matter for the judge and  she  was  perfectly
entitled to reach the conclusions that she did.

DECISION

 The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.











                               Signed                                  Date


                                                              16th June 2016
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
