
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-     -V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/10025/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 November 2016                  |On 30 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     RKN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Bahja, counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Dineen, promulgated on 26 August 2016. Permission to appeal was granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill on 21 October 2016.



Anonymity

 2. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal and this  is
    maintained.

Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom during  January  2010,  having
    been granted leave to enter as a Tier 4 migrant. That leave was due  to
    expire on 30 September 2012 but was curtailed to take effect on 8 March
    2012. On 6 June 2012, the appellant applied for further leave to remain
    under Tier 1 (Entrepreneur). That application was refused with no right
    of appeal. The appellant sought judicial review of  that  decision  but
    was unsuccessful in that his application was refused on 16 April  2013.
    The appellant remained in the United Kingdom and his continued presence
    came to light when he reported a matter to the  police  on  21  October
    2014. Removal directions were set on 22 October 2014 but were  deferred
    when the appellant applied for asylum on 28 October 2014.

 4. The appellant's asylum claim was based on his sexuality; in that he  is
    a gay man. The appellant's family learned of his sexuality at an  early
    stage, after his grandmother caught him having sex with a male  cousin.
    The difficulties caused by this revelation caused the appellant  stress
    and to develop anorexia. In 2004 the appellant was sexually  abused  by
    an uncle, T. The appellant had a relationship with a  male  friend,  A,
    but this ended after around 2 years, in 2005, when his friend's  mother
    caught them having sex  in  his  parent's  bed.  A's  mother  beat  the
    appellant, as did his own father. The appellant was sexually  assaulted
    by his uncle for a second time in 2005. Thereafter the appellant had  a
    sexual relationship with a neighbour, S, between 2007 and 2008. He also
    resumed his relationship with A. During 2008, A's  mother  caught  them
    having  sex  in  the  back  of  a  lorry  and  told  everyone  in   the
    neighbourhood that the  appellant  was  gay  and  misleading  her  son.
    Following this, the appellant was singled  out  for  verbal  abuse  and
    people in his village would throw stones  at  him.  The  appellant  was
    sexually assaulted while being given a lift by a lawyer in 2008 and was
    beaten and gang raped by a group of men at  the  end  of  2008.  During
    2009, the appellant was caught once more having sex with his cousin and
    beaten.  The  appellant  has  had  five  same-sex  relationships  since
    arriving in the United Kingdom.

 5. The Secretary of State's decision on  the  asylum  claim  is  dated  18
    November  2014.  The  respondent  accepted  the  appellant's  identity,
    nationality  and  sexuality.  Nonetheless,  it  was  thought  that  the
    appellant's credibility had been damaged by  his  delay  in  making  an
    asylum claim. It was accepted that the LGBT  community  faced  societal
    discrimination in Sri Lanka but not that this amounted to  persecution.
    It was considered that there was no need  for  the  appellant  to  live
    discreetly in Sri Lanka.

 6. After  considering  relevant  background  information,  the  respondent
    concluded that the appellant could return to his home area and live  as
    he had done in the past. There were considered to be avenues of redress
    available to the appellant, which  he  could  attempt  to  use  on  his
    return. Alternatively, it was considered reasonable to  expect  him  to
    relocate to avoid the those he feared.

 7. The appellant succeeded before the First-tier Tribunal, on  asylum  and
    Article 3 grounds, following a hearing on 22 May  2015.  That  decision
    was set aside by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Shaerf on 11  August  2015
    and the matter remitted to the First-tier to be heard afresh.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appeal proceeded by way of submissions  only.  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Dineen concluded that the appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  of
    further ill-treatment on return to Sri Lanka and that  he  could  avoid
    his relatives and others in his home area by relocating to  a  town  or
    city other than Colombo.

The grounds of appeal

 9. The grounds of appeal argued that  the  judge  erred  in  his  findings
    relating to internal relocation.

10. Permission to appeal was granted on the following basis:

      1. It is arguable that the judge may have applied LH and IP (gay  men:
         risk) Sri Lanka CG [2015] UKUT 00073 (IAC)  too  restrictively.  LH
         and IP did not preclude the possibility that  individual  claimants
         may succeed in showing that they are at real  risk  of  persecutory
         ill-treatment. It is arguable that the judge  may  have  failed  to
         take account of the appellant's previous experiences in having been
         raped by more than one individual on account of  his  homosexuality
         in deciding the future risk, especially given his evidence that  he
         is naturally an out-spoken person and would not choose to hide  his
         homosexuality except for fear of persecution.

      2. In addition, it is arguable  that  the  judge  may  have  erred  by
         failing to consider the appellant's past  experiences  in  deciding
         whether it would be unreasonable to expect him to relocate  in  Sri
         Lanka.

11. The respondent's Rule  24  response,  received  on  16  November  2016,
    indicated that the appeal was opposed. It was  argued  that  the  judge
    considered all the factors of the case including his outspokenness  and
    his past ill-treatment. Mention was made of the timing  of  the  asylum
    claim.

The hearing

12. For the appellant, Mr Bahja argued that the only matter in dispute  was
    that of internal relocation, regarding which the judge  did  not  adopt
    the correct approach. He emphasised that the appellant  was  previously
    living in Colombo, that he had been ill-treated there and  his  partner
    had been killed. Mr Bajha contended that the appellant wished  to  live
    as a proud gay man but that this would put him on  a  collision  course
    with police and those who had harmed him in  the  past.   It  could  be
    inferred that he would come to the attention  of  the  authorities  and
    suffer persecution based on what occurred in the past.

13. Mr Clarke's submissions were based on LH and IP.  He  argued  that  the
    grounds had taken sections of this decision out of context. At  108-110
    of that decision there was a differentiation between the  treatment  of
    sex workers and gay men in general.

14. Mr Clarke could not see that the appellant would fall into one  of  the
    risk groups identified in the country guidance, that is he would go  to
    a pick-up venue or  be  a  sex  worker.  His  case  was  based  on  him
    previously being in relationships and being raped, albeit  not  by  the
    police.  The reach of the appellant's aggressors  was  not  established
    and he was no longer at specific  risk  of  harm.  The  fact  that  the
    appellant is a Buddhist was found in LH and IP not to put him at  risk.
    The judge's findings were consistent with  the  country  guidance.  The
    same guidance did not say that being an openly gay man in  a  city  was
    enough to engage the 1951 Convention.

15. In reply, Mr Bahja argued that the Country Guidance did not say that no
    gay man is a refugee. The appellant had established  past  persecution;
    being openly gay would put him on a collision course  with  authorities
    and he was without family support or a network.

16. At the end of the hearing, I reserved  my  decision  as  to  whether  a
    material error of law had been made.

Decision on error of law

17. By the time of the hearing before Judge Dineen, there was no  challenge
    by the respondent to the credibility  of  the  appellant's  account  of
    having suffered many instances of serious ill-treatment by a  range  of
    individuals  over  a  five-year  period  in  Sri  Lanka  owing  to  his
    sexuality. The case advanced before Judge Dineen focused on whether the
    appellant remained at risk of  persecution  and  whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for him to relocate from his home area of Colombo.

18. In LH and IP, headnote (5) stated;

         "Where  a  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  exists  in  an
         appellant's home area, there may be an internal relocation  option,
         particularly for individuals returning via Colombo from the  United
         Kingdom."

19. The respondent's Operation Guidance Note on Sri  Lanka  of  July  2013,
    version 14, was before the panel in LH and IP. The most relevant  parts
    are as follows;

         3.14.8 Conclusion: Caseworkers must refer to the Asylum Instruction
         on sexual orientation and gender  identity  in  the  asylum  claim.
         Homosexuality is illegal in Sri Lanka but there is no  evidence  of
         systematic state  persecution.  Opportunistic  targeting,  societal
         hostility and discrimination against LGBT persons does exist and in
         individual cases may reach the Article 3 threshold.

         3.14.9 Given the level of social hostility, internal relocation  in
         such cases is unlikely to be  a  viable  alternative,  however  the
         personal  circumstances  of  the  individual  applicant  should  be
         carefully considered when assessing  whether  it  would  be  unduly
         harsh to expect them to do so.

20. Considering the appellant's account of his serious ill-treatment in Sri
    Lanka for a 1951 Convention reason was no longer in dispute, it is fair
    to say that he had established that he is reasonably likely  to  remain
    at risk from a range of people known to him in his  home  area.  As  is
    apparent from the respondent's own  guidance,  internal  relocation  is
    "unlikely" to be a viable alternative where the Article 3 threshold has
    been reached.

21. I have also taken into consideration the guidance in Januzi [2006] UKHL
    5, that  "decision  makers  must  give  careful  consideration  to  the
    relevance and reasonableness of internal relocation on  a  case-by-case
    basis taking full  account  of  the  individual  circumstances  of  the
    particular person."

22. The judge's consideration of the internal flight alternative  available
    to the appellant fell short of the careful consideration recommended in
    Januzi. While this appeal proceeded on submissions alone, I  note  that
    there was a 7-month delay between the hearing of  the  appeal  and  the
    decision and reasons being promulgated. Furthermore, the  reasons  were
    particularly brief. In deciding whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for
    the appellant to relocate, there was no reference to the  many  violent
    acts carried out against the appellant  in  his  home  area;  there  is
    little recognition of the fact that his home area is Colombo  to  which
    removal is likely to take place; little attempt to identify a safe area
    of Sri Lanka; no consideration of the fact that the appellant had  been
    rejected (and indeed persecuted) by his  family  and  that  he  had  no
    network of support anywhere in Sri Lanka. The judge did not engage with
    the content of the OGN, albeit he set out the relevant sections earlier
    in his decision.

23. The decision and reasons did not adequately engage with the appellant's
    evidence that he was determined to live openly as a  gay  man  and  the
    submission that this would put him  on  a  collision  course  with  the
    authorities. In view of the evidence in LH and IP of rapes of  gay  men
    by police; the danger identified to those using pick-up  areas  in  Sri
    Lanka and attacks on the appellant's partners, one of which resulted in
    death, I consider the judge's reasons for finding there to be  no  risk
    of future ill-treatment to be insufficient.

24. The submissions I heard on the appellant's behalf, were not of  a  high
    enough standard for me to confidently  proceed  to  fairly  remake  the
    decision. In view of the fact that the credibility of  the  appellant's
    account is intact, this matter is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    with favourable findings preserved. The matters which remain  in  issue
    are firstly, whether the appellant is at risk  of  persecution  in  Sri
    Lanka and secondly,  that  of  whether  it  is  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant to relocate from his home area in Colombo.




Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard  at  Hatton
Cross by any judge except First-tier Tribunal Judge Eban, Dineen and Lever.



Directions

    Those representing the appellant  are  to  serve  a  detailed  skeleton
    argument on the First-tier Tribunal and the Secretary  of  State  which
    addresses any current risk to the appellant  and  the  internal  flight
    alternative issue. The said document is to be served no  later  than  5
    working days prior to the rehearing of this appeal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

