
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/10676/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Crown Court           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7 September 2016                       |On 29 November 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     wtm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Browne, instructed by Government Legal Department


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  appellant,  WTM,  is  a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe.   By  a  decision
    promulgated 15 January 2016, Upper Tribunal Judge  Plimmer  found  that
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Munro) had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal failed to be set aside.

 2. A transfer order was made on 17 May 2016 to enable the resumed  hearing
    to take place before an Upper Tribunal Judge other than Judge  Plimmer.
    That hearing took place at Manchester Crown Court on 7 September  2016.
    The appellant was not produced from prison.  It was  not  necessary  to
    hear oral evidence from those witnesses of the appellant  who  attended
    court.   The  hearing  proceeded  by  way   of   submissions   by   the
    representative.

 3. The position as regards findings of  fact  reached  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is  problematic.   Judge  Plimmer  refers  to  "the  preserved
    findings of fact" at the directions at the end of  her  decision  [ii].
    At [16] of the same decision, she refers to  "three  factual  findings"
    which the Secretary of State had submitted were not open to the  judge.
    Judge Plimmer found in favour of preserving each of those  findings  as
    she indicates at [17] - [19].  It was not entirely  clear  which  other
    findings of fact by the First-tier Tribunal Judge Plimmer  intended  to
    preserve.  I have proceeded in this resumed hearing on the  basis  that
    the only findings of fact made by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  with
    which the Secretary of State  does  not  agree  are  indeed  the  three
    findings addressed  by  Judge  Plimmer  at  [17]  -  [19].   I  make  a
    distinction here between findings of fact and assessments based on  the
    evidence (for example, as regards the availability of internal flight).
     Mr Howard, for the appellant, did not  seek  to  persuade  me  at  the
    resumed hearing that the Upper Tribunal was  precluded  from  assessing
    the availability of internal flight within  Zimbabwe  by  the  comments
    made by Judge Munroe at [59].  Judge Munroe had written,

         Country  Guidance  records   that   'relocation   of   Matabeleland
         (including Bulawayo) may be negated by  discrimination,  where  the
         returnee is Shona'.  The appellant is Shona; he has  not  lived  in
         Zimbabwe since November 2000 and I find that internal relocation is
         contra-indicated.

 4. I shall deal first with the Section 72  certificate.   The  appellant's
    criminal offending history is set out by Judge Munroe in  her  decision
    at [9].  Most of the offences concern road traffic  matters,  first  in
    January 2004 when the  appellant  was  convicted  of  driving  a  motor
    vehicle with excess alcohol.  Most recently  on  8  October  2012,  the
    appellant was convicted at Manchester Crown Court of causing  death  by
    dangerous driving and was sentenced later that  year  to  eight  years'
    imprisonment.  He was notified by the Home Office of the  Secretary  of
    State's intention to cease his refugee status on 3  June  2014.   Prima
    facie, the appellant was presumed to be a danger to  the  community  of
    the United Kingdom because  he  has  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment  in  excess  of  two  years  (72(2)(b)).   However,   that
    presumption is  rebuttable  (Section  72(6)).   The  burden  of  proof,
    therefore, rests on the appellant.  I have considered all the  evidence
    which he has produced in written form and that  of  his  witnesses.   I
    agree with Mr Brown and it is hardly surprising that the appellant  now
    asserts that he is a reformed man who will not reoffend.  The tests for
    drugs and alcohol which has  undergone  in  prison  are,  as  Mr  Brown
    submits, mandatory and it is hardly surprising that the  appellant  has
    not exhibited his propensity to commit very serious  criminal  offences
    whilst driving under  intoxication  at  a  time  when  he  has  been  a
    prisoner.  The reports (OASys) regarding the appellant indicate that he
    is at risk of serious harm constituting a high level  of  risk  to  the
    public and a medium risk of further conviction.   The  appellant  asked
    the Tribunal to believe that he would be able to find a job which would
    not require him to drive and that, even if he did drive, he  would  not
    again  drink  and  drive.   Notwithstanding   these   assurances,   the
    appellant's drink driving record falls  firmly  into  the  category  of
    utterly appalling.  The appellant seem to have been  completely  unable
    to refrain from drinking and driving and, on  the  last  occasion,  his
    actions (driving on a motorway whilst intoxicated) led  to  the  tragic
    death of another person.  Given the extent, consequences and  repeating
    nature of the appellant's offending, I firmly find that  nothing  which
    the appellant has stated  in  his  evidence  or  the  evidence  of  the
    witnesses (in  the  words  of  Mr  Brown)  "comes  anywhere  close"  to
    rebutting the presumption that he remains a danger to the community  in
    the United Kingdom.

 5. This brings me to the question of Article 3  ECHR.   In  this  context,
    Judge Munroe's finding at [59] is particularly pertinent:

         The appellant would not be returning to Zimbabwe as a failed asylum
         seeker but as an individual who was recognised by the UK government
         to be in need of international protection.  I very much doubt  that
         he will be able to persuade the authorities that he has never  been
         deserving of protection or that they would accept the  decision  of
         the UK government that he no longer needed  protection  and  ensure
         his safety.  He is also identified in the media in Zimbabwe  as  an
         asylum seeker who caused the death of a young woman by driving with
         excess alcohol.   Having  been  persecuted  in  the  past  for  his
         perceived support for the  MDC,  and  having  a  number  of  family
         members who had been granted refugee status, I find that his return
         is unlikely to go unnoticed by the  media,  ZANU-PF  and  his  aunt
         Blantina who I find continues to work in  the  President's  office.
         It is credible that she will not  have  forgotten  the  appellant's
         association with her sister Virginia who was active  on  behalf  of
         the MDC and that she  would  carry  out  her  threats  against  the
         appellant or cause them to be carried out.   Association  with  the
         ruling party would ensure that she could do so with impunity ...."

 6. As I have recorded above, insofar as that paragraph  contains  findings
    of fact those are preserved by order of Judge Plimmer.  But, as it  was
    agreed by the parties at the resumed hearing, Judge Muroe's  assessment
    of the internal  flight  alternative  within  Zimbabwe  remains  to  be
    "critically assessed" by the Upper Tribunal.

 7. The respondent's decision to refuse the  appellant's  protection  claim
    and to cease his refugee status (granted to him in 2011) was  contained
    in a letter dated 17 November 2014.  At the time of the  grant  of  the
    refugee status of the appellant, as the  Secretary  of  State's  letter
    records, it was considered that the appellant would face a loyalty test
    or be obliged to conceal facts about his background [22].  That  is  no
    longer the case as evidenced by the current country guidance of CM (EM}
    (country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 0059 (IAC).   As
    the refusal letter records [42], the appellant was born in Harare where
    his parents also lived.  It was in Harare where his  aunt  Betina  also
    appears to live, working (as Judge Munroe found) in the office  of  the
    president  of  Zimbabwe.   The  question,  therefore,  is  whether  the
    appellant may reasonably  relocate  to  an  area  of  Zimbabwe  outside
    Harare.  Clearly, the observations in  the  refusal  letter  have  been
    supplanted by the findings of Judge Munroe as to the continuing Article
    3 risk which the appellant faces should his aunt  Betina  become  aware
    that the appellant has returned to Zimbabwe.  The Secretary of  State's
    letter at [42] comments (somewhat cryptically):

         The activities which you describe took place in Harare.  It  is  to
         Harare which you are free to return: you will not  be  required  to
         locate to a 'safer' area.  At the same time it appears  clear  from
         current information  there  would  be  areas  to  which  you  could
         relocate if you wish to do so.

    The letter then proceeds to discuss the assessment by the UNHCR of  the
    human rights situation in Zimbabwe.  No other areas outside Mugabe  are
    indicated in the letter as suitable for the appellant's relocation.   I
    have turned, therefore, to the country  guidance  offered  by  CM,  the
    headnote of which reads as follows:

         (1) There is no general duty of  disclosure  on  the  Secretary  of
         State in asylum appeals generally  or  Country  Guidance  cases  in
         particular. The extent of the Secretary of  State's  obligation  is
         set out in R v SSHD ex p Kerrouche No 1 [1997]  Imm  AR  610,  as
         explained in R (ota Cindo) v IAT [2002] EWHC 246 (Admin); namely,
         that she must not knowingly mislead a court or tribunal by omission
         of material that was known or ought to have been known to her.

         (2) The Country Guidance given by the Tribunal  in EM  and  Others
         (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC) on the position  in
         Zimbabwe as at the end of January 2011 was not  vitiated  in  any
         respect by the use made of anonymous evidence from certain  sources
         in the Secretary of State's Fact Finding Mission  report  of  2010.
         The Tribunal was entitled to find that there  had  been  a  durable
         change since RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT  00083.  The
         Country Guidance in EM does not require to be amended, as regards
         the position at that time, in the light of-

         (a) the disclosure  by  the  Secretary  of  State  of  any  of  the
         materials subsequently disclosed in response to the orders  of  the
         Court of Appeal and related  directions  of  the  Tribunal  in  the
         current proceedings; or

         (b) any fresh material adduced by the parties in those  proceedings
         that might have a bearing on the position at that time.

         (3) The only change to the EM Country Guidance that it is necessary
         to  make  as  regards  the  position as  at  the  end  of January
         2011 arises from the judgments in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC  38.
         The EM Country Guidance is, accordingly, re-stated as follows (with
         the change underlined in paragraph (5) below):

         (1)  As a general matter, there is significantly  less  politically
         motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe,  compared  with  the   situation
         considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the evidence does not
         show that, as a general matter,  the  return  of  a  failed  asylum
         seeker from the United Kingdom, having no significant MDC  profile,
         would result in that  person  facing  a  real  risk  of  having  to
         demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.

         (2) The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in the case of
         a person without ZANU-PF connections,  returning  from  the  United
         Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural  area  of  Zimbabwe,
         other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South. Such a  person
         may well find it difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to
         serious ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF  authority  figures  and  those
         they control.  The adverse attention may well involve a requirement
         to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF, with  the  prospect  of  serious
         harm in the event of failure.  Persons who  have  shown  themselves
         not  to  be  favourably  disposed  to  ZANU-PF  are   entitled   to
         international protection, whether or not they could  and  would  do
         whatever  might  be  necessary  to  demonstrate  such  loyalty  (RT
         (Zimbabwe)).

         (3) The situation is not uniform across the  relevant  rural  areas
         and there may be reasons why a particular individual,  although  at
         first sight appearing to fall within the category described in  the
         preceding paragraph, in reality does not do so.  For  example,  the
         evidence might disclose that, in the home  village,  ZANU-PF  power
         structures or other means of coercion are weak or absent.

         (4)  In general, a  returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  rural
         Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely to face
         significant  difficulty  from  ZANU-PF  elements,   including   the
         security forces, even if the returnee is a MDC member or supporter.
         A person may, however, be able to show that his or her  village  or
         area is one that, unusually, is under the sway of a ZANU-PF  chief,
         or the like.

         (5) A returnee to  Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
         difficulties, if going to a  low-density  or  medium-density  area.
         Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas  is  more
         challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
         not face significant problems there (including a  "loyalty  test"),
         unless he or she has a significant MDC profile, which  might  cause
         him or her to feature on a list of those targeted  for  harassment,
         or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract
         the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely to
         engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF.

         (6)  A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not suffer the  adverse
         attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces, even if he  or
         she has a significant MDC profile.

         (7)  The issue of what is a  person's  home  for  the  purposes  of
         internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of fact and is not
         necessarily to be determined by reference to  the  place  a  person
         from Zimbabwe regards as his or her rural homeland.  As  a  general
         matter, it is unlikely that a person with a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in a major urban centre such  as  Harare  will  have  a
         viable internal relocation alternative  to  a  rural  area  in  the
         Eastern provinces. Relocation to Matabeleland (including  Bulawayo)
         may be negated by discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.

         (8) Internal relocation from a rural area to Harare or (subject  to
         what we have just said) Bulawayo is, in  general,  more  realistic;
         but  the  socio-economic  circumstances  in   which   persons   are
         reasonably likely to find themselves will need to be considered, in
         order to determine whether it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         to expect them to relocate.

         (9) The economy of Zimbabwe has markedly improved since the  period
         considered in RN. The replacement of the Zimbabwean currency by the
         US  dollar  and  the  South  African  rand  has  ended  the  recent
         hyperinflation. The availability of food and other goods  in  shops
         has likewise improved, as has  the  availability  of  utilities  in
         Harare. Although these improvements are not being felt by everyone,
         with 15% of the population still requiring food aid, there has  not
         been any deterioration in the  humanitarian  situation  since  late
         2008. Zimbabwe has a large informal economy,  ranging  from  street
         traders  to  home-based  enterprises,  which  (depending   on   the
         circumstances) returnees may be expected to enter.

         (10) As was the position in RN, those who are or have been teachers
         require to have their cases determined on the basis that this  fact
         places them  in  an  enhanced  or  heightened  risk  category,  the
         significance of which will need to be  assessed  on  an  individual
         basis.

         (11)  In certain cases, persons found to be  seriously  lacking  in
         credibility may properly be found as a result  to  have  failed  to
         show a reasonable likelihood (a) that they would not, in  fact,  be
         regarded, on return, as aligned with ZANU-PF and/or (b)  that  they
         would be returning to a socio-economic  milieu  in  which  problems
         with ZANU-PF  will  arise.  This  important  point  was  identified
         in RN ... and remains valid.

         (4) In the course of deciding CM's appeal, the present Tribunal has
         made an assessment of certain general matters regarding Zimbabwe as
         at October 2012. As a result, the following country information may
         be  of  assistance  to   decision-makers   and   judges.   It   is,
         however, not Country  Guidance  within  the  scope  of  Practice
         Direction 12 and is based on evidence which neither  party  claimed
         to be comprehensive:

         (a) The picture presented by the fresh evidence as to  the  general
         position of  politically  motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe  as  at
         October 2012 does not differ  in  any  material  respect  from  the
         Country Guidance in EM.

         (b) Elections are due to be held in 2013; but it is unclear when.

         (c) In the light  of  the  evidence  regarding  the  activities  of
         Chipangano, judicial-fact finders may need to pay particular regard
         to whether a person, who is reasonably likely to go to Mbare  or  a
         neighbouring high density area of Harare, will come to the  adverse
         attention of that group; in particular, if he or she is  reasonably
         likely to have to find employment of a kind that  Chipangano  seeks
         to  control  or  otherwise  exploit  for  economic,   rather   than
         political, reasons.

         (d) The fresh evidence regarding  the  position  at  the  point  of
         return does not indicate any increase in  risk  since  the  Country
         Guidance was  given  in HS  (returning  asylum  seekers)  Zimbabwe
         CG [2007] UKAIT 00094. On the contrary, the available evidence  as
         to the treatment of those who have been returned to Harare  Airport
         since 2007 and the absence of any reliable evidence of  risk  there
         means that there is no justification for extending the scope of who
         might be regarded by the CIO as an MDC activist.

 8. I note that the Tribunal  found  that  "as  a  general  matter,  it  is
    unlikely that a person with a well-founded fear  of  persecution  in  a
    major  urban  centre  such  as  Harare  will  have  a  viable  internal
    relocation alternative to a rural area in the  Eastern  provinces."  As
    Judge Munroe recorded, the appellant is Shona and may face problems  of
    discrimination should he relocate to Matabeleland (including Bulawayo).
     The crucial issue, therefore, in this  appellant's  protection  appeal
    rests on whether there are any areas of Zimbabwe to which it would  not
    be unduly harsh to expect him to relocate  outside  his  home  area  of
    Harare.

 9. I find that it is important to consider the country  guidance  provided
    by CM as a whole as it  is  also  to  consider  the  particular  socio-
    economic and other circumstances of this appellant.   To  that  end,  I
    have considered the guidance  provided  in  [7]  and  [8]  of  CM  very
    carefully.  I have acknowledged that the fact  that  the  appellant  is
    Shona may negate the  viable  possibility  of  internal  relocation  to
    Matabeleland (including Bulawayo) [my emphasis].  But the question  is,
    having regard to the appellant's  circumstances  whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect the appellant, notwithstanding his  Shona  race,
    to live in Bulawayo.  CM makes it clear that  a  returnee  to  Bulawayo
    will not in general suffer the adverse  attention  of  ZANU-PF  or  the
    security forces.  Moreover, the appellant has lived  for  a  number  of
    years  in  the  United  Kingdom  where,  notwithstanding  his  criminal
    offending and imprisonment, it is reasonable to conclude  that  he  has
    had access to funds which he may have acquired  himself  or  which  may
    have been provided to him by friends and relatives  to  enable  him  to
    sustain his existence here.  I am aware  that  the  appearance  of  the
    appellant in, for example, Bulawayo where he would be  a  stranger  may
    cause some problems but I see no reason why those who are his family or
    who have supported him (including in this appeal) could not provide him
    with sufficient funds to ease his integration into a new  community  in
    Zimbabwe.  This is not an appellant who  will  return  to  an  area  of
    Zimbabwe where he will suffer severe discrimination or who, because  of
    his  own  poor  financial  circumstances,  may   eventually   encounter
    destitution.  On the contrary, I find that there is no reason  why  his
    financial circumstances would not be generally good both at  the  point
    of his return to Zimbabwe and (if funds are provided to  him  there  by
    family in the United Kingdom) thereafter.  Carrying out the  assessment
    which headnote [8] of CM requires the Tribunal to  carry  out,  I  find
    that any problems which the appellant might encounter  in  Bulawayo  by
    reason of his Shona ethnicity are likely to be outweighed by reason  of
    the fact  that  his  own  financial  circumstances  are  likely  to  be
    relatively good.  I find, therefore, that whilst the appellant may face
    a real risk of Article 3 ill-treatment in Harare from the activities of
    his aunt it would not be unduly harsh to  expect  him  to  relocate  to
    Bulawayo.

10. The question still remains, however, as to whether the aunt will become
    aware of the appellant's presence in Bulawayo.  There  is  no  evidence
    before me to show that,  notwithstanding  the  aunt's  influence  as  a
    member of the president's office, that influence  will  enable  her  to
    find out about  the  appellant's  return  to  Zimbabwe.   There  is  no
    evidence, for example, that the aunt would routinely be  aware  of  the
    identities of failed asylum seekers from the United  Kingdom  returning
    to Zimbabwe or that officers of  the  Zimbabwean  authorities  who  may
    interview the appellant upon his return  to  Harare  would  necessarily
    connect him with his aunt or, even if they did connect him, would  feel
    under any duty to notify the aunt.

11. I now turn to paragraphs 399 and 399A of HC 395 (as amended) of Article
    8 ECHR.  Paragraph 398 provides, "the public  interest  in  deportation
    will  only  be  outweighed  by  other  factors  where  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
    399 and 399A" where an appellant has been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment exceeding four years; this appellant has been sentenced to
    eight years' imprisonment.  I note also from Judge  Plimmer's  decision
    [21] how the First-tier Tribunal erred in the  application  of  Section
    117 of the 2002 Act (as amended).

12. I should first record (given that Judge Plimmer has directed  that  the
    findings of fact shall stand), a number of the factual findings made by
    Judge Munroe are simply incorrect.  Those errors are pertinent  to  the
    analysis under HC 395  and  Article  8.   Contrary  to  Judge  Munroe's
    findings, the appellant's children are not British citizens nor has the
    appellant's wife been granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain;  she  has
    applied for indefinite  leave  but  that  application  is  outstanding.
    Further, Judge Munroe made a number of observations at  [75]  and  [76]
    regarding the problems which the appellant's wife has coping  with  the
    appellant's absences from home and coping with the two children, one of
    whom  "has  some  behavioural  difficulties."   I  do  not  find  those
    observations amount to findings of fact as such and I observe also that
    the separation of this appellant from his family at the present time is
    a direct consequence of his own criminal behaviour.  Furthermore, given
    that the children appear to be Zimbabwean rather than British and  that
    the appellant's wife has no settled immigration status in this  country
    at the present time the primary question, certainly as regards  Article
    8, is whether her family life may be pursued abroad, in  particular  in
    Zimbabwe.  Having considered all the evidence  carefully,  I  concluded
    that family life may be pursued in Zimbabwe.  Indeed, the circumstances
    of the appellant and his family are not, on the face of  the  evidence,
    exceptional nor  do  they  fall  outside  the  parameters  of  HC  395,
    paragraphs 399 and 399A. The appellant must show that his circumstances
    (for example, that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  child  of  the
    appellant to live in Zimbabwe) must be exceeded ("over and  above")  by
    very compelling circumstances if the appellant (who has been  sentenced
    to a period of  imprisonment  exceeding  four  years)  is  to  succeed.
    Given that the appellant's family will be  returning  together  to  the
    country of their nationality and that it is reasonable for them  to  do
    so, I cannot find that the very severe test imposed by the  Immigration
    Rules can be met.  The same must, in my opinion and by reference to the
    same factual matrix, be the case with the  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.  In  reaching  that  decision,  I  have  considered  the  best
    interests of the children who are not British citizens and who will  be
    resuming family life  with  their  parents  in  the  country  of  their
    nationality (see EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874).

13. For the reasons I have given, I  remake  the  decision  dismissing  the
    appellants' appeal.



Notice of Decision

(1)  This appellant is excluded from the protection provided by the  Refugee
    Convention because he constitutes a danger  to  the  community  of  the
    United Kingdom (Section 72) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002  (as  amended).   (See  also  Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention).

(2)  This appeal is  dismissed  on  human  rights  grounds  (Article  3  and
    Article 8 ECHR).

(3)  The appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules is dismissed.

(4)  This appellant is not entitled to a grant of  humanitarian  protection.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 12 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 12 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

