

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10936/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 27 April 2015                     |On 1 May 2015                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     BGA
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondents:   Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 10 February  2015
    of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  which  refused  the  appellant's
    asylum and human rights claims.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  the
    protection claim.

 3. The appellant claimed to be of Eritrean ethnicity and nationality, born
    in Eritrea to Eritrean parents. Her account is that she went to live in
    Ethiopia when very young. She became a Pentecostal Christian.  She  was
    expelled from Ethiopia to Eritrea in 2000.  She  was  discovered  at  a
    Pentecostal Christian meeting  there,  detained  for  10  days  and  on
    release left the country illegally, in 2001.

 4. Judge Parkes did not accept that the appellant was Eritrean. He did not
    accept her account to have  been  born  in  Eritrea  or  to  have  been
    expelled from Ethiopia to Eritrea. He gave his reasons for this at [12]
    to [14] and [19] to [22]. The  appellant  spoke  an  Ethiopian  not  an
    Eritrean language. A letter from a community organisation was not clear
    as to how the conclusion that she was Eritrean  was  reliably  reached.
    Her knowledge of the geography of the area in which she claimed to have
    lived in Eritrea and of Eritrea generally did not  support  her  claim.
    She failed to claim asylum in the other European countries she had been
    in before coming to the UK.

 5. Judge Parkes also found at [15] to [18]  that  the  appellant  had  not
    shown that she was a Pentecostal Christian  as  her  knowledge  of  the
    faith was insufficient and her claim not consistent  with  the  country
    evidence of difficulties for Pentecostal Christians in Eritrea.

 6. Nothing  in  the  written  or  oral  submissions  before  me  indicated
    specifically why those findings were inadequately reasoned as  asserted
    in ground 4. The conclusion at [23] that the appellant's  evidence  was
    "riddled with inconsistencies" was not in any way  the  only  reasoning
    provided; see above. The judge considered the letter from the community
    group in terms at [13] to [14]. The  evidence  of  the  appellant's  UK
    pastor (at page 61 of the  appellant's  bundle)  was  not  referred  to
    specifically in the determination but is  in  very  general  terms  and
    gives no detail to explain why the Pastor made the comment he did about
    the appellant's faith. It was not my view that against the  credibility
    findings as a whole that failure to refer to this  letter  specifically
    was something that  could  have  made  a  material  difference  to  the
    credibility finding on the appellant's Pentecostal faith even if it was
    weighed at its highest. It does not purport to say anything  about  her
    claimed Eritrean nationality.

 7. I therefore found  no  error  in  the  adequacy  of  reasoning  in  the
    credibility finding of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  was  not  argued
    before me that those findings were  perverse  and  nothing  about  them
    indicated to me that they were otherwise unsound.

 8. Where the appellant was not found to have made out a  claim  to  be  of
    Eritrean nationality  there  was  no  requirement  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to assess, in the alternative, whether there would be  a  risk
    on return if she had been found credible. Grounds 1  and  5  must  fail
    where that is so.

 9. Ground 2 argues  that  even  if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  credibility
    findings stand, the judge applied the  wrong  standard  of  proof  when
    finding that the appellant was  Ethiopian.  The  difficulty  with  that
    submission is that  the  judge  does  not  find  the  appellant  to  be
    Ethiopian. He records that as the  respondent's  view  at  [6].  Having
    found her not credible, he only comments at [23] that she had not  made
    out a claim to face risk on return to Ethiopia "on any basis". Ground 3
    argues that this  was  an  incorrect  assessment  where  the  appellant
    claimed to be  of  Eritrean  ethnicity  and  set  out  in  her  witness
    statement that she could not go to Ethiopia as she was  not  Ethiopian,
    would not be welcome, had no family there and  would  be  detained  and
    persecuted if returned there. That  ground  cannot  succeed  where  the
    appellant's evidence as to being from an Eritrean family or of Eritrean
    nationality was not accepted and there being  no  other  basis  of  any
    substance in the evidence to show taht she would face  mistreatment  on
    return to Ethiopia.

10. In any event, even if the First-tier Tribunal had  concluded  in  terms
    that the appellant is Ethiopian,  it  was  my  view  that  this  was  a
    sustainable finding even when the standard  of  proof  applied  is  the
    balance of probabilities.  The  appellant's  evidence  as  to  Eritrean
    nationality was rejected and those findings not open to challenge.  She
    has been found to speak Amharic, the language of Ethiopia and it is her
    own account that she spent most of her life and childhood in Ethiopia.

11. Ground 6 concerning significant obstacles to reintegration  falls  away
    where the appellant's own evidence is that she lived most of  her  life
    in Ethiopia and the finding  that  she  has  not  shown  that  she  was
    mistreated in Ethiopia by way of expulsion to Eritrea or in  any  other
    manner has been upheld.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no  error  and  shall
    stand.



Signed:[pic]  Date: 27 April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
