


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10155/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination  Sent          |
|On : 18 July 2014                             |On : 31 July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     AE
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Ajina of Arden Solicitors Advocates
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to  appeal  on
14 May 2014.

The appellant is a national of Libya born on 29 September 1991.  He  resided
in the United Kingdom from 1993 until 2000 as a dependant  on  his  father's
student visa. He returned to the United Kingdom in 2008 on his  own  student
visa and, other than short periods of  visits  to  Libya,  remained  in  the
United Kingdom as a student and Tier 4 student migrant since that time.  His
last entry to the UK was on 19 April 2011, which followed a period  of  stay
in Libya from 24 February 2011. His visa was due to  expire  on  31  October
2013 and he claimed asylum on 30 September 2013. His claim  was  refused  on
22 October 2013 and a decision was made to  refuse  to  vary  his  leave  to
remain and also to remove him from the United Kingdom.

The Appellants' claim

The appellant claims  to  fear  persecution  as  a  result  of  the  changed
circumstances in Libya and his sur place pro-Gadaffi  political  activities.
A summary of his claim is as follows. He is from  Sirte,  a  member  of  the
Ghuoos clan, part  of  the  Gadadfa  tribe  and  was  distantly  related  to
Gadaffi. Members of his family who  were  ministers  and  military  officers
during the Gadaffi regime had either been killed or fled following the  2011
uprising.  He  attended  a  pro-Gadaffi  demonstration  outside  the  Libyan
Embassy on 17 February 2011, which was broadcast on Libyan national  TV.  On
22 February 2011 he and his friends were assaulted by a group of  supporters
of the Libyan rebels. Two days later he went to Libya and stayed in  Tripoli
before returning to Sirte where he helped  man  checkpoints  throughout  the
city. He attended a mass demonstration against the air embargo in  Sirte  in
March 2011. His family remained in Sirte. Since the  uprising  he  had  been
politically active and vocal in his opposition to the Libyan revolution  and
current Libyan government. Since August 2011 he had  made  15  short  videos
for YouTube  which  had  been  uploaded  onto  an  independent  journalist's
YouTube channel. All but  one  of  the  videos  were  political  in  nature,
criticising the current government. The last one  was  uploaded  in  October
2012, but the videos remained on  YouTube.  He  had  also  been  politically
active through his facebook page and, since the  start  of  the  revolution,
had been  posting  comments,  pictures,  videos  and  articles  against  the
revolution and  the  government.  His  political  views  were  considered  a
criminal offence in Libya and he would be imprisoned  or  killed  on  return
and would be targeted by armed militia. His family home in Sirte was  looted
by armed militia when his family moved  temporarily  to  Tripoli,  with  the
neighbourhood being targeted for its known Gadadfa tribal affiliation.

The respondent, in refusing  the  claim,  did  not  accept  the  appellant's
account of his ethnicity and his family links to the Gadaffi regime. It  was
not accepted that he would be recognised as having worked at checkpoints  or
that he would be targeted for  attending  a  demonstration  along  with  the
entire city in March 2011. With regard to  the  YouTube  screen  shots,  the
respondent noted the background evidence of the growing use of social  media
in Libya and the large number  of  people  googling  information  about  the
rebels and considered that there  were  many  other  young  Libyan  who  had
spoken out against  the  rebels.  It  was  noted  that  his  father  took  a
sabbatical from his post as associate professor at the University  of  Sirte
and came to the United Kingdom, with his trip funded by the university,  but
then returned to Libya. The respondent  concluded  that  the  appellant  had
fabricated his claim and did not consider that  he  would  at  any  risk  on
return to Libya.

The appellant's appeal against that decision came before  Judge  O'Keefe  in
the First-tier Tribunal on 7  March  2014.  The  judge  accepted,  from  the
evidence produced before her, that the appellant was  part  of  the  Gadadfa
tribe and Ghuoos clan. She accepted that he had attended a demonstration  on
17 February 2011 and that he had been  photographed  at  the  demonstration,
but she did not accept that footage had been shown on  Libyan  TV.  She  did
not find that the appellant's presence in manning the checkpoints  in  Sirte
or his attendance at a mass demonstration in Libya in March 2011 would  have
brought him to the adverse  attention  of  the  current  regime  or  militia
groups. The judge accepted that the appellant had been  using  social  media
to speak out about events in Libya but found no  evidence  to  suggest  that
the postings had attracted any adverse attention so as to put him  at  risk.
With regard to the DVDs containing the video footage that  could  be  viewed
through YouTube, she noted that the appellant  had  not  been  mentioned  by
name, that the videos had been posted on the account of another  user,  that
the majority of the videos were posted in 2011 and that  there  was  then  a
gap between 27 October 2012 and the most recent video on  3  February  2014.
She noted that the videos were not  exclusively  anti-regime  and  concluded
that they would not put him at risk. She did not consider that the  messages
posted on his facebook  account  would  have  brought  him  to  the  adverse
attention of the regime. She did not find  that  he  would  be  at  risk  by
virtue of his tribal affiliation. She  did  not  consider  that  the  Libyan
authorities would have continued to fund his studies as  they  had,  if  his
profile was considered to be against  them.   She  did  not  find  that  the
appellant would be at risk on  return  and  she  accordingly  dismissed  the
appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

Permission to appeal that decision was sought, inter alia,  on  the  grounds
that the judge's finding, that the appellant had not  demonstrated  that  he
had attracted or would attract any adverse attention  as  a  result  of  his
political activity, was at odds with the objective evidence before her.

Permission to appeal was initially refused,  but  was  subsequently  granted
upon a renewed application, on 14 May 2014.

Appeal hearing

The appeal came before me on 18 July 2014 and I  heard  submissions  on  the
error of law.

Mr Ajina referred to the grounds of appeal, submitting that  the  judge  had
failed to give proper  consideration  to  the  background  information  when
concluding that the appellant would not come to  the  adverse  attention  of
the Libyan authorities. The appellant had produced evidence  of  16  YouTube
videos, in the form of DVDs, and 78 pages of  facebook  posts  and  comments
from his personal facebook account dating back to February 2011, as well  as
evidence of attendance at two demonstrations on  17  February  2011  and  19
February 2014. The skeleton argument before the judge referred  to  extracts
from the background information in which reference was made  to  the  Libyan
authorities conducting internet  surveillance.  The  background  information
was before the judge but she did  not  refer  to  it.  With  regard  to  the
funding of the appellant's studies, the judge failed to note  that  the  new
law passed in 2014 preventing those hostile to  the  regime  from  receiving
scholarships was passed after the appellant had completed his  studies.  The
judge also erred by considering that the appellant was  claiming  to  be  at
risk merely on the basis of his ethnicity, which he was not.  There  was  no
proper analysis of risk.

Ms Everett acknowledged that she was in some difficulty as she had not  seen
the DVD footage herself,  although  it  seemed  that  the  judge  had  given
reasons why that would not give  rise  to  a  risk  to  the  appellant.  She
accepted that there was a problem with paragraph 35 of the judge's  decision
in regard to a Google search conducted by the  respondent,  as  it  did  not
specify  whether  those  searching  the  internet  were  all  Libyans.   She
considered that  the  real  issue  of  relevance  was  whether  or  not  the
appellant would be identified as a result  of  his  facebook  postings.  She
accepted that if he was, he would be at risk, but  she  submitted  that  the
judge did not have evidence before  her  of  the  Libyan  regime  monitoring
websites.

Mr Ajina, in response, submitted that  the  judge  did  have  such  evidence
before her and he directed me to it.

On the basis of the narrow issue properly identified by Ms  Everett  in  the
appeal, I concluded that the judge had erred in law and that she  ought,  on
the basis of that evidence, to have allowed the appeal.

Consideration and findings.

It was accepted by Judge O'Keefe that the appellant had posted  messages  on
his facebook account and had posted videos on YouTube. At  paragraph  34  of
her determination she did not consider that the content of the  videos  were
such that he would be perceived as being in favour of  the  previous  regime
and against the current one. However at paragraph 50, when referring to  the
YouTube  videos  and  facebook  comments,  she  found  that  they  could  be
considered as political in nature. Nevertheless she did  not  consider  that
the appellant had thereby  demonstrated  that  he  had  attracted  or  would
attract any adverse attention as a result of those postings.

The reason for that finding is to be found at paragraphs 35  and  37,  where
at paragraph 35 the judge considered that the large number of Libyans  using
the internet and facebook meant that his postings  would  not  have  brought
him to the attention of the authorities. Ms Everett, however, conceded  that
there was a problem with the judge's reliance on the respondent's  reference
to a Google search, as it did not  identify  whether  those  conducting  the
searches were Libyan nationals.

At paragraph 37 the judge  said  that  she  had  considered  the  background
information submitted by the appellant and she referred in particular  to  a
January  2012  Amnesty  International  report  which  referred  to   Libyans
enjoying greater freedom and being able to openly voice their  criticism  of
the former regime. However what she failed to do was to make  any  reference
to the background materials provided by the appellant in his  appeal  bundle
and the skeleton argument  regarding  the  limitations  on  the  ability  of
Libyans to  openly  criticise  the  new  regime  and  to  voice  pro-Gadaffi
sentiments. References were made in the skeleton argument before  the  judge
to the continued application of  the  Libyan  penal  code  in  criminalising
activities of Libyans abroad against the interests of the state and  to  the
continued use of surveillance equipment.

Paragraph 2.5 of the skeleton argument before  the  judge  quoted  from  the
Asylum Research Consultancy  report  "Libya  Country  Report  dated  5  July
2013", referring to "credible reports that the  government  monitored  email
or  internet  communication".  Reference  was  also  made  in  the  skeleton
argument to the UNHCR refworld report entitled "Freedom on the  Net  2013  -
Libya" which is included in the appellant's appeal bundle at  page  174  and
which refers, at page 180 of the bundle,  to  reports  of  the  surveillance
tools  left  over  from  the  Qadhafi  era  being  restarted.  Further,  the
appellant's supplementary bundle contained an internet  article  taken  from
an official Libyan government website referring to  procedures  proposed  to
confront the public activities of  Libyan  students  and  residents  abroad,
pursuant to Decision No. (13) issued by the Head  of  the  General  National
Conference for the  year  2014.  Those  procedures  involved  not  only  the
setting up of a decision to stop scholarships for students  studying  abroad
and to stop salaries to employees  associated  with  the  Libyan  Government
abroad who had led or participated in activities  against  the  17  February
revolution (as referred to by the appellant himself in  his  evidence),  but
also to a request to ministries and associated offices  to  refer  lists  of
their names to the public prosecutor in order to take "necessary  procedures
to commence interrogations with them".

In the circumstances, it seems to me that, whilst the  background  materials
before the judge did indeed refer to the  opening  up  of  and  widening  of
access to the internet and social media under the new regime, as she  noted,
there was also evidence of surveillance  used  by  the  regime  and  of  the
monitoring of the internet and of diaspora activities which  she  failed  to
address and which, on a lower standard of proof, ought to have  led  her  to
conclude that there was a reasonable likelihood that the appellant  was,  or
may be, if questioned on return to Libya, known to  and  adversely  regarded
by the Libyan authorities.

Accordingly on the basis of  Ms  Everett's  concession  that  the  appellant
would be at risk if there was  evidence  of  the  Libyan  regime  monitoring
websites and in the light of the above background evidence, it seems  to  me
that he has demonstrated, to the lower standard of  proof,  that  he  has  a
well-founded fear of being persecuted in Libya for one of  the  reasons  set
out in paragraph 6 of the  2006  Regulations  and  that  his  removal  would
breach Article 3 of the ECHR.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision and  re-make  it  by
allowing the appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  and  Article  3  human  rights
grounds.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   I  continue
    that order (pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008).

                               Signed[pic]


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
