
[pic]
IAC-TH-LW-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10556/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 August 2016                            |On 17 August 2016             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                    [S M]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S. Iengar, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who appealed against a decision
    of the respondent to refuse her asylum under paragraphs 336 and 399M of
    the Immigration Rules HC  395  (as  amended).   She  also  appealed  on
    Humanitarian Protection grounds and human rights  grounds  (Articles  3
    and 8).  Her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lodge
    on 22 April 2016 who dismissed it on all grounds.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was originally  refused
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pedro on 3 June 2016.  However, the
    appellant renewed her grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   On  7
    July 2016 her application for permission to appeal was granted by Judge
    of the Upper Tribunal Perkins who gave the  following  reasons  for  so
    doing:-

         "1.  The appellant is an asylum seeker from Sri Lanka.

         2.   The grounds, settled by Miss Jegarajah of Counsel, may not  be
             equally meritorious  but,  in  my  judgement,  they  are  each
             properly arguable.

         3.   It may be helpful to begin at ground 2.  If  it  is  made  out
             then it may be that  the  judge  has  failed  to  consider  an
             important strand of evidence and that the omission  undermines
             his findings generally.

         4.   Ground 3 raises the case that the judge gave wholly inadequate
             reasons for attaching no weight at all (assuming that  it  was
             what the judge did) to a letter from a Sri  Lankan  member  of
             Parliament.  Arguably the suggestion that the evidence is just
             too good to be true is insufficient.

         5.   These may not be the best points and  I  emphasise  that  give
             (sic) permission to appeal on each ground that is raised."

 3. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 4. I asked Ms Iengar to deal with ground  2  first.   She  submitted  that
    paragraph 23 of the judge's decision reveals a material error of  fact.
    Consequent upon this the judge has deprived the appellant  of  material
    positive evidence and has failed to give significant weight  to  a  key
    piece of evidence.  Paragraph 23 of the judge's decision states:-

         "I have no statements from any members of  the  appellant's  direct
         family to support the appellant's contentions.   I  have  a  letter
         page 34 from a Sivasakthy Ananathan who claims to be  a  Member  of
         Parliament  for  the  Vanni  district.   He   refers   the   family
         celebrating martyr's day and the consequences that followed.  I  do
         not  have  the  original  and  have  no  way   of   assessing   its
         authenticity.  The rest of the letter reads, 'I have to  say,  like
         an advertisement for  the  appellant's  asylum  claim.   It  covers
         almost every important aspect of the appellant's claim.  I  am  not
         inclined to give it any significant weight; it has every appearance
         of being concocted to assist her appeal.'"

    Contrary to the judge's finding that he  has  no  statements  from  any
    members of the appellant's direct family  to  support  the  appellant's
    contentions, they are at pages 48 and 50  of  the  appellant's  bundle.
    She submitted that at paragraphs 48 and 50 of  the  appellant's  bundle
    are two letters from the appellant's mother to firstly the Human Rights
    Commission and secondly the Sri Lanka Red Cross  Society.   These  have
    not been taken into account by the judge in coming to his decision  and
    as a consequence the judge has materially erred in failing to  consider
    important evidence put forward supporting the appellant's  claim.   She
    also relied on the other grounds which I will not detail  further  here
    as in light of my findings in  relation  to  the  above  issue  further
    consideration of them becomes a redundant exercise.

 5. Miss Iengar acknowledged that the grounds seeking permission to  appeal
    relate to the asylum and Humanitarian Protection claims only  and  that
    in the event that I were to find a material error of law  the  findings
    and decision in relation to  the  appellant's  Article  8  claim  would
    inevitably be preserved.

 6. Mr. Kotas urged me to accept that that was the position in relation  to
    the Article 8 claim and that all findings in relation thereto should be
    preserved.  He then referred me to paragraph 15 of the judge's decision
    where it is recorded that the appellant  was  cross-examined  and  said
    that she last had contact with her family one or two  months  ago.   He
    said that that had to be linked with the judge's findings in  paragraph
    23 of his decision and that all the judge was saying was that he had no
    "witness statements" or letters to the Tribunal and  that  consequently
    it could not be said that the judge has materially erred as submitted.

 7. From reading the judge's decision, taking account of the plain language
    used I am unable to accept the submission of Mr.  Kotas.   I  find  the
    judge has materially erred in failing to consider an  important  strand
    of evidence and that the consequent omission  undermines  his  findings
    generally in relation to the asylum and Humanitarian  Protection  claim
    rendering them unsafe.

 8. Both parties were agreed that with the exception of the Article 8 issue
    the appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    considered afresh.

 9. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.   The  decision  in  relation  to
    asylum and Humanitarian Protection is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt with afresh in relation
    to those two aspects of the appellant's  appeal,  pursuant  to  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
    Practice Direction 7.2(b), before any judge  other  than  Judge  Lodge.
    The findings and decision in relation  to  the  appellant's  Article  8
    appeal are preserved.


Signed   Date 16 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

