
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/10842/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 15 November 2017                    |        On 04 December 2017          |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     kr
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Muzira, Counsel instructed by Solomon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity.  His  date  of
    birth is 1 January 1997.

2.   The Appellant came here on 3 February  2015.  He  claimed  asylum.  His
    application was refused on 21 July 2015. He appealed.  His  appeal  was
    dismissed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  M  A  Hall  in   a
    determination, promulgated on 13 March 2017, following a hearing  on  2
    March 2017.  Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor on
    12 September 2017 on the following grounds:

         "In light of AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944, the grounds are plainly
         arguable.  The FtT was  required  to  undertake  an  assessment  of
         whether the Appellant would be able  to  obtain  a  CSID  and  then
         assess whether relocation to Baghdad and/or the IKR would be unduly
         harsh in light of its conclusion thereon.  It is arguable  that  it
         failed to undertaken such an assessment."


3.   The case as advanced  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  the
    Appellant lived in Jalawla before coming to the UK with his parents and
    siblings.   The Appellant's evidence in a  nutshell  was  that  he  was
    pressured to join ISIS but changed his mind before doing so.  The Iraqi
    authorities came to his family home to look for him.  They arrested the
    Imam at the local mosque and believed that the Appellant  was  involved
    with ISIS.  The Appellant's evidence  was  that  he  had  not  been  in
    contact with his family since he arrived in the  UK.   The  Appellant's
    evidence was that he fears ISIS and the Iraqi authorities.

4.   The judge did not find the Appellant to be credible  and  rejected  his
    account. The judge did not accept that there had  been  an  attempt  by
    ISIS to recruit the Appellant and found that he was not  at  risk  from
    the Iraqi authorities.  The judge found that the  Appellant's  date  of
    birth is 1 January 1997; not 5 January 1999 as advanced  by  him.   The
    Appellant relied on two documents (an Iraqi national  ID  card  and  an
    Iraqi nationality certificate) which he stated were obtained from Iraq.
    They showed his date of birth as 5 January 1999.  The  judge  concluded
    that the Appellant had given conflicting and inconsistent  accounts  in
    relation to the identity documents  and  how  he  obtained  them  which
    adversely affected his credibility.  The judge considered the  document
    verification report produced by the Respondent and concluded  that  the
    documents were not genuine.  He accepted that the Appellant  originates
    from a contested area and therefore could safely return there. He  went
    on to consider relocation. The Appellant submitted that he would not be
    able to safely return to Baghdad  because  he  was  at  risk  from  the
    authorities and that he could not be returned directly to  IKR  because
    he does not originate from there.

5.   The judge concluded  that  the  Appellant's  return  was  not  feasible
    because he did not have either a current or expired Iraqi  passport  or
    laissez passer (the identity documents that he produced at the hearing,
    having been found not to be genuine).  The judge went  on  to  consider
    risk on return and he made the following findings at paragraphs 75-79:

         "75. I find that the Appellant would have an option  of  reasonable
             internal relocation to Baghdad.  He is a  young  man  with  no
             medical or health difficulties.  I accept  that  he  does  not
             speak Arabic, but his own evidence is that he has two maternal
             uncles, one  of  whom  arranged  his  journey  to  the  United
             Kingdom, who live  in  Baghdad.   I  do  not  accept,  as  the
             Appellant is not a  credible  witness  that  he  has  not  had
             contact with his uncles, and I find that  he  would  therefore
             have family who would be able to accommodate him.  I find that
             internal relocation to Baghdad would not be unduly harsh.


         76.  In the alternative, I find that the Appellant has a reasonable
             internal relocation  option  to  the  IKR.   This  would  mean
             firstly travelling to Baghdad.  The Appellant would  not  have
             any language difficulty if returned to the IKR  as  he  speaks
             Kurdish Sorani.  I find that there would be  no  risk  in  the
             IKR.  In AA (Iraq)  at  E18  of  the  head  note  the  IKR  is
             described as virtually violence free, with  no  Article  15(c)
             risk to an ordinary civilian.


         77.  The authorities in the IKR do not require a  Kurdish  returnee
             to have an expired or current passport or laissez  passer.   A
             Kurd who does not originate from the IKR can obtain entry  for
             ten days as a visitor and then renew this entry permission for
             a further ten days.  If he finds employment he can remain  for
             longer although he would need to register with the authorities
             and provide details of the employer.   There  is  no  evidence
             that the IKR authorities proactively remove Kurds from the IKR
             whose permits have come to an end.


         78.  The Appellant would therefore be able to gain admission to the
             IKR as an individual of Kurdish ethnicity.  I  see  no  reason
             why the Appellant would not be able to  gain  employment.   He
             confirmed that he had employment as a porter  in  Iraq  before
             travelling to the United Kingdom.  There  is  no  evidence  to
             indicate that the Appellant could not travel from  Baghdad  by
             air.  Because I have not accepted that the Appellant's account
             is credible, it is my view that his family members  are  still
             in Jalawla and I am not satisfied that  he  could  not  regain
             contact with  them.   The  maternal  uncle  who  arranged  the
             Appellant's travel to the United Kingdom was able  to  arrange
             for the Appellant to travel into the  IKR  without  difficulty
             and I do not find that any  evidence  has  been  submitted  to
             indicate that that uncle could not  provide  support  for  the
             Appellant.  He was able to arrange a  journey  to  the  United
             Kingdom.


         79.   I  therefore  conclude  that  because  the  Appellant  has  a
             reasonable option of internal relocation either to Baghdad  or
             to the IKR via Baghdad, he is  not  entitled  to  a  grant  of
             asylum or humanitarian protection, and his  removal  from  the
             United Kingdom would not breach Articles 2 or 3  of  the  1950
             Convention."


6.   The  grounds  seeking  permission  assert  that  the  judge  failed  to
    adequately consider relocation  to  Baghdad  without  a  CSID.   It  is
    asserted that the judge's conclusions in respect of relocation  to  IKR
    are flawed because he did not make any findings as to the  practicality
    of travel from Baghdad to the IKR for somebody who does  not  have  any
    identity documentation. The judge undertook no consideration of whether
    the Appellant would be able to find employment in the IKR without  such
    documentation.  In addition, it is asserted that there were no findings
    about the availability of assistance from family or friends in the IKR.

7.   As a matter of fact, the judge did not consider whether  the  Appellant
    has a CSID or would be able to obtain one reasonably soon after arrival
    in Iraq and therefore his decision in respect of relocation to  Baghdad
    is flawed.  However, he properly considered relocation to the IKR.  The
    Appellant's representative relied on written  submissions  which  quote
    extracts from Country of Origin Information Reports. The thrust of  her
    oral submissions was that an  Appellant  needed  a  CSID  or  at  least
    identity documents to safely re-locate and travel to the IKR.
8.       The argument that the Appellant would not be able to safely  travel
    from Baghdad to IKR because he does not  have  any  identity  documents
    (because the documents that he produced  for  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge were counterfeit) is  a  non-starter.  Whilst
    the Appellant would  need  identity  documents  to  ensure  return  (to
    Baghdad) is feasible, the absence of them does not give rise to risk on
    return to Baghdad or the IKR.  The judge concluded that  there  was  no
    evidence to indicate that the Appellant could not travel  from  Baghdad
    by air and there is no properly articulated challenge to  this.   There
    was no evidence before the judge to seek to establish that travel  from
    Baghdad was not practical. The grounds conflate feasibility  of  return
    and risk on return.  In respect of the absence of a  CSID,  this  is  a
    matter  material  to  risk  on  return  to  Baghdad.   The   background
    information and AA (Iraq) [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944  do  not  support  the
    argument that without a CSID there would be a risk on return to the IKR
    and/ or risk would arise from travelling there from Baghdad  without  a
    one.  There was no evidence before me (or the FtT) that the absence  of
    a CSID would put this Appellant at risk on return to IKR.

9.   In the context of whether re-location to the IKR would  be  reasonable,
    the judge conducted a fact sensitive assessment in accordance with  the
    guidance in AA. He considered all material matters and made  adequately
    reasoned findings which are grounded in  the  evidence.   The  relevant
    guidance in AA reads;

    E. IRAQI KURDISH REGION
    17. The Respondent will only return P to the IKR if P originates from
    the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with the IKR
    authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P to have an
    expired or current passport, or laissez passer.
    18. The IKR is virtually violence free. There is no Article 15(c) risk
    to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.
    19. A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR can obtain entry for
    10 days as a visitor and then renew this entry permission for a further
    10 days. If K finds employment, K can remain for longer, although K
    will need to register with the authorities and provide details of the
    employer. There is no evidence that the IKR authorities pro-actively
    remove Kurds from the IKR whose permits have come to an end.
    20. Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be expected to
    avoid any potential undue harshness in that city by travelling to the
    IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is likely to involve an assessment of
    (a) the practicality of travel from Baghdad to the IKR (such as to
    Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of K's securing employment in the
    IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance from family and friends in
    the IKR.
    21. As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in a home area
    in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR.

          There  was  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    Appellant had family in Iraq (albeit in Baghdad and his home area)  and
    the judge concluded, at paragraph 75, that he has two maternal  uncles,
    one of whom arranged his journey to the UK.  Whilst the Appellant  does
    not have family in IKR, he has family in Iraq who can support him.  The
    judge did not accept the Appellant's  evidence  that  he  had  not  had
    contact with his uncles. The judge considered  the  likelihood  of  the
    Appellant securing employment in the IKR and his findings, at paragraph
    78, are lawful and sustainable.   I  have  not  been  referred  to  any
    evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  was   not
    considered. There is no properly articulated challenge to the  findings
    of the judge in relation to family assistance (see paragraph 78 of  the
    decision). I conclude that the judge's finding that the Appellant could
    safely and reasonably return to the IKR is lawful.

10.  The decision of the judge contains an error of law. However, it is  not
    material  and  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Anonymity direction made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed            Joanna McWilliam               Date 1 December 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam







