

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10590/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 7th May 2015                      |On 14th May 2015                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               ROKAN MOHAMMEDI
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Manning instructed by Sultan Lloyd Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge J.W.H Law promulgated on the 29th January 2015 in  which  the
         Judge dismissed the appeal against the refusal of further leave  to
         remain dated 21st November 2014.

Background


      2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born in  1996.  His  immigration
         history shown he entered the UK in February  2011.  His  claim  for
         asylum was refused but he was granted discretionary leave to remain
         until  1st  June  2013  under  the  terms   of   the   Respondent's
         discretionary policy for unaccompanied child asylum seekers.

      3. The Appellant appealed against the  2011  refusal  and  the  Judges
         starting point as per  the  Devaseelan  principle  was  an  earlier
         determination in which the Appellant was found to lack  credibility
         for the reasons set out at paragraph 24 of the determination  under
         challenge. The Judge also considered the more recent evidence which
         he found had to be treated with circumspect for the reasons stated,
         before concluding that in light of his agreement with the  original
         judge that the Appellant had lied in order the enhance  his  claim,
         the material part of the claim was not accepted as being  true.  In
         paragraph 31 the Judge found:

             31.  I have therefore determined the appellants  asylum  claim
                  (and any Article 3 claim, to the extent that it stands and
                  falls with it) on the same basis as the immigration  judge
                  in 2011, namely that the appellant's claim is not credible
                  and he does not have a well founded fear of persecution in
                  Iran.  I am  not    satisfied  that  he  has  a  political
                  opinion opposed to the authorities in Iran,  or  that  the
                  authorities would impute such an  opinion  to  him.   With
                  regard to the issue of tracing, I do not believe that  the
                  appellant ever did complete  a  Red  Cross  questionnaire;
                  this is both because of his general  lack  of  credibility
                  and also because if he had completed such a  questionnaire
                  he surely  would  have  tried  to  find  out  subsequently
                  whether the Red Cross had had any  success.   I  therefore
                  agree with the conclusions of the respondent on the issues
                  of tracing and find that the appellant is  indeed  at  the
                  "negative  end  of  the  spectrum"  referred  to   in   KA
                  (Afghanistan).  I am not satisfied that there is  anything
                  to prevent him returning to live with his  family  in  his
                  own village; alternatively, if they have moved away of  is
                  (contrary to my findings) he is at risk  there,  it  would
                  not be unreasonable or unduly harsh for him  to  relocate.
                  He is no longer a minor and, having had the opportunity to
                  observe him giving evidence in English, I  find  there  is
                  nothing childlike in his demeanour or  behaviour  such  as
                  might put him at risk of being treated  like  a  child  on
                  return.

Grounds and submissions


      4. Ground 1 is a challenge to the methodology used  by  the  Judge  in
         assessing the Appellants credibility. Although First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Gibb in granting permission  expressed  the  view  that  this
         ground appeared to him to be "misguided and unarguable"  permission
         was not specifically refused and Miss Manning pursues it today,  in
         accordance with instructions.

      5. The Appellant relies upon the judgment of the Grand Chamber of  the
         Court  of  Justice  of  the  European  Union  (CJEU)   in   ABC   v
         Staatssecretaris van Veilgheid en  Justitie,  United  Nations  High
         Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) intervening.  C-148/13 to C-150/13.

      6. That case involved a referral by the authorities in Holland  for  a
         preliminary ruling concerning the interpretation of  Article  4  of
         Council Directive 2004/83/EC. The main part  of  the  text  of  the
         judgment is as follows:

             Consideration of  the  question  referred  for  a  preliminary
             ruling

             Preliminary observations

             45   It is apparent from recitals 3, 16 and 17 in the preamble
                  to  Directive   2004/83   that   the   Geneva   Convention
                  constitutes the cornerstone  of  the  international  legal
                  regime  for  the  protection  of  refugees  and  that  the
                  provisions of the directive for determining who  qualifies
                  for refugee status and the content thereof were adopted to
                  guide the competent authorities of the  Member  States  in
                  the application of that convention on the basis of  common
                  concepts  and  criteria   (judgment   in   N.,   C-604/12,
                  EU:C:2014:302, paragraph 27).

             46   Directive 2004/83 must, therefore, be interpreted in  the
                  light of its general   scheme and purpose, and in a manner
                  consistent  with  the  Geneva  Convention  and  the  other
                  relevant treaties referred to in Article 78(1) TFEU. As is
                  apparent from recital 10  in  the  preamble  thereto,  the
                  directive must also be interpreted in a manner  consistent
                  with the rights recognised by the Charter (judgment  in  X
                  and   Others,   C-199/12   to   C-201/12,   EU:C:2013:720,
                  paragraph 40).

             47   Furthermore, it should be recalled that Directive 2004/83
                  does not contain any procedural rules  applicable  to  the
                  examination   of   an   application   for    international
                  protection,  nor,  therefore,  does  it   lay   down   the
                  procedural  guarantees  that  must  be  afforded   to   an
                  applicant  for  asylum.  It  is  Directive  2005/85   that
                  establishes minimum standards applicable to procedures for
                  examining  applications  and  specifies  the   rights   of
                  applicants for asylum that must be taken into  account  in
                  the examination of the cases in the main proceedings.

             Consideration of the question

             48   By its question, the referring court  asks,  in  essence,
                  whether Article 4 of Directive 2004/83, read in the  light
                  of the Charter, must be interpreted  as  meaning  that  it
                  imposes on  the  competent  national  authorities,  acting
                  under the supervision of the courts, certain  limits  when
                  they assess the facts  and  circumstances  concerning  the
                  declared sexual orientation of an  applicant  for  asylum,
                  whose application is based on a  fear  of  persecution  on
                  grounds of that sexual orientation.

             49   In that regard, it should be noted at  the  outset  that,
                  contrary to the submissions made by the applicants in  the
                  main  proceedings,  according  to  which   the   competent
                  authorities examining an application for asylum based on a
                  fear of persecution on grounds of the  sexual  orientation
                  of the applicant for asylum must hold the declared  sexual
                  orientation to be an established fact on the basis  solely
                  of the declarations of the applicant,  those  declarations
                  constitute, having regard to  the  particular  context  in
                  which the applications for asylum  are  made,  merely  the
                  starting point in the process of assessment of  the  facts
                  and circumstances envisaged under Article 4  of  Directive
                  2004/83.

             50   It is clear from the very wording of Article 4(1) of  the
                  directive that, in the context  of  that  assessment,  the
                  Member States may consider it to be the  applicant's  duty
                  to submit as soon  as  possible  all  elements  needed  to
                  substantiate the application for international protection,
                  the  Member  State  assessing,  in  cooperation  with  the
                  applicant, the relevant elements of the application.

             51   Furthermore, it follows from Article  4(5)  of  Directive
                  2004/83 that when the conditions listed under (a)  to  (e)
                  of  that  provision  are  not  met,  statements  made   by
                  applicants for  asylum  with  respect  to  their  declared
                  sexual orientation may require confirmation.

             52   It follows that, although it is  for  the  applicant  for
                  asylum to identify his sexual  orientation,  which  is  an
                  aspect of his  personal  identity,  applications  for  the
                  grant of  refugee  status  on  the  basis  of  a  fear  of
                  persecution on grounds of that sexual orientation may,  in
                  the same way as applications based on  other  grounds  for
                  persecution, be subject to an assessment process, provided
                  for in Article 4 of that directive.

             53   However, the methods used by the competent authorities to
                  assess the statements and documentary  or  other  evidence
                  submitted  in  support  of  those  applications  must   be
                  consistent with the provisions of  Directive  2004/83  and
                  2005/85 and, as is clear from recitals 10  and  8  in  the
                  preambles  to  those  directives  respectively,  with  the
                  fundamental rights guaranteed by the Charter, such as  the
                  right to respect for human dignity, enshrined in Article 1
                  of the Charter, and the right to respect for  private  and
                  family life guaranteed by Article 7 thereof.

             54   Even though Article 4 of Directive 2004/83 is  applicable
                  to all applications for international protection, whatever
                  the ground for persecution relied on in support  of  those
                  applications, it remains the  case  that  it  is  for  the
                  competent authorities to modify their methods of assessing
                  statements and documentary or other evidence having regard
                  to the specific features of each category  of  application
                  for asylum, in observance of the rights guaranteed by  the
                  Charter.

             55   As regards the assessment of the facts and  circumstances
                  under Article 4  of  Directive  2004/83,  that  assessment
                  takes place, as was held at paragraph 64 of  the  judgment
                  in M. (C-277/11, EU:C:2012:744), in two  separate  stages.
                  The first stage  concerns  the  establishment  of  factual
                  circumstances which may constitute evidence that  supports
                  the application, while the second  stage  relates  to  the
                  legal appraisal of that evidence, which  entails  deciding
                  whether, in the light of the    specific facts of a  given
                  case, the substantive conditions laid down by  Articles  9
                  and 10 or Article 15 of Directive 2004/83 for the grant of
                  international protection are satisfied.

             56   During the first stage, to which  the  questions  of  the
                  referring  court  in  each  of  the  cases  in  the   main
                  proceedings relates, while the Member State  may  consider
                  that it is generally  for  the  applicant  to  submit  all
                  elements  needed  to  substantiate  his  application,  the
                  applicant being, besides, best placed to provide  evidence
                  to establish his own sexual orientation, the fact  remains
                  that it is the duty of the Member State to cooperate  with
                  the applicant at  the  stage  of  assessing  the  relevant
                  elements of that application, in accordance  with  Article
                  4(1) of the directive (see, to that  effect,  judgment  in
                  M., EU:C:2012:744, paragraph 65).

             57   It should be noted in that  regard  that,  in  accordance
                  with Article 4(3)(c) of Directive 2004/83, that assessment
                  must be made on an individual basis and must take  account
                  of the individual situation and personal circumstances  of
                  the  applicant,  including  factors  such  as  background,
                  gender and age, in order for it to be determined  whether,
                  on the basis of the  applicant's  personal  circumstances,
                  the acts to which the  applicant  has  been  or  could  be
                  exposed would amount to persecution or serious harm.

             58   Furthermore, as is  recalled  at  paragraph  51  of  this
                  judgment, in verifications carried out  by  the  competent
                  authorities, pursuant to Article 4 of the directive,  when
                  certain aspects of the statements  of  the  applicant  for
                  asylum are not    substantiated by  documentary  or  other
                  evidence,  those  aspects  do  not  require   confirmation
                  provided that  the  cumulative  conditions  laid  down  in
                  Article 4(5)(a) to (e) of the directive are met.

             59   As regards the methods of assessing  the  statements  and
                  documentary or other evidence at  issue  in  each  of  the
                  cases in the main proceedings, it is appropriate, in order
                  to provide an answer useful to  the  referring  court,  to
                  restrict the present analysis to  the  compatibility  with
                  Directives 2004/83 and 2005/85 and the Charter of,  first,
                  the verifications carried out by the competent authorities
                  based  on,   in   particular,   stereotypes   as   regards
                  homosexuals or  detailed  questioning  as  to  the  sexual
                  practices of an applicant for asylum and the  option,  for
                  those authorities, to allow the  applicant  to  submit  to
                  'tests' with a  view  to  establishing  his  homosexuality
                  and/or of allowing him to produce, of his own  free  will,
                  films of his intimate acts and, second, the option for the
                  competent authorities of finding a lack of credibility  on
                  the basis of the sole fact that the applicant did not rely
                  on his declared sexual orientation on the  first  occasion
                  he was given to set out the grounds for persecution.

             60   As regards, in the  first  place,  assessments  based  on
                  questioning as  to  the  knowledge  on  the  part  of  the
                  applicant for asylum concerned of  organisations  for  the
                  protection of the rights of homosexuals and the details of
                  those organisations, such questioning suggests,  according
                  to the applicant in the main proceedings in case C-150/13,
                  that the authorities base their assessments on stereotyped
                  notions as to the behaviour of homosexuals and not on  the
                  basis of the specific  situation  of  each  applicant  for
                  asylum.

             61   In that respect,  it  should  be  recalled  that  Article
                  4(3)(c)  of  Directive  2004/83  requires  the   competent
                  authorities to carry out an assessment that takes  account
                  of the individual position and personal  circumstances  of
                  the applicant  and  that  Article  13(3)(a)  of  Directive
                  2005/85  requires  those  authorities   to   conduct   the
                  interview in a manner that takes account of  the  personal
                  and general circumstances surrounding the application.

             62   While questions based on stereotyped  notions  may  be  a
                  useful element at the disposal  of  competent  authorities
                  for the purposes of  the  assessment,  the  assessment  of
                  applications for the grant of refugee status on the  basis
                  solely of stereotyped notions associated with  homosexuals
                  does not, nevertheless, satisfy the  requirements  of  the
                  provisions referred to in the previous paragraph, in  that
                  it does not allow those authorities to take account of the
                  individual situation and  personal  circumstances  of  the
                  applicant for asylum concerned.

             63   Therefore, the inability of the applicant for  asylum  to
                  answer  such  questions  cannot,  in  itself,   constitute
                  sufficient grounds for concluding that the applicant lacks
                  credibility,  inasmuch  as  such  an  approach  would   be
                  contrary  to  the  requirements  of  Article  4(3)(c)   of
                  Directive 2004/83 and of  Article  13(3)(a)  of  Directive
                  2005/85.

             64   In the second place, while the national  authorities  are
                  entitled to carry out, where  appropriate,  interviews  in
                  order to determine the facts and circumstances as  regards
                  the  declared  sexual  orientation  of  an  applicant  for
                  asylum,  questions  concerning  details  of   the   sexual
                  practices  of  that  applicant   are   contrary   to   the
                  fundamental rights  guaranteed  by  the  Charter  and,  in
                  particular, to the right to respect for private and family
                  life as affirmed in Article 7 thereof.

             65   In relation, in the third place, to the  option  for  the
                  national authorities of allowing, as certain applicants in
                  the main  proceedings  proposed,  homosexual  acts  to  be
                  performed, the submission of the  applicants  to  possible
                  'tests' in order to  demonstrate  their  homosexuality  or
                  even the production by those applicants of  evidence  such
                  as films of their intimate acts, it must  be  pointed  out
                  that,  besides  the  fact  that  such  evidence  does  not
                  necessarily have probative value, such evidence  would  of
                  its nature infringe human dignity, the respect of which is
                  guaranteed by Article 1 of the Charter.

             66   Furthermore, the effect of authorising or accepting  such
                  types of evidence would be to incite other  applicants  to
                  offer the same and would  lead,  de  facto,  to  requiring
                  applicants to provide such evidence.

             67   In the fourth  place,  as  regards  the  option  for  the
                  competent authorities finding a lack of credibility  when,
                  in particular, the applicant did not rely on his  declared
                  sexual orientation on the first occasion he was  given  to
                  set out the grounds for persecution, it must  be  held  as
                  follows.

             68   It is clear from Article 4(1) of Directive  2004/83  that
                  Member States may consider it the duty of the applicant to
                  submit 'as  soon  as  possible'  all  elements  needed  to
                  substantiate the application for international protection.

             69    However,  having  regard  to  the  sensitive  nature  of
                  questions relating to a person's personal identity and, in
                  particular, his sexuality, it cannot be concluded that the
                  declared sexuality lacks credibility simply  because,  due
                  to his reticence in  revealing  intimate  aspects  of  his
                  life, that person did not declare his homosexuality at the
                  outset.

             70   Moreover, it must be observed that  the  obligation  laid
                  down by Article 4(1) of Directive 2004/83  to  submit  all
                  elements  needed  to  substantiate  the  application   for
                  international protection 'as soon as possible' is tempered
                  by the requirement imposed on the  competent  authorities,
                  under Article 13(3)(a) of Directive  2005/85  and  Article
                  4(3) of Directive 2004/83 to conduct the interview  taking
                  account  of  the   personal   or   general   circumstances
                  surrounding   the   application,   in   particular,    the
                  vulnerability of  the  applicant,  and  to  carry  out  an
                  individual assessment of the application,  taking  account
                  of the individual position and personal  circumstances  of
                  each applicant.

             71   Thus, to  hold  that  an  applicant  for  asylum  is  not
                  credible, merely because he  did  not  reveal  his  sexual
                  orientation on the first occasion that he was given to set
                  out the grounds of persecution, would be to fail  to  have
                  regard to the requirement  referred  to  in  the  previous
                  paragraph.

             72   Having regard to all the foregoing,  the  answer  to  the
                  question referred in each of  the  cases  C-148/13  to  C-
                  150/13 is:

                      - Article 4(3)(c) of Directive  2004/83  and  Article
                      13(3)(a) of Directive 2005/85 must be interpreted  as
                      precluding, in the context of the assessment  by  the
                      competent  national  authorities,  acting  under  the
                      supervision  of  the  courts,  of   the   facts   and
                      circumstances   concerning   the   declared    sexual
                      orientation  of  an  applicant  for   asylum,   whose
                      application is based on  a  fear  of  persecution  on
                      grounds of that sexual orientation, the statements of
                      that applicant and the documentary and other evidence
                      submitted in support of his application being subject
                      to an assessment  by  those  authorities  founded  on
                      questions   based   only   on   stereotyped   notions
                      concerning homosexuals.

                      - Article 4 of Directive 2004/83, read in  the  light
                      of Article 7 of the Charter, must be  interpreted  as
                      precluding, in the context of  that  assessment,  the
                      competent  national  authorities  from  carrying  out
                      detailed questioning as to the sexual practices of an
                      applicant for asylum.

                      - Article 4 of Directive 2004/83, read in  the  light
                      of Article 1 of the Charter, must be  interpreted  as
                      precluding, in the context of  that  assessment,  the
                      acceptance by those authorities of evidence  such  as
                      the performance by the applicant for asylum concerned
                      of homosexual acts, his submission to 'tests' with  a
                      view to establishing his homosexuality or,  yet,  the
                      production by him of films of such acts.

                      - Article  4(3)  of  Directive  2004/83  and  Article
                      13(3)(a) of Directive 2005/85 must be interpreted  as
                      precluding, in the context of  that  assessment,  the
                      competent national authorities from finding that  the
                      statements  of  the   applicant   for   asylum   lack
                      credibility merely because the applicant did not rely
                      on his  declared  sexual  orientation  on  the  first
                      occasion he was given  to  set  out  the  ground  for
                      persecution.

             Costs

             73   Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the  main
                  proceedings, a step  in  the  action  pending  before  the
                  national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that
                  court. Costs incurred in submitting  observations  to  the
                  Court, other than the costs  of  those  parties,  are  not
                  recoverable.

                       On those grounds, the Court  (Grand  Chamber)  hereby
                  rules:

                  Article 4(3)(c) of Directive 2004/83/EC of 29  April  2004
                  on minimum standards   for the qualification and status of
                  third country nationals or stateless persons  as  refugees
                  or as persons who otherwise need international  protection
                  and the content of  the  protection  granted  and  Article
                  13(3)(a) of Directive 2005/85/EC of 1  December  2005,  on
                  minimum standards  on  procedures  in  Member  States  for
                  granting  and  withdrawing   refugee   status,   must   be
                  interpreted  as  precluding,  in  the   context   of   the
                  assessment by the competent national  authorities,  acting
                  under the supervision of the  courts,  of  the  facts  and
                  circumstances concerning the declared  sexual  orientation
                  of an applicant for asylum, whose application is based  on
                  a  fear  of  persecution  on  grounds   of   that   sexual
                  orientation, the statements  of  that  applicant  and  the
                  documentary and other evidence  submitted  in  support  of
                  his application being subject to an  assessment  by  those
                  authorities,  founded   on   questions   based   only   on
                  stereotyped notions concerning homosexuals.

                  Article 4 of Directive  2004/83,  read  in  the  light  of
                  Article 7 of the Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the
                  European Union, must be interpreted as  precluding, in the
                  context  of  that  assessment,  the   competent   national
                  authorities from carrying out detailed questioning  as  to
                  the sexual practices of an applicant for asylum.

                  Article 4 of Directive  2004/83,  read  in  the  light  of
                  Article 1 of the Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the
                  European Union, must be interpreted as  precluding, in the
                  context  of  that  assessment,  the  acceptance  by  those
                  authorities of evidence such as  the  performance  by  the
                  applicant for asylum concerned  of  homosexual  acts,  his
                  submission to 'tests' with  a  view  to  establishing  his
                  homosexuality or, yet, the production by him of  films  of
                  such acts.

                  Article 4(3) of Directive 2004/83 and Article 13(3)(a)  of
                  Directive 2005/85 must be interpreted  as  precluding,  in
                  the context of that  assessment,  the  competent  national
                  authorities  from  finding  that  the  statements  of  the
                  applicant for asylum lack credibility merely  because  the
                  applicant did not rely on his declared sexual  orientation
                  on the first occasion he was given to set out  the  ground
                  for persecution.

      7. The ground as pleaded asserts that the effect of  the  decision  is
         that under EU law an assessment of the Appellants  credibility  was
         warranted only if his  asylum  application  was  not  supported  by
         "documentary or other evidence". The Appellant asserts that as  his
         account was supported by such evidence in the form  of  the  Danish
         immigration Service Reports which provided  corroborative  evidence
         of his claim and the workings of the Kurdish parties, including the
         PJAK, there should not have been an assessment of  the  credibility
         of those elements of his claim supported by  documentary  of  other
         evidence.

      8. Article 4(5) was considered in detail by the Upper Tribunal in  the
         case of KS (benefit of doubt) 2014 UKUT 00552 in which the Tribunal
         was considering when assessing the credibility of an asylum  claim,
         the benefit of the doubt ("TBOD"), as discussed in  paragraphs  203
         and 204 of the 1979 UNHCR Handbook on Procedures and  Criteria  for
         Determining Refugee Status. In relation to the position in  EU  law
         the Tribunal stated:

             78.  We find it  unnecessary  in  this  decision  to  seek  to
                  interpret the precise import of the approach to  TBOD  set
                  out by the ECtHR in its jurisprudence relating to  Article
                  3 in the context of assessing risk on return, but we would
                  make this observation. Whilst  that  approach  is  clearly
                  wider than an "end-point" approach, we are  not  convinced
                  that it is as holistic or pervasive as Mr Bazini  submits,
                  since the  Court  appears  to  envisage  that  in  certain
                  circumstances the notion is disapplied  "when  information
                  is presented which gives strong reasons  to  question  the
                  veracity of an asylum  seeker's   submissions":  see  I  v
                  Sweden,  61204/09  [2013]  ECtHR  813,  at   [50]   (supra
                  paragraph 8. (Insofar as it might  be  suggested  that  in
                  R.C. v Sweden  the Court was envisaging  that  in  certain
                  circumstances   the  burden  of  proof  shifts  from   the
                  applicant to the state, we would regard ourselves as bound
                  to follow domestic authority to the contrary: see PJ  (Sri
                  Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 1011, approving  NA  (UT  rule  45:
                  Singh v Belgium) Iran [2014] UKUT 205 (IAC) and MJ  (Singh
                  v Belgium: Tanveer Ahmed  unaffected)  Afghanistan  [2013]
                  UKUT 254 (IAC).)

             Article 4(5) of the Qualification Directive (QD)

             79.  Perhaps unsurprisingly given  the  dearth  of  case  law,
                  neither party was able  to  give  us  much  assistance  in
                  relation to the question as to whether Article 4(5) QD has
                  replaced or modified the UNHCR Handbook's  formulation  of
                  TBOD  notion.  Since  our  hearings   dealing   with   the
                  appellant's case some light has been shed on Article  4(5)
                  by Advocate General Sharpston in her  Opinion  in   Joined
                  Cases C-148/13, C-149/13 and C-150/13, A, B and C, 17 July
                  2014. At [50] she observes that in general  terms  neither
                  the  Qualification Directive nor the Procedures  Directive
                  (2005/85/EC) make specific provision  for  the  manner  in
                  which an applicant's credibility is  to  be  assessed  and
                  that "the general position is that, in the absence  of  EU
                  rules on a subject, it is for the domestic legal system of
                  each Member State to determine the  procedural  conditions
                  governing actions at law intended to ensure the protection
                  conferred by EU law." Earlier, at [42], she observed that:

                  "42. Article 4(1) allows Member States to place  the  onus
                      upon applicants '... to submit as  soon  as  possible
                      all elements needed to substantiate  the  application
                      for international protection  ...'.   That  provision
                      also places a positive duty on Member States  to  act
                      in cooperation  with  the  applicant  to  assess  the
                      relevant elements of his application. The  assessment
                      should be carried out  on  an  individual  basis  and
                      should include taking into  account  the  applicant's
                      individual  position  and   personal   circumstances.
                      Article   4(5)   of   the   Qualification   Directive
                      acknowledges that an applicant may not always be able
                      to substantiate his claim with documentary  or  other
                      evidence. Such evidence  is  therefore  not  required
                      where the cumulative conditions of Article 4(5)(a) to
                      (e) are met."

             80.  The Advocate General goes on to emphasise   at  [56]-[57]
                  that " it does not follow from the  lack  of  any  express
                  wording  in  the  Directive  regulating   Member   States'
                  discretion  regarding  the  practices   or   methods   for
                  assessing an applicant's credibility, that EU  law  places
                  no limits on that discretion." She highlights the role  of
                  the Charter:

                  "57. The Charter provides overarching standards that  must
                      be applied in the implementation  of  any  directive.
                      The Qualification Directive harmonises by introducing
                      minimum standards for obtaining refugee status within
                      the European Union.  It would undermine the CEAS,  in
                      particular the Dublin system, if Member  States  were
                      to apply widely divergent  practices  when  assessing
                      such applications. It would  be  undesirable  if  the
                      differences in its implementation led to applications
                      being more likely to succeed in one jurisdiction than
                      in another because the evidentiary requirements  were
                      easier to satisfy. "

             81.  In light of this Opinion and other academic commentary it
                  can be discerned that the  effect  of  Article  4(5)  (for
                  those  Member  States  who  opt  to  apply  the  principle
                  according to which it is the  duty  of  the  applicant  to
                  substantiate the application for international protection)
                  is  limited  to  the  situation  where  aspects   of   the
                  applicant's statements are not supported by documentary or
                  other evidence (i.e. a situation where there is a lack  of
                  corroboration). By Article 4(5) the applicant  in  such  a
                  situation  will  not   need   to   provide    confirmation
                  (corroboration) when the conditions enumerated  under  (5)
                  are  cumulatively  met[1].  These  conditions  relate   to
                  genuine   effort   (4(5)(a)),   satisfactory   explanation
                  (4.5(b)),   plausibility   (4(5)(c),   earliest   possible
                  application (4(5)(d) and general credibility (4(5)(e)).

             82.  As such, does Article 4(5) enunciate a TBOD rule? We have
                  already  referred to the position taken by the  respondent
                  in the APIs which is that this  provision  does  enunciate
                  such a rule (see above paragraphs  18,21).  That  is  lent
                  some  degree  of  support  by  the  observation  made   by
                  Hailbronner in EU Immigration and  Asylum  Law-Commentary,
                  2010, at p.1030 that the text of Article 4(5) was based in
                  part on the UNHCR      Handbook.

             83.  However, stating that Article 4(5) is based "in part"  on
                  the HCR Handbook does not demonstrate that this  provision
                  codifies such a rule and the idea that it does so  is  not
                  shared by the most in-depth academic  commentary  so  far,
                  that by Gregor Noll, "Evidentiary assessment  and  the  EU
                  qualification directive", UNHCR Working Paper no.  117  in
                  New Issues in  Refugee  Research,  June  2005.  Describing
                  Article  4(5)  as   comprising   overall    "a   qualified
                  alleviating evidentiary rule", Noll cautions at p.12:

                      "The wording  of  [this  rule]  signifies  a  heavier
                      burden for the applicant than the analogue  principle
                      of "benefit of the doubt", as this  is  described  in
                      UNHCR's handbook. In  addition  to  the  requirements
                      given in the handbook, article 4.5  places  at  least
                      one additional condition on the applicant',  s/he  is
                      required to have applied for international protection
                      as early as possible unless  s/he  can  provide  good
                      reasons for not doing so".

             84.  Of course, had we accepted that Article 4(5) of the QD is
                  to be read as     codifying a TBOD  rule,  then  we  would
                  have to revise our earlier statement that this  notion  is
                  not a rule of law. That is because,  in  the  UK,  Article
                  4(5)  has  been  implemented  by  paragraph  339L  of  the
                  Immigration Rules (see above, paragraph 20) which for most
                  purposes do have the force of law.

             85.  But (like Noll) we think it unwise to  refer  to  Article
                  4(5) as reflecting or encapsulating  a TBOD rule. In  part
                  that is  because  we  think  that  the    provision  seeks
                  primarily to identify one particular  application  of  the
                  lower standard of proof  (which  in  our  view  affords  a
                  positive role for      uncertainty). In part this  relates
                  to the point we have already emphasised, namely that  this
                  provision is, limited to cases where there is  a  lack  of
                  corroboration: viz., "where  aspects  of  the  applicant's
                  statements are  not  supported  by  documentary  or  other
                  evidence" (chapeau to Article 4(5)); that on its  face  is
                  more limited in scope  than  the  notion  as  set  out  in
                  paragraph  204  of   the   UNHCR   Handbook   (where   the
                  precondition is that  "all  available  evidence  has  been
                  obtained and checked and when the   examiner is  satisfied
                  as to the applicant's general credibility").  In  part  is
                  because whereas the notion  is  formulated  in  the  UNHCR
                  Handbook in defeasible and contingent terms, Article  4(5)
                  sets out in mandatory terms[2] four conditions which  have
                  to be cumulatively met in order for an  applicant  not  to
                  be required to substantiate his application.  As  such  we
                  think Article 4(5)  (and  paragraph  339L  of  the  Rules)
                  should be applied as it is without any gloss or  reference
                  to the UNHCR Handbook "analogue".  We  understand  UNHCR's
                  concern, as expressed in the 2013 CREDO study, that if not
                  read in the light of  the  UNHCR  Handbook,  Article  4(5)
                  could operate as a policy for withholding TBOD from asylum-
                  seekers; but we consider that danger to be offset  by  (i)
                  the fact that the ambit of  Article  4(5)  is  limited  to
                  cases of non-corroboration/confirmation; and (ii) the fact
                  that applicants   benefit  throughout  the  assessment  of
                  credibility from the lower standard of proof, which in the
                  terminology of Karanakaran, ensures that the  entirety  of
                  that assessment affords a positive role for uncertainty.

      9. The Immigration Rules contain reference to the way in which a judge
         is to assess the merits of an appeal before them in paragraph 399L.
         This was recognised KS where it is said:

             20.  Despite figuring little in UK case law,  TBOD  notion  is
                  given great   prominence in the aforementioned APIs, which
                  also see it as an integral part of paragraph 339L  of  the
                  Immigration Rules. Paragraph 339L specifies that:

                           "It is the duty of the  person  to  substantiate
                      the asylum claim or establish that  he  is  a  person
                      eligible for humanitarian protection or  substantiate
                      his  human  rights  claim.  Where  aspects   of   the
                      applicant's   statements   are   not   supported   by
                      documentary or other evidence, those aspects will not
                      need  confirmation  when   all   of   the   following
                      conditions are met:

                      (i)   the  person  has  made  a  genuine  effort   to
                           substantiate his asylum claim...;

                      (ii) all material factors at  the  person's  disposal
                           have   been   submitted,   and   a   satisfactory
                           explanation regarding any lack  of  material  has
                           been given;

                      (iii)    the person's  statements  are  found  to  be
                           coherent and plausible and do not run counter  to
                           available  specific   and   general   information
                           relevant to the person's case;

                      (iv) the person has made an asylum  claim...  at  the
                           earliest possible time,  unless  the  person  can
                           demonstrate good reason for not having  done  so;
                           and

                      (v)  the general credibility of the person  has  been
                           established ."

             21.  By way of an attempted gloss on paragraph 339L, paragraph
                  4.3.4. of the APIs states:

                            "4.3.4  Benefit  of  the  doubt   and   general
                      credibility

                           Facts which are internally credible but lack any
                      external evidence to confirm them are  deemed  to  be
                      "unsubstantiated"  or  "uncertain"   or   "doubtful".
                      However, a decision must be made whether to give  the
                      applicant the benefit of the doubt on each  uncertain
                      or  unsubstantiated  fact  -  this  means  that   the
                      decision maker must come to a  clear  finding  as  to
                      whether the fact can be accepted or rejected.  It  is
                      not acceptable to come to a final conclusion  that  a
                      claimed fact (about which you  are  uncertain),  "may
                      have happened". The benefit of the doubt needs to  be
                      considered  and  applied   appropriately   to   these
                      uncertain facts when considering all the evidence  in
                      the round at the end of the  credibility  assessment.
                      This means that the benefit of the doubt can only  be
                      considered after a finding on the material facts that
                      are to be accepted or rejected has been made.

                           ...

                           However, it is important to understand paragraph
                      339L and its limitations. What it is saying  is  that
                      if an applicant meets  all  5  criteria,  a  decision
                      maker should give the benefit of the  doubt  -  there
                      would, after all be no reason not to do so.  However,
                      the reverse is not  automatically  true.  Because  an
                      applicant fails to meet one or more of the  criteria,
                      this in itself does not permit a  decision  maker  to
                      disregard all unsubstantiated areas of an applicant's
                      claim because an  unsubstantiated  statement  can  be
                      credible if it    is generally internally consistent,
                      compatible with known facts  and  plausible.  It  is,
                      once again, a matter of determining the weight to  be
                      given to these issues in the light  of  the  material
                      facts of the case.

                           ...

                            Decision  makers  must  ensure  that   wherever
                      possible, the applicant is given the  opportunity  to
                      provide  a  reasonable  explanation  where  and  when
                      required  under  the  provisions  of  339L.  If   the
                      applicant has met all 5 of the criteria  set  out  in
                      Paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules, the  benefit
                      of the doubt should be given to  any  unsubstantiated
                      facts. If the applicant has not met all the criteria,
                      decision makers nevertheless  must  consider  whether
                      giving the benefit of  the  doubt  to  any  uncertain
                      facts is justified. ...

                           Any decision not to apply  the  benefit  of  the
                      doubt to a material claimed fact  that  is  otherwise
                      internally  credible  must  be  based  on  reasonably
                      drawn, objectively justifiable, inferences. "

     10. It is important to  note  the  wording  of  the  Article  which  is
         reflected in the Immigration Rules and which speaks of there  being
         no need to substantiate  an  application  if  it  is  supported  by
         documentary or other evidence.

     11. Art 4 (5) does not  say  that  if  documentary  evidence  has  been
         provided there is no need to provide further evidence, irrespective
         of the quality of the available material. To assess whether a claim
         is supported by evidence requires an assessment of  that  material.
         Such may not be sufficient and may require more which the  decision
         maker is not arguably barred from seeking. The Article sets out the
         circumstances  in  which  a  person  is  not  required  to  provide
         confirmation where supporting material has been provided if all the
         conditions have been met. This recognises that in some cases  there
         may be no supporting material and that it will be  unreasonable  to
         expect the same to be provided if the Appellant  has  done  all  in
         their power to substantiate the claim. The Article is  a  provision
         relating to the way in which the burden of proof can be  discharged
         and how such should be assessed and what  can  be  expected  of  an
         applicant.

     12. The challenge in this case is in reality to the  weight  the  Judge
         gave the evidence relied upon. The Judge was required  by  domestic
         law and good practice to consider the merits of the case based upon
         the available evidence including the  previous  determination.  The
         adverse credibility findings are not contrary to that evidence. The
         Judge has not erred in requiring the Appellant to substantiate  his
         claim in a situation  where  the  same  is  not  required  per  the
         provisions of the Immigration Rules and Article 4(5).  No  arguable
         legal error is made out.

     13. Ground 2 is a mere disagreement with the findings relating  to  the
         tracing obligation. It has not been shown the Appellant is  or  was
         entitled to the corrective relief sought. The finding he has family
         in Iran has not been shown to be  irrational  or  contrary  to  the
         evidence. The fact he was granted discretionary leave as a minor is
         not determinative. It has not been shown the Respondent  failed  to
         comply with her statutory duty to endeavour to trace the family  of
         the Appellant whilst a minor, especially in a country such as  Iran
         where there is no diplomatic presence.  It has also not been  shown
         any such failure had caused the Appellant such  prejudice  that  it
         would be unfair now to remove him to Iran.

     14. Ground 3 refers to the assessment of the Article 8 element  of  the
         appeal. In paragraph 40 of the determination the Judge found:

             40.  Under appendix FM, the relationship between the applicant
                  and the  partner must be genuine  and  subsisting:  E-LTRP
                  1.7.  I  do  not  doubt  that  Ms  Aladag  has  a  genuine
                  affection for the appellant, but I am not  satisfied  that
                  they are in a subsisting relationship.  It has not reached
                  the stage     where she  is  willing  to  acknowledge  his
                  existence to her parents and I find that they  have  is  a
                  friendship rather than a relationship.  They  do  not  co-
                  habit and they spend only limited periods together.

    15. As the above finding was made the Judge did not consider EX.1.

    16. The grounds assert the  Judge  erred  in  failing  to  give  proper
        consideration to cultural differences and to the fact  it  is  more
        difficult for a Muslim female to tell her parent of a  relationship
        than it may be for a non Muslim female.

    17. Whilst cultural elements are important when assessing the  evidence
        they are not determinative. The  Judge  refers  to  Ms  Aladag  not
        informing her parents of the relationship but that does  not  means
        there is no form of relationship or the one that  exists  satisfies
        the relevant Rule. The evidence shows there is  a  relationship  in
        that the Appellant and Ms Aladag are a young couple who have formed
        an attachment. She stays at  his  accommodation  occasionally  even
        though she has not informed her parents. They on the  facts  appear
        to  be  a  courting  couple  in  a  'boyfriend   girlfriend'   type
        relationship.

    18. The relevant provisions of Appendix FM are those  relating  to  the
        'partner route'. At the date of application the Appellant was under
        18 which fell foul of the requirements of E-LTRP 1.3. Although over
        18 at the date of the hearing the rule contains a specific timeline
        and the need to satisfy the age requirement  at  the  date  of  the
        application.

    19. The Judge found against the Appellant on E-LTRP1.7  which  required
        the relationship to be genuine and subsisting. There is, however, a
        more fundamental element that needed to be considered  in  relation
        to the Appellants claim the Judge erred in finding he was unable to
        succeed under the Rules, which  relates  to  the  definition  of  a
        partner to be found in Gen 1.2 which states:

             GEN.1.2. For the purposes of this Appendix "partner" means-

                       a.  the applicant's spouse;

                       b.  the applicant's civil partner;

                       c.   the  applicant's  fianc(e)  or  proposed  civil
                  partner; or

                       d.  a person who has been living  together  with  the
                  applicant in a    relationship akin to a marriage or civil
                  partnership for at least two years prior to  the  date  of
                  application,

             unless a different meaning of  partner  applies  elsewhere  in
             this Appendix.

     20. The Appellant and his girlfriend are not married in law, not  civil
         partners, not engaged to be married and have not been living  in  a
         relationship   akin   to   marriage.   E-LTRP.1.7.   requires   the
         relationship between the applicant and their partner to be  genuine
         and subsisting, but the definition of  the  term  partner  in  this
         requirement must be assessed by reference to Gen 1.2.

     21. No material legal error has been shown in the  decision  to  refuse
         the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

     22.  The  Judge  considered  Article   8   and   found   the   decision
         proportionate. In light of the facts and the limited nature of  the
         rights being relied upon, which form part of the Appellants private
         life, it has not been shown the legitimate aim relied upon  by  the
         Respondent is arguably displaced in this matter. The finding as  to
         proportionality is one open to the Judge on the evidence.

Decision

     23. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.

     24. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005. I make no such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed.......................................................

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 8th May 2015

-----------------------
[1] In the IARLJ study (op.cit. at para 9) the requirements of Article  4(5)
are said to "form an exhaustive list and each  must  be  satisfied  for  the
claimant to have the benefit of that lack of  need  for  confirmation.  This
gives partial statutory effect in those circumstances to the concept of  the
application of the 'benefit of  the  doubt'  to  which  the  UNHCR  Handbook
refers at paragraphs 203 and 204. Article 4.5, however, applies only  'where
Member States apply the principle according to which it is the duty  of  the
applicant to substantiate the application' - that is where the MS  exercises
its option to rely on the first sentence of Article 4.1 either  specifically
or because  this  principle  forms  part  of  its  national  law  concerning
evidential requirements".
[2] Albeit only "[w]here Member States apply the principle according to
which it is the duty of the applicant to substantiate the application for
international protection ..." (Article 4(5)).

