
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10850/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Belfast                      |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 26 June 2015                       |                   On 28 September    |
|                                      |2015                                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                              Mr Essa Abdi Muse
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S McTaggart, Counsel instructed by RP Crawford &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Mathews, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes back before the Upper Tribunal following a hearing on
    28 March 2014 before the President of the Upper Tribunal,  whereby  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the  appellant's  appeal
    against a removal decision, was set aside for error of law.  The  error
    of law decision is set out in full as follows:

                         "DETERMINATION AND REASONS

         1.   This appeal originates in a decision made  on  behalf  of  the
             Secretary of State for the Home Department ('the Secretary  of
             State')  on  16th  November  2012  whereby   the   Appellant's
             application for refugee status was refused.  The Appellant  is
             a national of Somalia, aged 29 years.   He  was  also  refused
             humanitarian   protection   under   Article   15(c)   of   the
             Qualification Directive.  Similarly, his claims under Articles
             2, 3 and 8 ECHR were rejected.  Finally,  discretionary  leave
             to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  refused.   This  was
             followed by a decision to remove the Appellant from the United
             Kingdom.   In  substance,  the  Appellant's  applications  for
             protection were  based  on  his  claim  that  the  'Al-Shabab'
             organisation would kill him in the event of having  to  return
             to Somalia.

         THE IMPUGNED DECISION

         2.   The ensuing appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal ('the FTT')  was
             unsuccessful.  The decision of the FTT may be analysed in  the
             following way:

             (a)  The Judge identified various features of the  Appellant's
                  story which cast doubt on  his  claim  that  he  had  left
                  Somalia in September 2012.

             (b)  It was considered that the Appellant's failure to mention
                  in interview the alleged death of his uncle undermined the
                  credibility of his later account that his uncle was killed
                  by Al-Shabab.

             (c)  The Appellant's account of events on the day when he left
                  Kismayo, Somalia suffered  from  various  inconsistencies,
                  undermining still further the credibility of his account.

             (d)  His claim that he  took  his  uncle's  'cemetery  records
                  book' from Kismayo but then handed this to an agent before
                  boarding the plane in Mogadisu was considered unworthy  of
                  belief.


             (e)  (By implication) the Appellant's credibility  was  shaken
                  still further by his  failure  to  contact  his  wife  and
                  mother after leaving Kismayo.

             (f)  He gave contradictory accounts of his stay with the  Imam
                  in Mogadishu.

             (g)  His ability to  travel  from  Kismayo  to  Mogadishu,  to
                  remain in Mogadishu for a period and then to travel to the
                  airport and leave the country undermined the risk asserted
                  by him.

             (h)  His claim that he is at risk in Somalia on account of his
                  illegitimacy was undermined by his other evidence that  he
                  is married, was  working  in  a  cemetery  and  also  sold
                  cigarettes.

             These factors gave rise to the Judge's omnibus conclusion that
             the Appellant's credibility was damaged.   The  Judge  further
             rejected the Appellant's claims that he has family members who
             belong to the Ashraf clan and that his  uncle  was  killed  as
             alleged in the various respects outlined above.

         THE FTT DETERMINATION

         3.   The Judge then considered the question of risk upon return  to
             Mogadishu  in  greater  detail.   This  exercise  included  an
             examination of the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  AMM  and
             Others (Conflict; Humanitarian Crisis; Returnees; FGM) Somalia
             CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC).  Having done so, she reasoned  and
             concluded as follows:

                  'The Appellant is  not  returning  to  Mogadishu  after  a
                  significant time abroad.  There is no evidence that he  is
                  vulnerable.  He therefore comes within paragraph  [2]  (of
                  AMM) and is someone who would not  face  a  real  risk  of
                  Article 3 harm as he  is  fit  for  work  and  has  family
                  connections in Kismayo and has  previously  been  able  to
                  seek the help of an Imam in  Mogadishu.   Even  if  he  is
                  unable to return to Kismayo, which I  do  not  accept,  he
                  could remain in Mogadishu.'

             The Judge's overall conclusion was that the Appellant had  not
             demonstrated a  well  founded  fear  of  persecution,  thereby
             impelling to a dismissal of his asylum appeal.  The Judge also
             dismissed the appeals  on  humanitarian  protection  and  ECHR
             grounds.

         APPEAL TO THIS TRIBUNAL

         4.   The grant of permission to appeal to this Tribunal is  couched
             in terms that the FtT Judge did not adequately deal  with  the
             risk to which the Appellant would  be  exposed  on  return  to
             Somalia, particularly in Mogadishu, in journeying therefrom to
             Kismayo and in Kismayo, given the 'current  conditions'.   The
             permission Judge noted  the  FtT  Judge's  findings  that  the
             Appellant is not vulnerable and could remain in Mogadishu.  He
             considered it arguable that the Judge did not properly  engage
             with  these  issues.   Permission  to  challenge  the  Judge's
             adverse  credibility  findings  was  also   granted,   without
             elaboration.

         5.   Notably,  the  'headline'  in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  is  a
             criticism of the FTT Judge's  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
             credibility:

                  'The appellant would submit that the decision .....  shows
                  material errors of law in  regard  to  the  assessment  of
                  credibility in the case.

             Attention is then directed to  the  decision  of  the  English
             Court of Appeal in Karanakran - v - SSHD [2000] EWCA  Civ  11,
             which enjoined  Tribunals  to  concentrate  on  the  'ultimate
             question' of:


                       'Whether there is a real risk of serious harm in  the
                  country of origin.'

             The Grounds proceed to criticise the FTT determination in  the
             following respects:

             (a)  No reason is given for the suggestion that the  Appellant
                  should have been aware that Al-Shabab withdrew on the  day
                  he departed from Somalia.


             (b)   The  Judge's  adverse  credibility  assessment  of   the
                  Appellant for his failure to  mention  his  uncle's  death
                  during the screening interview is undermined by  the  fact
                  that the Appellant did so both in the  substantive  asylum
                  interview and again in his statement.

             (c)  The Judge erred in suggesting that the  Appellant's  wife
                  would not have been free to go to tell him of the  uncle's
                  death in its aftermath.

             (d)  The Judge was wrong  in  considering  that  a  series  of
                  events described by the Appellant could not have  unfolded
                  within the limited time frame of 30 minutes.

             (e)  The Judge failed to recognise that agents typically order
                  their 'clients' to leave everything behind.

             (f)  In finding the Appellant's claim that he had no means  of
                  contacting a relative who assisted him not  credible,  the
                  Judge provides no  reason  'with  reference  to  objective
                  evidence'.

             (g)  The Judge should have found that the Appellant's internal
                  travel movements were the product of good fortune.

             (h)  The Judge was wrong to reject the Appellant's claims that
                  some members of his family belonged to  the  Ashraf  clan,
                  that his uncle was killed as alleged and  that  Al  Shabab
                  were looking for him.

             (i)  The Judge failed to  correctly  apply  the  AMM  test  of
                  whether conditions  in  Kismayo  -  were  the  fact  of  a
                  transitional   government   is    acknowledged    -    are
                  'sufficiently  durable'  to  allay  concerns   about   the
                  Appellant's safety upon returning there.

             (j)  The Judge further erred in failing to consider,  properly
                  or  at  all,  whether  a  person  with   the   Appellant's
                  characteristics viz  someone  who  has  been  absent  from
                  Somalia for a significant period could  safely  return  to
                  Mogadishu.

         CONSIDERATION AND CONCLUSIONS

         6.   At the outset of the hearing, I raised with Mr  McTaggart  (of
             Counsel), representing the Appellant, the issue of  the  grant
             of  permission  to  appeal   against   the   Judge's   adverse
             credibility findings.  I observed that  the  permission  Judge
             had not identified any arguable error of law in this  respect.
             I suggested to Counsel that, taking into account the  relevant
             threshold, namely irrationality, this  aspect  of  the  appeal
             presented a  substantial  challenge  for  the  Appellant.   It
             seemed to me that this element  of  the  grant  of  permission
             exhibited little enthusiasm on  the  part  of  the  permission
             Judge.  Bearing in mind the evidence considered, coupled  with
             the consideration that the Judge had had  the  opportunity  of
             considering the Appellant's evidence at first hand, it  seemed
             to me unlikely that any of  the  Judge's  adverse  credibility
             findings would be upset on the ground of irrationality.  While
             Mr  McTaggart  did  not  concede  this,  he  was  inclined  to
             recognise the force of these observations.

         7.   As noted above, the central pillar of the grant of  permission
             to appeal was the adequacy of the Judge's treatment of the AMM
             decision and its application to the Appellant's circumstances.
               I  considered,  provisionally,  that  the  terms  in   which
             permission was granted were, considering the Determination  as
             a whole, as one must, a little  harsh.   The  outcome  of  the
             contest on this, the core, issue was by no means  preordained.
             However, echoing the terms of the  grant  of  permission,  Mrs
             O'Brien, on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State,  signalled  a
             concession on this issue, based on paragraphs 26 - 29  of  the
             Determination.  This concession, very properly, did not extend
             to the adverse credibility findings.





         DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

         8.   Reflecting the above, at the hearing I decided and directed as
             follows:

             (i)  The decision of the FtT is set aside.

             (ii) I retain the case in the forum of the Upper Tribunal  for
                  the purpose of remaking the decision.

             (iii)    The further hearing will postdate the promulgation of
                  the decision of the Upper Tribunal in MOJ and Others - v -
                  Secretary of State for the Home Department, which has  the
                  potential to be  designated  an  updated  Somalia  Country
                  Guidance decision.

             (iv) Following promulgation of the decision in MOJ and Others,
                  the file should be brought to my immediate  attention  for
                  the purpose of making any desirable further directions.

              (v) Any further hearing will be relisted before  me,  subject
                  to availability.

         9.   I add the footnote that, as the decision  in  MOJ  and  Others
             will make clear,  there  is  a  substantial  body  of  country
             evidence relating to Somalia some of which was not  considered
             by the Secretary of State in making the impugned  decision  in
             the present case and much of which  was  not  brought  to  the
             attention of the FtT Judge."

 2. Although the grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  included
    a challenge  to  the  First-tier  Judge's  credibility  findings,  that
    challenge was no longer pursued.

    The oral evidence

 3. In examination-in-chief the appellant  adopted  his  witness  statement
    dated 22 June 2014.  In  cross-examination  he  confirmed  that  he  is
    originally from Kismayo which is in the lower Juba region of Somalia.

 4. When he left Kismayo, his mother had by then passed away but  his  wife
    was there.  However, now she has left.  His mother passed away in  July
    2014.  Although he did not say that in his witness statement,  this  is
    not something he was asked but he did tell his solicitor.  It  is  true
    that his mother dying is a very important event for him.

 5. He last made contact with his wife in 2014 but he does not remember the
    date exactly.  It was at the same time as his mother passed away, about
    July 2014.  That was not the only occasion on  which  he  was  able  to
    speak to her, he had been communicating with her  for  a  while,  since
    about December (2013).

 6. The last time he spoke to his wife she said that she intended to  leave
    Kismayo for Mogadishu  and  that  she  would  go  to  an  IDP  camp  in
    Mogadishu.  Life was very difficult in Kismayo and the only person  she
    had there was the appellant's mother, who had died.

 7. He had heard that the judge who first heard his appeal (at  the  First-
    tier Tribunal) did not believe that his uncle had  died.   He  did  not
    have any other family in Kismayo, apart from his mother, who also died.

 8. His cousin in Saudi Arabia was deported from there in July 2014.  As to
    whether it is just a coincidence that  all  these  events  happened  in
    2014: his wife leaving, his mother dying and his cousin being  deported
    from Saudi Arabia, the appellant said that he has no control  over  the
    things that happened.

 9. He had attempted to use the Red Cross to try and trace his wife.  As to
    whether he had considered getting the Red Cross to confirm that matter,
    when he went there he filled in a form and they said  that  they  would
    send a letter but so far he has not received it.  He had  filled  in  a
    form with all the details of  his  family  in  February  of  this  year
    (2015).

10. He had heard of the programme whereby the Home Office help people to go
    back to their own countries with financial assistance and help them  to
    obtain employment.   He  then  said  that  he  had  heard  about  those
    possibilities but he did not know about support.   He  remembers  being
    given a piece of paper when reporting to the Home Office but he did not
    understand what it was all about.

11. As to why he does not now want to go back to Mogadishu with  assistance
    from the Home Office, the appellant said that he did not come to the UK
    for economic reasons but for protection and to save his life.

12. He had told the truth to the previous judge and was telling  the  truth
    today.  He was targeted by Al-Shabaab and is from a minority tribe  and
    would therefore have no protection if he  went  back  to  Somalia.   He
    would not be able to protect himself and his wife,  not  being  from  a
    strong tribe and he has no skills or a profession which would allow him
    to survive.  The "economic boom" belongs to  majority  tribes  and  the
    uneducated are given the low-paid jobs.  There  would  be  nothing  for
    him.  Since the Somalian government collapsed all business is that way.
     At the  moment  he  knows  that  in  Mogadishu  there  is  an  African
    peacekeeping force and that it is a war zone,  with  fighting  all  the
    time.

    Submissions

13. On behalf of the respondent Mr Mathews submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Judge had found the appellant to be lacking in  credibility  and  those
    findings are  preserved.   The  First-tier  Judge  did  note  that  the
    respondent did not accept that the appellant was illegitimate, although
    the First-tier Judge made no finding about that.  She did however  find
    that the appellant had not given a credible account of his  mother  and
    uncle being Ashraf or that his uncle was killed by Al-Shabaab, or  that
    Al-Shabaab were looking for the appellant.

14. Despite there being  no  express  finding  about  whether  or  not  the
    appellant is illegitimate, the judge was still not satisfied  that  the
    appellant was from a minority clan.  There was no finding  as  to  what
    clan he belonged to.  That therefore, leaves open the  conclusion  that
    he is from a majority clan.  It is improbable that he would say that he
    was from the minority Ashraf, but was in reality from another  minority
    clan.

15. His claim was made at a time when there would  be  some  benefit  to  a
    claim to be from a minority clan but the decision in MOJ & Ors  (Return
    to Mogadishu) (CG) [2014] UKUT 442 (IAC)  means  that  the  benefit  of
    being from a minority clan is considerably diminished.

16. The First-tier Judge was not completely convinced  that  the  appellant
    was in Kismayo at the  time  when  he  said  he  was  there  since  his
    knowledge of events at that time was not convincing.

17. In the evidence at this hearing, the appellant was clear  that  he  had
    his mother and wife there, and the finding of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    is to the effect that it can be assumed that his uncle was also  there.
    It is surprising that he had said that his mother had passed  away  but
    he had omitted that from his witness  statement.   That  could  not  be
    explained away just on the basis that he was not asked about it.

18. Contact with his wife was re-established on or around July 2014 and  no
    doubt that evidence would be linked in his mind to  the  death  of  his
    mother.  That is said by the appellant to be at the very same time that
    his wife went to an IDP camp in Mogadishu, and the very same month that
    his cousin, who paid a considerable sum to  get  him  to  the  UK,  was
    deported from Saudi Arabia.

19. Those claims seem to indicate  a  contrived  case  to  make  his  claim
    consistent with country guidance.

20. Despite what the appellant said  about  efforts  to  contact  his  wife
    through the Red Cross, that is information that could very easily  have
    been confirmed with the Red Cross.

21. As to clan membership, the appellant is not able to establish  that  he
    would not have the assistance of a majority clan,  and  the  burden  of
    proof is on him.

22. According to MOJ there would be no risk to the appellant of a breach of
    his Article 3 rights from Al-Shabaab, and  he  would  not  be  able  to
    establish an Article 15(c) breach either.  The appellant does not  have
    any particular characteristics that would create a risk  for  him  more
    than for anyone else.  The argument for the  appellant  seems  to  boil
    down to an Article 3 risk in terms of his being required to live in  an
    IDP camp  or  where  conditions  on  return  would  breach  Article  3.
    However, not everyone outside Mogadishu is in an IDP camp.  At [424]  -
    [425] of MOJ it was concluded that that it is  not  simply  those  from
    Mogadishu who may return there without an Article 3  or  Article  15(c)
    risk.  Someone returning there  with  access  to  funds  and  a  social
    support network or in receipt of remittances, would not be at risk.

23. Furthermore, MOJ refers at [344] -  [352]  to  the  economic  boom  and
    inward investment.  That is in terms of hotels, restaurants, taxis, bus
    services, construction and so forth.  None of those require  particular
    skills and there is nothing to indicate that  the  appellant  would  be
    excluded from obtaining such employment.

24. Furthermore, at [351] it is suggested that people  from  the  West  may
    have advantages in seeking employment.

25. Clan membership is less significant in Mogadishu.  Although it has some
    relevance it is not determinative.   As  explained  in  MOJ,  there  is
    assistance of up to �1,500 available.   The  appellant  previously  had
    financial  assistance  from  a  relative  in  Saudi   Arabia   although
    conveniently that cousin has now been deported and he says is unable to
    provide such assistance.

26. There is no reason to believe that the appellant would have to go to an
    IDP camp.  He is young  and  fit  and  more  than  capable  of  finding
    employment.  He has not established that he  has  no  clan  affiliation
    from whom he could obtain assistance.

27. Mr McTaggart accepted that the First-tier Judge did not accept that the
    appellant had links to the  Ashraf  through  family  members,  although
    there was no finding as to his illegitimacy.  It was  an  impermissible
    leap to say that he is therefore a member of a majority clan and  would
    have support.

28. It is true that a finding on illegitimacy does not rule out  membership
    of a majority clan, but the fact still remains that there is no finding
    on what clan the appellant is from.

29. As to the meaning of 'illegitimate', it is to the effect that he is not
    officially from one clan or another.

30. The appellant's claim is that his mother was raped  and  that  she  was
    from the Ashraf.

31. As the report dated November 2014 from the Office for the  Coordination
    of Humanitarian Affairs ("OCHA") states at page 14 of  the  appellant's
    bundle, "Over 40,000 Somalis were deported from  Saudi  Arabia  in  the
    last year as part of a crackdown on illegal immigrants."  That supports
    what the appellant says about his  cousin  having  been  deported  from
    Saudi Arabia.

32. The appellant is not from Mogadishu and  has  no  established  presence
    there, only having been there for a short period of time.   It  is  not
    known whether the imam who  helped  him  is  still  there.   These  are
    factors set out in MOJ as being relevant.  The appellant says  that  he
    has no other family or friends there and no clan support.

33. He had previously been in employment as  a  grave  digger  and  selling
    cigarettes.  Although packages of support are available, these are  for
    assisted voluntary returns, which is not what the  appellant  is.   His
    evidence is that his cousin is no longer in Saudi  Arabia  and  is  not
    therefore in a position to send him any money.  In the UK he  only  has
    NASS support.

34. Last December was the last contact he had with his wife.  He would  not
    be able therefore, to take advantage of the so-called economic boom.

35. The OCHA report at page 1 suggests that the situation has  deteriorated
    since the decision in MOJ.  There  is  reference  at  page  2  to  clan
    discrimination and violence.

36. The Country Information and Guidance from the Home Office  dated  March
    2015 ("CIG") refers at 1.3.1 to there  being  no  effective  protection
    from the State.  I was referred to 2.2.5 of the same report,  being  an
    extract from a report from Amnesty International dated October 2013.

37. Mr McTaggart also referred me to  2.5.16  -  2.5.22  in  terms  of  the
    situation for IDPs. It was submitted that if the appellant is  returned
    to Mogadishu he would have no option but to go to an IDP camp where  he
    would face an Article 3 risk.

    My conclusions

38. The First-tier judge found, in effect, that the appellant's account was
    devoid of credibility.  Aside from what appears at [2] of the error  of
    law decision in terms of the summary of findings made by the First-tier
    Judge, it is also important to note that it was concluded at [19]  that
    it was not credible that the appellant has no means of  contacting  his
    cousin in Saudi Arabia who is said to  have  funded  his  journey  from
    Somalia.  At [24] the First-tier judge said that  she  did  not  accept
    that the appellant was at risk in Somalia because of  his  illegitimacy
    or that he is unable to support himself and his family there.  At  [25]
    the claim that his uncle was killed "as claimed" was rejected.  At [27]
    it was concluded that the appellant has family in Kismayo and would  be
    able to work.  Lastly, at [29] the conclusion was  that  there  was  no
    evidence that the appellant was vulnerable, he is fit for work and  has
    family connections in Kismayo.

39. Those findings in relation to  the  appellant's  credibility  put  into
    context the appellant's claim that his mother has died, that  his  wife
    has left Kismayo and lives in an IDP camp outside  Mogadishu  and  that
    his cousin in Saudi Arabia has been deported to Somalia.  In  his  most
    recent witness statement the appellant says that she has fled to  Kenya
    for safety and is still there, and has no money to help him.

40. I bear in mind the background material drawn to my attention on  behalf
    of the appellant in terms of deportations of Somalis from Saudi  Arabia
    in 2014.  Nevertheless, I am satisfied  that  there  is  merit  in  the
    submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  in  terms  of   the
    credibility of the latest evidence from the appellant.  He claims  that
    his mother died in July 2014.  However, his latest witness statement is
    dated 22 June 2015 and in it he says nothing about  his  mother  having
    died.  That alone in my view undermines the credibility of that  aspect
    of his claim.  The lack of credibility is reinforced  by  his  evidence
    that his mother died at about the same time as the last  time  he  made
    contact with his wife.  In addition, this was also at  about  the  same
    time, indeed the same month according to his  witness  statement,  that
    his cousin was deported from Saudi Arabia.  The  last  contact  he  had
    with his wife, and his cousin's deportation from Saudi Arabia, if true,
    would both have been reference points for his evidence which would have
    reminded him, if he needed reminding, that his mother had also died  at
    about the same time.

41. The appellant says that he contacted the Red Cross in order to  see  if
    they could trace his wife.  However, despite apparently having gone  to
    the Red Cross and completed a form, there is no evidence from  the  Red
    Cross to support his contention that  he  ever  went  there.   This  is
    evidence that in my judgement it is reasonable to believe he could have
    obtained.

42. I entirely accept that events such as the appellant's wife leaving  her
    home area and going to an IDP camp, his mother  passing  away  and  his
    cousin  being  deported  from  Saudi  Arabia,  are  all  events   which
    individually are inherently plausible. It is well known that there  are
    IDP camps in Somalia and, as  I  have  indicated,  background  material
    shows that there were deportations from Saudi Arabia in 2014.  However,
    I am not satisfied that the appellant has given a credible  account  of
    any of these specific events  having  occurred,  bearing  in  mind  the
    matters relating to the appellant's credibility on those issues set out
    above, and taking into account his lack  of  credibility  to  date,  as
    found by the First-tier Tribunal.

43. Thus, I am not satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  given  a  credible
    account of his wife having left her home area of Kismayo, of any cousin
    having been deported from Saudi Arabia or of his  mother  having  died.
    Even if the  appellant  did  go  to  the  Red  Cross  and  complete  an
    application form in relation to a claimed intention to search  for  his
    wife, I do not accept that this was done by the  appellant  because  he
    actually needs their assistance to contact her.  In any event,  on  the
    basis of the information before me, I am  not  satisfied  that  he  has
    sought the assistance of the Red Cross.

44. On behalf of the appellant what is said to  be  his  'illegitimacy'  is
    relied on.  That is to say, his mother was not married to  his  father,
    she having been raped.

45. In his first witness statement the appellant claimed that he  would  be
    at risk on return to Somalia in part  because  he  is  an  illegitimate
    child with no clan and no-one to protect  him,  which  would  make  him
    vulnerable.  It was not suggested on behalf  of  either  party  that  a
    finding has already been made by the First-tier Judge  in  relation  to
    the appellant's claim that he is illegitimate.  It seems to me that the
    First-tier Judge's findings at [24] and [25] can be read either way  on
    this issue.

46. In any event, the appellant's account in my judgement is so lacking  in
    credibility that I am not satisfied that he has established that it  is
    reasonably likely that he is illegitimate.  Even if he is, on the basis
    of  the  findings  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that  has  not
    disadvantaged him in the past.  He was able  to  find  employment,  get
    married and was able to arrange to leave the country and  come  to  the
    UK.

47. The First-tier Judge was not satisfied that the  appellant  has  family
    members who are from the Ashraf.  There was in fact no  finding  as  to
    what clan affiliation he has.  Mr McTaggart submitted that it  was  not
    necessarily the  case  that  just  because  he  was  found  not  to  be
    associated with a minority clan, the Ashraf, he must therefore be  from
    a majority clan.  This submission has some superficial  attraction  but
    there is, it seems to me, force in the submission made by Mr Mathews to
    the effect that it is not credible that  the  appellant  would  falsely
    assert he was from one minority clan, the Ashraf, only to conceal  that
    he was in fact from another, different, minority clan.  Logically,  the
    concealment must relate to his being a member of a majority clan.

48. On the facts of this appeal, that in my judgement is the true position.
     The appellant's overall lack of credibility, and the preserved finding
    that he had not established that he is from the minority  Ashraf  clan,
    leads to the conclusion that he is in fact associated with one  of  the
    majority clans.  It is not possible to determine which  clan  that  is,
    but that is not a finding that needs to be made.

49. I do not accept therefore,  that  on  return  the  appellant  would  be
    without clan associations which would mean that he would be hampered in
    terms of any support that he might be able to obtain,  for  example  in
    obtaining employment.  In any event, for the reasons I have  given,  it
    is reasonably likely that the appellant has family members in  Somalia,
    being connections which would  help  him  to  re-establish  himself  in
    Mogadishu, even if he were not able because of the  security  situation
    to travel to Kismayo.

50. I was not referred to any evidence in terms of what difficulties  there
    may be in the appellant returning to his home area of  Kismayo.   I  am
    prepared  to  accept  however,  that  the  security  situation  outside
    Mogadishu is such that he may be at risk of harm in  travelling  there.
    However, taking into account all the matters set out in MOJ at [407] in
    terms of  an  individual's  return  to  Mogadishu,  and  with  specific
    reference to the appellant, I am not satisfied that he has  established
    that he would be at risk for any reason, or that he would  be  required
    to live in an IDP camp.

51. Although it  was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  with
    reference to the information in the OCHA report, for example at page 1,
    the situation has deteriorated since the guidance provided in MOJ, that
    report is dated November 2014, just two months after the last  date  of
    hearing, and promulgation of MOJ. I do not consider  that  that  report
    affects  in  any  way  the  guidance  in  MOJ,  when  set  against  the
    considerable volume of  background  material  considered  in  MOJ,  and
    bearing in mind the date of the report.

52. The appellant has not established that he would not be able  to  access
    the economic opportunities available in Mogadishu.  He would be able to
    support himself and to live in relative safety, as  he  did  before  he
    came to the UK, when he was living in Kismayo.

53. I am not satisfied that the appellant has established to  the  required
    standard  that  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason or that he faces a real  risk  of  a  breach  of  his
    Article 3 rights on return to Somalia.

54. It was accepted on behalf of the appellant that in the  light  of  MOJ,
    there is no scope for argument as to a risk of harm with  reference  to
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

    Decision

55. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  That decision having been set aside, I re-make  the
    decision by dismissing the appeal on asylum grounds and with  reference
    to Article 3 of the ECHR.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            28/09/15
