
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA106902015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th May 2016                             |On 15 June 2016               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Ms Germaine Deroux
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ousseynou, Counsel, instructed by Harding
Mitchell Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT


 1. The Appellant in these proceedings was the Respondent before the First-
    tier Tribunal and I am going to refer to the parties as  the  Secretary
    of State and claimant for my ease of reference.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals  with  permission  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal a decision of Judge Bird promulgated on  21st  March  2016  in
    which Judge Bird allowed, on Article 8 grounds, the  claimant's  appeal
    against a decision of the Respondent to grant her leave.

 3. The grounds upon which permission are granted are in  essence  twofold,
    firstly that there was an  inadequate  proportionality  assessment  and
    secondly that there is inadequate reasoning.

 4. The grounds set out at (a) and (b) are that the  judge  has  failed  to
    take into account matters adverse  to  the  claimant,  as  required  by
    Section 117B of the nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   The
    issue before me turned on the treatment of  the  public  interest,  and
    specifically the public interest as reflected by the refusal under  the
    Immigration Rules.

 5. I turn to the judge's decision.

 6. On the face of the decision there  does  not  seem  to  have  been  any
    dispute before the judge that the Appellant had a  family  and  private
    life with  which  the  decision  interfered.   Certainly  that  is  not
    apparent on the face of the refusal.

 7. Judge Bird at paragraph 6 of her decision noted that  the  grounds  are
    within and outside of the Rules, in the context of Article 8.

 8. At paragraphs 18 to 20 she sets out her findings relevant to the  Rules
    in respect of Appendix FM and the Rules in respect of paragraph 276ADE,
    private life requirements.

 9. At paragraph 21 the judge considers whether or not it  would  be  right
    for her to move on to consider the claimant's case outside of the Rules
    and in particular considers the issue as to whether or  not  the  Rules
    provided an adequate or full consideration of the circumstances of  the
    Appellant.

10. In that context I am satisfied  that  the  judge  has  correctly  self-
    directed in terms of the structure of her decision-making task.

11. In terms of  the  public  interest  requirements  the  judge  notes  at
    paragraph 21 the public weight attaching to the  Immigration  Rules  in
    the context  of  Section  117B  when  considering  Article  8.   It  is
    important to note that in that context she has taken her  consideration
    of Section 117 through the lens of the Immigration  Rules,  having  set
    out in the paragraphs immediately preceding the position in respect  of
    the Rules, to the point that  I  am  satisfied  that  the  reasons  for
    rejecting the Appellant's Grounds of Appeal in  respect  of  the  Rules
    were clearly held in her mind at the point of moving on to consider the
    matter outside of the Rules.

12. Judge Bird took the public interest in the maintenance  of  immigration
    control and the point is set out  at  117B(1)  as  being  her  starting
    point, and has accurately therefore identified in her consideration the
    relevance of the position under the Rules as being her  starting  point
    in making her proportionality assessment, and  so  brings  forward  the
    reasons for why she has found that the requirements of  the  Rules  are
    not met.  Those are set out at 19 and 20 of her  decision  and  reflect
    difficulties  with  the   specified   evidence   submitted   with   the
    application, and the absence of evidence in terms of the ability of the
    Sponsors in the United Kingdom to be able to afford the  sort  of  help
    that the claimant would  require  on  return,  and,  in  terms  of  the
    claimant's private life,  the  issues  in  respect  of  her  linguistic
    ability in speaking French, the language of the country of origin,  and
    the presence of friends in the context of integration.

13. The Secretary of State argued before me that the matters that the judge
    has taken into account in the context of the Rules are  in  reality  no
    different from those taken into account in the context  of  her  family
    life and matters  pertaining  to  the  proportionality  exercise.  With
    respect to Mr Wilding, I disagree.

14. The judge has made  findings  of  fact,  which  are  not  significantly
    disputed before me.

15. The judge found that the Appellant had been  here  since  2004,  having
    entered lawfully,  and  at  paragraph  2  of  her  determination,  that
    following that initial position the claimant was here unlawfully.  That
    she is now a 67 year old lady who is  frail  and  a  vulnerable  adult.
    Vulnerability is not a matter which is considered in the context of the
    personal assistance required in Appendix FM,  or  as  set  out  in  the
    context of paragraph 276 ADE.

16. The judge has made findings in terms of the claimant's  ethnicity,  and
    the difficulties in her home area that have arisen out of the political
    conflict. Specifically that  the  claimant  has  no  relatives  in  her
    country of origin, that her home had been destroyed or burnt down,  and
    that her village is now occupied by  the  rebels  who,  the  judge  had
    found,  had destroyed it and who  have  a  history  of  antagonism  and
    hostility to those of the claimant's ethnicity.

17. The judge found that the claimant was dependent on her son and daughter
    in the United Kingdom, and took into account medical evidence including
    difficulties with the claimant's memory which had led her to previously
    adjourn the proceedings, and it is clear that when at paragraph  25  of
    her decision the judge is refers to the  family  circumstances  of  the
    claimant that is the background that she is clearly referring to.

18. In those circumstances it is not at all surprising that the judge found
    that the private life requirements at paragraph 276ADE and the Rules in
    respect of Appendix FM did not provide  an  adequate  consideration  of
    this  claimant's  family  life  and   that   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances which required her to consider the matter in the  context
    of Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.

19. In short, I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  has  adopted  the  correct
    structure to her decision-making task and  has  given  due  and  proper
    account to the public interest question as required  by  Section  117B.
    Further that the conclusion is sustainable on  the  evidence  that  was
    before the judge and that the overall decision is not perverse.

20. In respect of the adequate reasoning ground I am satisfied that for the
    reasons I have already given the ground is not made out.

21. I turn briefly to deal with the suggestion that there is an  irrelevant
    factor in the context of the position  of  accommodation  and  in  that
    regard I am satisfied again that the judgment  reveals  no  error,  the
    ground drawn by the Secretary of State being a  mischaracterisation  of
    the finding in respect of the Appellant's position in her home  village
    on return.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The Judge's decision allowing  the  appeal  reveals  no  error  of  law  and
stands.



Signed   E Davidge                           Date 13 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

