
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10444/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 15th August 2014                           |On 19th November 2014        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     G R
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr K Behbahani instructed by Oaks solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Dewison - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge  Henderson  promulgated  on  8th  January  2014  in  which  she
       dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  direction  for  her
       removal to Iran that accompanied the refusal of her claim for  asylum
       or any other form of international protection.


    2. The  Appellant  first  claimed  asylum  in  2007  using  an  identity
       different from that in which she made this claim, in relation to both
       name and date of birth. The Appellant has  admitted  that  the  first
       account was untrue and that the current basis of the  claim  is  that
       she seeks to rely upon. Having considered the evidence the Judge sets
       out her findings of fact from paragraph 53 of the determination which
       can be summarised as follows:


       i. The Appellant is an Iranian national who  arrived  in  the  United
           Kingdom with her mother and sister on a family visit.   Bio-data
           taken from the entry clearance application confirms the  current
           claim is made using her true identity [53].


       ii.    The issue of  credibility  has  been  made  difficult  by  the
           Appellant presenting what she  confirmed  as  false  information
           regarding her identity and reasons for claiming  asylum  earlier
           [54].


       iii.   The basis of the current claim is as summarised in  paragraphs
           11 to 24 of the determination. It is accepted the Appellant came
           to the United Kingdom with a visit visa with  the  intention  of
           visiting an aunt in Leeds although  she  claimed  to  have  very
           quickly become involved with an Iranian man she met in a  coffee
           shop in the UK [57].


       iv.    The alleged rapidity with which the Appellant stated she moved
           from first meeting the man in the coffee shop to a relationship,
           to a sexual relationship, to becoming pregnant, to  leaving  her
           aunt's house, to living with the man,  was  said  to  be  "quite
           astonishing". The Appellant provides no dates in  her  statement
           and gives little by way of a timescale when  asked  to  be  more
           precise about the relationship and  events  in  interview  [57].
           Replies to questions in interview indicate the Appellant came to
           the United Kingdom on 25th October 2006, met unnamed man at  the
           end of October, had a relationship that lasted two months,  took
           the pregnancy test which proved positive in  November  and  that
           her boyfriend  obtained  tablets  for  the  termination  of  the
           pregnancy  [58].   In  oral  evidence  however   the   Appellant
           confirmed she  had  a  first  meeting  with  the  named  man  by
           November. The Judge records 'surprise' at the evidence regarding
           the alleged discovery of being pregnant. The Judge records  that
           in light of past history she has real concerns  about  accepting
           such facts as credible [59].


       v. The Judge found it surprising her family in Iran were aware of the
           pregnancy within days of the Appellant knowing [60] it was found
           odd that her mother would tell her father when she was aware  of
           what the reaction might be. The assertion her mother had to tell
           her father was not found to be supported by any reason [61].


       vi.    A  false  asylum  claim  was  made  after  the  Appellant  had
           allegedly left the named man although she was  vague  about  who
           advised her to submit the false claim. Other family members  who
           entered on similar  visit visas remained in the  United  Kingdom
           until the end of December/early January.   The  Judge  found  it
           surprising that the family members  would  not  collectively  or
           individually make an effort to find the  Appellant  and  discuss
           the issues with her [62].


       vii.   The Appellant's claim she and her aunt were no longer speaking
           to each other was again  said  to  be  'surprising'  albeit  not
           implausible given she reunited with her aunt  in  2007  and  was
           living with her at the time she made a second  application.  The
           aunt could have corroborated her account  but  she  was  not  in
           court to assist the Appellant. The  Appellant's  claim  to  have
           used her cousin's laptop in court (son of  her  aunt)  indicated
           ongoing contact. The Judge concluded the Appellant was not being
           truthful regarding contact with her aunt and the reasons for her
           aunt not attending court or knowledge of her aunt's  immigration
           history [63].


       viii.  The Appellant was very vague about what she had been doing  in
           the United Kingdom for the past  few  years.   No  one  came  to
           support her. She has a Facebook account in which  she  has  been
           very active and from which many pages were provided in evidence.
           There are references to links on reports about Iran.  The  Judge
           found  the  Appellant's  uses  Facebook  "like  most  people  to
           communicate, contact, shock, inform and  entertain"  [65].   The
           Judge finds that what is lacking from the  information  provided
           in the Facebook correspondence is how open  the  forums  are  in
           which the Appellant is participating [66].


       ix.    The Appellant claims to fear persecution on account of contact
           with KS who she claimed she met through a  discussion  group  on
           Facebook. In addition, Gmail correspondence from her laptop with
           links to several reports has been provided although  apart  from
           the Appellant's assertion that this is a Gmail account  in  Iran
           there is no evidence to show this is the case. It  is  simply  a
           Gmail account to someone with  an  Iranian  name  which  can  be
           accessed by  a  recipient  in  any  country  and  there  was  no
           additional evidence which shows that this was an e-mail sent  to
           Iran [67].


       x. If the Appellant sent attachments such as those  she  provided  to
           the First-tier Tribunal to a recipient in Iran there is  a  real
           risk that the recipient could be monitored and she face problems
           with the  authorities.  The  difficulty  is  that  there  is  no
           evidence to show that this evidence has been  sent  to  Iran  or
           that the Appellant has  allowed  open  access  to  her  Facebook
           account [68].


       xii.    Objective  evidence  regarding  the  monitoring  of  Internet
           communications by the  Iranian  authorities  is  noted  but  the
           Appellant is not a known activist  or  dissenter.  The  material
           contains reports and sentiments which are anti-regime. Links for
           the reports are being passed on to others but not necessarily in
           Iran [70].


       xiii.  The case of SB (risk on return-illegal exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]
           UKAIT 53 is relied on both parties but the Appellant will not in
           general face a real risk on account of past activities  in  Iran
           as she left the country legally.  There  remains  the  issue  of
           whether on return her conduct on  Facebook  constitutes  a  risk
           factor [71].


       xiv.   Having taken account of  the  case  of  BA  (demonstrators  in
           Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36: the  Appellant
           has received and passed on links on her Facebook which would  be
           perceived as anti-regime, she can be clearly identified by  name
           and location on her Facebook account, the  factors  which  would
           trigger enquiry or action on return would be  the  long  absence
           from Iran and the fact the Appellant will be returned  forcibly.
           The Appellant does not have a political profile and has not been
           previously identified as an opposition activist [74].


       xv.    The Appellant's account of the whereabouts of her passport was
           inconsistent and it was not accepted she was being truthful. The
           claim in interview to have destroyed it yet also to have left it
           at the house of  the  person  with  whom  she  claimed  to  have
           conceived a child was an unexplained discrepancy.  The  passport
           would, however, have expired on 20 August  2011  and  she  would
           require a new travel  document  which  could  trigger  enquiries
           [75].


       xvi.   BA refers to individual cases of returnees being asked to hand
           over details of their Facebook account with information  on  the
           same leading to them being identified as taking  part  in  anti-
           regime demonstrations.  There is no evidence the  Appellant  has
           been involved in such  demonstrations  such  that  she  will  be
           identifiable on return. It was found to be  relatively  easy  to
           identify a person if somebody has  a  Facebook  account  and  to
           check what is on the account  although  the  Appellant  has  the
           option of removing incriminating material from her account prior
           to her return. There is no evidence that she has participated in
           sending material to Iran or to any individual outside her  known
           circle.  It was not accepted the Appellant would ignore  privacy
           settings which are  so  crucial  to  her  safety.  There  is  no
           evidence to show that the information read  on  the  Appellant's
           Facebook account by the Tribunal has come to  the  attention  of
           the authorities or that it would  come  to  their  attention  on
           return given that she can remove any offending material prior to
           return [76].


       xvii.  It is not accepted that the Appellant is at risk on account of
           an imputed political opinion or that as a failed  asylum  seeker
           there is  a  real  risk  of  persecution  on  return  [77].  The
           Appellant is not credible concerning the  core  of  the  account
           regarding a fear of return to Iran. She has  not  shown  a  real
           risk  for  a  Convention  reason  or  substantial  grounds   for
           believing that she will face a real  risk  of  serious  harm  if
           returned to Iran. No medical evidence has been provided to  show
           she is unfit for removal [78].


       xviii. The decision  to  remove  is  proportionate  by  reference  to
           Article 8 ECHR [79-81].



Error of law finding


    3. The grounds assert legal error  in  the  determination  as  the  core
       element of the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  she  has  come  to  the
       attention  of  the  Iranian  authorities  following  the  arrest  and
       detention of KS with whom she has claimed  to  have  been  exchanging
       anti-government material  on  Facebook  and  to  whom  she  has  sent
       specific e-mails from the United Kingdom  containing  anti-government
       and highly critical content. The  grounds  assert  that  the  overall
       findings are flawed in  that  the  determination  is  silent  on  any
       consideration  of  the  core  issue  of  KS's  arrest  and  continued
       detention and interrogation of the Appellant's family  following  his
       arrest.  Paragraph 67 to 68 of the determination  are  challenged  on
       the basis that the finding there was  no  corroborative  evidence  is
       irrational in light of the fact that  the  Appellant's  evidence  was
       only that she and KS were privy to the e-mails and given that he  had
       been arrested  and  was  in  detention  she  was  unable  to  provide
       corroborative evidence  from  him  as  to  receipt  of  the  e-mails,
       especially as it is alleged his computer  and  belongings  have  been
       seized by the authorities. The requirement for corroborative evidence
       is said to be wholly unreasonable. It is also asserted that the Judge
       erred in failing to properly consider the issue of risk on return  in
       the context of her own positive findings especially in light  of  the
       fact that the claim rested on the core issue of adverse  interest  by
       the authorities against the Appellant following  the  arrest  of  the
       named individual. The failure to consider and make findings regarding
       the authorities interrogation of the Appellant's family, particularly
       her father, following adverse interest in  the  Appellant  makes  the
       conclusions unsafe.


    4. It is also asserted the Judge failed to consider  relevant  case  law
       such as RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 and that the Appellant cannot be
       expected to return to Iran  to  modify  her  behaviour  and  opinions
       simply to avoid becoming  a  target  of  prosecution.  Asserting  the
       offending material can be removed from  her  face  account  prior  to
       return to Iran is contrary to the Supreme Court findings.


    5. I find the Judge did not ignore the core of the claim. The Judge  was
       clearly aware of the basis of the claim but was also troubled by  the
       weight such a claim deserved in light of the fact the  Appellant  has
       been shown to be dishonest and willing to lie in order to secure  her
       desired end of being permitted to remain in the United Kingdom.


    6. The core of the claim is not that the Appellant will face a real risk
       on return as a result of attending demonstration or  her  own  direct
       anti-regime  political  activities  but  rather  that  she  will   be
       perceived as holding views contrary to the interests of the regime if
       detained on return and interrogated  as  a  result  of  material  she
       claims to have sent to KS who she claims has been arrested and  whose
       computer was  seized.   She  infers  such  material  must  have  been
       discovered leading to the  visit  to  her  home  by  the  authorities
       looking for her. As a result the Judge set her  focus  not  upon  the
       credibility  of  the  claim  KS  was  arrested  for,  as  the   Judge
       acknowledges, there is no evidence to corroborate such  a  claim  and
       the only source of this claim is therefore the oral evidence  from  a
       person whose credibility has been damaged, but upon  the  credibility
       of the claim the material the Appellant relies upon has been shown to
       have been sent to and/or received by the named person in Iran.


    7. The material in question originates from two  sources,  e-mails  sent
       via the Gmail server and Facebook. The Judge  does  not  dispute  the
       fact the materials relied upon exist or that the content of the same,
       if they came to the attention of the authorities in Iran will  create
       an arguable real risk for  the  sender.  The  issue  is  whether,  in
       respect of the communications, they have ever come to  the  attention
       of the authorities and, in relation to the Gmail account, which is an
       e-mail account service provided by Google,  whether  they  were  ever
       sent to or received by a person in Iran.


    8. The Judge has not engaged upon a flight of fancy in such an  approach
       as it is not sufficient to tender documents asserting they  create  a
       real risk without more, as otherwise this is all an individual  would
       need to do to succeed with a claim for international  protection.  If
       the material has not been sent to Iran there cannot  be  an  arguable
       real risk and the credibility of the claim to face such, or that  the
       authorities have an adverse interest in the Appellant, has  not  been
       proved.


    9.  There have been many reports in the press regarding the  actions  of
       the Iranian authorities in  relation  to  the  blocking  of  internet
       access for its citizens, especially  at  the  time  of  elections  or
       periods of greater opposition activity. Google has been  specifically
       targeted and access to its sites denied. E-mail or  other  electronic
       communications sent during such a period and carried  on  the  Google
       server are, therefore,  not  likely  to  have  reached  the  intended
       destination.


   10. E-mails have what is known as  a  Header  which  ordinarily  contains
       details of the sender, the address to  which  it  is  sent,  and  the
       subject. This is a summary of what are  considered  to  be  the  main
       details of interest to a sender and recipient. Most service providers
       allow an e-mail account holder to expand the header  to  provide  the
       delivery path and it has not been shown this was  evidence  available
       to the Judge or that enquiries had been made of the internet  service
       provider  (ISP)  to  obtain  evidence  that  the  messages  had  been
       delivered to an  address  in  Iran  and  opened.   In  multi-cultural
       Britain a person with a name similar to that of an  Iranian  national
       need not necessarily be a person in Iran.


   11. The Judge was provided with a number of  copy  Facebook  entries  and
       comments upon the lack of evidence relating to the  security  setting
       used by the Appellant on her  account.   As  a  general  rule  it  is
       possible to control how  users  see  or  do  not  see  a  profile  on
       Facebook.  Various settings are available to maintain  the  level  of
       transparency a user wants.


   12. When a person logs in to Facebook, in the top right  corner  are  two
       different ways to access privacy settings.  Clicking  the  lock  icon
       opens a drop-down menu that shows Privacy Shortcuts.  From  here  key
       changes can be made to the settings.


          [pic]


    13. There are three settings to control how posts are seen on the  site
        and by whom. The options are 'Public',  'Friends',  'Only  Me'  and
        'Custom'. What this is set to becomes the default  sharing  setting
        for all future posts unless changed. It does  not  affect  anything
        previously posted.  If  posts  are  set  to  Public  they  will  be
        captured by  Google  and  other  web  indexing  services  and  made
        available to the world for all to  see,  otherwise  the  restricted
        access is applicable.


    14. There is also available within Facebook an  Activity  Log  page  on
        which everything a person has done on Facebook or  been  tagged  as
        doing by others will show up. It is this type  of  information  the
        Judge was referring to and which  had  not  been  provided  in  the
        evidence made available to her.


    15. If the material shown to the Judge has not been accessed by  anyone
        in Iran or is not shown the Appellant  can  be  identified  as  the
        source of such material as a result of privacy settings, any  claim
        of risk as a result of the Iranian authorities becoming aware of it
        has not been substantiated. The Judge's finding to this effect  has
        not been shown to be irrational or tainted by legal  error  on  the
        basis of the evidence made available to her.


    16. The Judge is also criticised for the finding such material could be
        deleted before return on an RT (Zimbabwe), HJ(Iran) basis. The  key
        element in relation to this claim is that it is not  acceptable  to
        insist a person is required to  delete  information  or  to  change
        their  behaviour  to  avoid  persecution  if  this   involves   the
        suppression of a  genuinely  held  belief  that  forms  part  of  a
        person's fundamental identity. In this case it was not  established
        on the evidence that the material  does  represent  such  genuinely
        held views of the Appellant. She stated she was asked  by  a  named
        individual to access and send information he  was  unable  to  view
        from Iran, which she did. Whilst the core finding that this has not
        been proved is noted, it has not been shown  the  Appellant  should
        not be required to delete information of a matter that has not been
        shown to represent an element of her fundamental identity.  It  has
        also not been established on the evidence that  the  lifestyle  the
        Appellant  has  in  the  United  Kingdom   represents   a   genuine
        fundamental held belief or that requiring her to adapt to  life  in
        Iran will  create  an  entitlement  to  a  grant  of  international
        protection.


    17. As the core account has not been accepted the  credibility  of  the
        claim the authorities came to her father's house  looking  for  her
        must also have been rejected by the Judge.  This  can  be  inferred
        even if not expressly stated in the determination.


    18. The burden is upon the Appellant to prove legal error  material  to
        the conclusion the Appellant failed to substantiate her claim to be
        at risk on return to Iran. On the basis of the  available  evidence
        the Judge's conclusions have  not  been  shown  to  be  irrational,
        unlawful, or contrary to that evidence.



Decision

   19. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.


  Anonymity.


   20. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  I
       continue that order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 18th November 2014




