
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10437/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd June 2016                              |On 4th July 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                           Guhaneswaran Kanthasamy
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Rai, Counsel, instructed by TTS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Sri Lanka  born  on  14th  September
    1974.  The Appellant arrived in the UK and applied for  asylum  on  1st
    January 2001.  That application was eventually refused for the  reasons
    given in a letter of the Respondent  dated  12th  November  2014.   The
    Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Ross (the Judge) sitting at Hatton Cross on 30th January 2015.
     He decided to dismiss the appeal on asylum,  humanitarian  protection,
    and human rights grounds for the reasons given in  his  Decision  dated
    16th  February  2015.   The  Appellant  sought  leave  to  appeal  that
    decision, and following an Order made in the High Court by  Mr  Justice
    Dove QC such permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal on 18th April
    2016.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant applied for asylum on the basis that he was  at  risk  on
    return to Sri Lanka partly on the basis that his  brother  Ratheeswaran
    had been a second lieutenant  in  the  LTTE.   Whilst  at  school,  the
    Appellant had been  a  member  of  the  Student  Organisation  for  the
    Liberation Tigers (SOLT), and for these reasons he had  been  arrested,
    detained, and physically abused in September 1996, July 1997, and March
    1998.

 4. The Judge dismissed the appeal because he found the Appellant's account
    of events in Sri Lanka lacking in credibility.  Therefore the Appellant
    did not come within any of the categories of risk identified in GJ  and
    Others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319
    (IAC).

 5. At the hearing, Mr Rai referred to the grounds of application  and  the
    Order of Mr Justice Dove QC and argued that  the  Judge  had  erred  in
    coming to this conclusion.  The Judge had made no finding in respect of
    the claim that the Appellant's brother had been a senior officer in the
    LTTE.  This was  a  material  error  because  having  a  family  member
    connected to the LTTE was a risk category identified in GJ and  Others.



 6. In response, Mr Kandola referred to the Rule 24 response and  submitted
    that there was no such error of law.  The Judge  had  made  an  adverse
    credibility finding against the Appellant which implied that he did not
    believe that the Appellant's brother had held  rank  within  the  LTTE.
    The Judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for  that  finding  in  respect  of
    credibility starting at paragraph 13 of the Decision.

 7. I find an error of law in the decision of the Judge so that  it  should
    be set aside.  It is true that the Judge made  an  adverse  credibility
    finding against the Appellant and gave some reasons for  that  finding.
    However, the Judge was obliged to make a specific finding in respect of
    the Appellant's claims relating to his  brother,  and  this  the  Judge
    failed to do.  That amounts to an  error  of  law.   It  amounts  to  a
    material error because as Mr Rai said, it was decided in GJ and  Others
    that if a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  security  services  on
    return there remains a real risk of  ill-treatment  or  harm  requiring
    international protection.  Further, at the airport on return, a  forced
    returnee can expect to be asked about his own  and  his  family's  LTTE
    connections  and  sympathies.   Therefore  if  it  is  true  that   the
    Appellant's brother held rank  in  the  LTTE,  there  is  a  reasonable
    likelihood that the Appellant will face persecution on return.  This is
    something the Judge should have decided.

 8. Having set aside the decision of the Judge, I decided not to remake the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal but instead to remit the appeal  to
    that Tribunal for the decision to be remade there  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements.  The error of law  relates
    to judicial fact-finding.  At the rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal,
    the finding as to credibility and any findings  of  fact  made  by  the
    Judge will not be preserved.

Notice of Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside that decision.

    The decision in the appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

10. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an Order for anonymity.  I was not
    asked to do so and indeed I find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Dated: 4th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
