
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10764/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Sent                   |
|On 24 June 2014                      |On 23 July 2014                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HADDON-CAVE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                             ms Behnaz Mortazavi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hodson
For the Respondent:    Mr Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the applicant,  Ms  Behnaz  Mortazavi,  against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Mrs R J N B  Morris  dated  8
    January 2014  whereby  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against a decision  of  the  Home  Office  dated  20
    November 2013 refusing the appellant's application for asylum.

 2. Mr Hodson, who appears for the appellant, submits that the  Immigration
    Judge's finding that the appellant's case was not  credible  was  wrong
    and unfair because the appellant's account  was  not,  as  he  put  it,
    "adequately  engaged  with"  by  the  Immigration  Judge.  He  submits,
    firstly, that the Immigration Judge referred to  "discrepancies"  which
    were not proper findings founded on the documents. Secondly, he submits
    the Immigration  Judge  made  adverse  findings  in  relation  to,  for
    instance, an Iranian  lawyer  whose  evidence  was  relied  on  by  the
    applicant which were not justified.   Thirdly,  he  points  to  various
    "plausibility findings", which he said were not backed by evidence.

 3. There is an air of unreality about this appeal.  The appellant uses the
    usual technique of picking away at peripheral and minor points  in  the
    Determination  and  Reasons  without  grappling  with  the  fundamental
    adverse finding of the judge as to credibility. In what appears  to  us
    to be a meticulous judgment, the Immigration Judge concluded as follows
    as regards the fundamental question of credibility:-

         "18. I had the benefit of seeing and listening  most  carefully  to
             the appellant as she gave  her  evidence.   Moreover,  I  have
             compared her oral evidence with her written accounts given  in
             statement  and  interview  form.  I  have  also  compared  the
             appellant's own evidence  and  that  of  the  authors  of  the
             various documents she has produced in  support  of  her  case.
             Having had that opportunity, I state now at this  early  stage
             in my findings that I do not find the appellant's claim to  be
             credible.  The  cumulative  effect  of  the   inconsistencies,
             contradictions and statements it contains is such as  to  cast
             serious doubt upon the reliability of the appellant's evidence
             and the veracity of her case."

 4. The Immigration Judge went  on  to  consider  the  appellant's  initial
    excuse for the inconsistencies in her evidence, which was that  English
    was not her first language and that both her  screening  interview  and
    mainly her asylum interview were conducted in  English.  She  said:  "I
    find it difficult to keep my thoughts  straight".  However,  there  was
    clearly little substance in  this  excuse.  As  the  Immigration  Judge
    pointed out in paragraph 18, although  the  appellant  had  an  English
    interpreter available, she hardly used the interpreter at all.

 5. The core of her case was, as the Immigration Judge  said  in  paragraph
    18(i), the appellant's claim that  she  submitted  a  paper  which  she
    variously described as a "Proposal"  or  as  a  "Dissertation"  to  the
    Iranian MSRT, which attracted the  adverse  attention  of  the  Iranian
    authorities. The Immigration Judge carefully considered each  piece  of
    evidence which the appellant relied upon to support that proposition of
    fact, and in relation to each aspect concluded that  the  evidence  put
    forward by the appellant was not  persuasive  or  credible.   It  would
    burden this appeal unnecessarily to catalogue all the many reasons  why
    the Immigration Judge concluded as she did.  Suffice to say that  there
    was not simply one or two reasons given by the  Immigration  Judge  for
    her conclusion on credibility, but a whole raft of reasons  as  to  why
    she concluded that this appellant's core case was simply not  credible.
    The laudable detail in the Reasons seems  only  to  have  provided  the
    Appellant with an opportunity to pick away at minor  individual  points
    in the judgment in the vain hope of  mounting  some  sort  of  credible
    appeal. One only needs to alight on a few aspects of  the  judgment  to
    see how hopeless this appeal is.

 6. At paragraph 21(ii) the Immigration Judge says this:-

         "It is simply not plausible that the appellant would have handed in
         her documents three months before  she  was  due  to  hand  in  her
         dissertation to the University of Plymouth  and  approximately  six
         months before she expected to receive her Masters Degree."

 7. Mr Hodson submits that this  was  simply  surmise  and  unfair  of  the
    Immigration Judge who should not have made this sort  of  "plausibility
    statement". We ask rhetorically, why not?  It is a perfectly reasonable
    for the Immigration Judge to have asked whether in the  real  world  it
    was likely that a student would hand in  a  dissertation  three  months
    before the due date. It is the  sort  of  implausible  assertion  which
    judges routinely reject.

 8.  The  learned  judge  refers  in  paragraph  18(i)(a)  to  one  of  the
    discrepancies in the dates put forward by the claimant. She asserted in
    her witness statement that she had submitted the first set of documents
    to the MSRT  on  20  September.   However,  according  to  her  uncle's
    evidence the documents were submitted around "2 -  3  Mehr  1391".  The
    problem for the appellant is that the translation of this  date  is  on
    one view the equivalent of 23 to 24 September 2012,  not  the  specific
    date of 20 September which the claimant relied on. Mr Hodson  submitted
    that another translation would give  it  a  vague  date  of  "about  22
    September". Be that as it may, this is one aspect of many parts of  the
    appellant's case which the Immigration Judge was not satisfied about.

 9. Another was in paragraph 18(i)(b) regarding the  appellant's  assertion
    that on the day in question when the documents were actually  delivered
    to the MSRT the appellant had told a friend of  hers,  Orla  O'Reilley,
    that she had "been out in traffic all day in order  to  transport  from
    the MSRT to her uncle's which caused her a long delay to  get  to  ours
    for dinner" (sic). The problem with that is that it  clearly  conflicts
    with the uncle's evidence in his statement that "early in the  morning,
    before going to work I drove her (the appellant) in my private  car  to
    the Ministry of Science and Research".

10. The immigration judge went on in her judgment  to  look  at  the  wider
    aspects of the case, and in particular whether or not the  dissertation
    was obviously critical of the regime. She concluded on any  reading  of
    it, it is not. She considered whether it was likely that the  appellant
    would have submitted a dissertation that was critical of the regime and
    would have got her into trouble. She concluded that it was not  likely.
    She went on to consider whether or not the  appellant  was  politically
    active. She was not.

11. In our view, the judgment is redolent of  a  careful  analysis  of  the
    documents and a comparison with the documents against  the  appellant's
    own evidence and amounts in our view to an  unassailable  rejection  of
    the appellant's case.

12. The only specific point on which permission to appeal was given  was  a
    point which Mr Hodson did not deal with in relation to paragraph 20  in
    which the Immigration Judge said this:-

         "I have assessed the appellant's claim independently of the Reasons
         for Refusal Letters. I found these letters to be detailed documents
         which gave  a  correct  and  balanced  summary  of  the  background
         material. They also  dealt  thoroughly  with  each  aspect  of  the
         appellant's   claim   cross-referencing   where   appropriate   the
         particular finding in the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letters  with  the
         relevant background material.  Since I have found that the  Reasons
         for Refusal Letters deal adequately with all the matters  at  issue
         and that the respondent's findings and  assertions  (with  which  I
         agree) are fully argued in those documents, it would not serve  any
         purpose for me to repeat them all here."

13. In granting permission for this appeal it was  suggested  that  it  was
    arguable  that  in  placing  reliance  on  the  refusal   letters   the
    Immigration Judge was not  making  an  independent  assessment  of  the
    evidence as a whole.  We respectfully disagree.  It is quite clear from
    the Immigration Judge's findings that that is precisely  what  she  was
    doing, making independent findings; but she also stated in paragraph 20
    that in her view everything said in the reasons letter was correct.  On
    reading those refusal letters we can understand  why  she  formed  that
    view. As we see from D3 to 4 and D6 to 7 of  the  bundle,  the  refusal
    letters make a pretty good job of shredding the appellant's case.

14. In relation to the specific point Mr Hodgson  made  about  the  Judge's
    treatment of the Iranian lawyer's evidence, we would  simply  say  that
    the Iranian lawyer's evidence was in our view distinctly  unimpressive.
    The Iranian lawyer's letter dated 15 April in which  asserted  that  he
    would "normally" refuse to take cases such as this  because  they  were
    "quite complicated and sensitive", but  in  this  particular  case  for
    whatever reason he decided to look into the matter. The plausibility of
    his evidence is not helped by his assertion that Mrs Mortazavi resorted
    to writing a thesis to express her disagreement "with the policies  and
    laws of the Islamic Republic". On any quick reading of the dissertation
    is obviously not what she was doing.  Mr Hodson  also  relied  on  some
    further evidence that students in Iran had  fallen  foul  of  this  law
    without knowing about it.  That  does  not  take  the  case  very  much
    further. The Immigration Judge took the view that it was not reasonably
    likely that this appellant would have submitted a document to the  MSRT
    which she knew would or could  cause  offence  and  bring  her  to  the
    adverse attention of the authorities in Iran, and that is not a finding
    which, in our view, one can take issue with (see paragraph  22  of  the
    reasons).

15. We re-iterate that the problem with this  appeal,  as  indeed  so  many
    others, is that it fails to grapple with  the  fundamental  finding  of
    credibility which the judge summarised powerfully in  paragraph  18  as
    follows:-

         "... the cumulative effect of the  inconsistencies,  contradictions
         and statements the  appellant's  case  contains  such  as  to  cast
         serious doubt upon the reliability of the appellant's evidence  and
         the veracity of her case".

    We are at a loss to see why permission to appeal was given in the first
    place.

16. This appeal is dismissed.

Signed   Date

Mr Justice Haddon-Cave
