
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10333/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Sent           |
|on 14 July 2014                               |on 21 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             HUNER ANWAR MOHAMAD
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:      Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Livingstone
Brown,
       Solicitors

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This determination refers to parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

2) The SSHD appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Wallace, dated 14 March 2014, allowing the appellant's appeal on  Article
   8 grounds outwith the Immigration Rules.

3) The grounds criticise  the  judge  for  failing  to  apply  the  criteria
   established by the case law, and for treating the best interests  of  the
   child as the primary rather than as a primary consideration.

4) Mrs Saddiq submitted that the judge failed to identify  a  good  arguable
   case  for  going  outside  the  Rules,  and  did  not  explain  why   the
   consequences   of   the   decision   were   unjustifiably   harsh.    The
   proportionality conclusions were thereby flawed, and the interests of the
   child had wrongly been  treated  as  determinative  by  themselves.   Due
   weight had not been given to the public interest in  the  maintenance  of
   immigration control.

5) The appellant relied upon a Rule 24 response, and having  heard  from  Mr
   Forrest in support thereof, I indicated that the SSHD's appeal  would  be
   dismissed.

6) A judge does not have to cite any specific case, so long as  she  follows
   the correct legal approach.  There is nothing to suggest that she did not
   understand the criteria for looking outside the Rules.  As an experienced
   judge in this jurisdiction, she must be given credit for being well aware
   of the public interest in maintaining the Rules.  The facts on which  she
   had to make her proportionality judgment were scarcely  in  dispute,  and
   fairly straightforward.  There can be no  quarrel  with  the  finding  at
   paragraph  54  that  the  appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and   subsisting
   relationship with his UK citizen partner and that his  removal  would  in
   effect sever his relationship with his daughter, also a UK citizen.   The
   judge reminded herself at paragraph 55 that nationality is  not  a  trump
   card, and at paragraph 56 found that it would not be reasonable to expect
   partner and child to go to Iraq.  It could  not  be  suggested  that  the
   final outcome is one which no reasonable judge could have reached.    The
   SSHD's grounds amount only to disagreement with the outcome.

7) I am fortified in that view by reference to section 19  of  the  24  Act,
   which is be brought into force on 28 July 2014 and appears to me to be  a
   reliable touchstone in the meantime.  There will  be  inserted  into  the
   2002  Act  "Part  5A,  Article   8   of   the   ECHR:   public   interest
   considerations".  This will codify that little weight should be given  to
   private life or a relationship  with  a  partner  established  while  the
   person is in the UK unlawfully.  The appellant has  a  criminal  history,
   but it is relatively minor and he is not a person liable to  deportation.
   The new statutory regime is that the public  interest  does  not  require
   removal of a person not liable to deportation where he has a genuine  and
   subsisting parental relationship with a UK citizen child,  and  it  would
   not be reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK.

8) The SSHD's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The  determination
   of the First-tier Tribunal, allowing the appellant's appeal, shall stand.





                               [pic]
                                15 July 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
