
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10984/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Date Sent                  |
|On 23rd April 2014                              |On 2 June 2014             |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                             saba girma biernnet
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Wilson of Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr J Wardle, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Mensah
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 14th January 2014.





Background

 2. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Eritrea but is believed by  the
    respondent to be from Ethiopia.  She arrived in the  UK  on  14th  July
    2009, claimed asylum on the same day, was refused  and  her  subsequent
    appeal was dismissed  by  Judge  Rabin  on  17th  February  2010.   She
    submitted further evidence on 1st November 2012, again claiming  to  be
    at risk on return to Eritrea and was refused on 25th November 2013.

 3. The judge said that  her  starting  point  for  consideration  was  the
    previous determination of Judge Rabin who considered what the appellant
    had said about her history in Eritrea, her  claimed  religion  and  her
    nationality.  Judge Rabin had heard evidence from Mr Peter Lancelot  of
    the New Testament Church, who also gave evidence before Judge Mensah.

 4. Judge Mensah  said  that  Judge  Rabin's  findings  were  to  be  taken
    seriously as they were made after careful examination of the  evidence.
    She noted that the appellant sought to rely upon the  evidence  of  two
    witnesses who were not attending the Tribunal because they had to go to
    work.  The judge said that there was no request for an  adjournment  to
    allow them to attend and no  evidence  from  them  or  their  employers
    explaining their absence.  She found that the explanation for the  lack
    of attendance and lack of evidence undermined the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant.

 5. She then considered the letter from the Ethiopian Embassy  in  relation
    to an application for an Ethiopian passport and said it was clear  that
    the appellant had told the Ethiopian official that  she  believed  that
    she was Eritrean, and it was therefore not surprising that  they  would
    not issue her with a passport.  She did not consider the document to be
    sufficient to rebut the findings of Judge Rabin.

 6. She recorded that she heard evidence from Mr Lancelot and did not doubt
    that Mr Lancelot believed the appellant to be a credible  person.   She
    accepted that the appellant attended church but was not satisfied that,
    simply because she has continued to attend before putting  in  her  new
    claim, she had shown that she was credible about her faith.

 7. She concluded as follows.

         "The overall adverse credibility findings in the previous  decision
         and the evidence before me today are in my opinion insufficient  to
         overturn the previous decision and  for  all  the  reasons  already
         given above I therefore dismiss the appeal on asylum."

The Grounds of Application

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on two grounds, firstly  that
    the judge had not properly assessed the testimony of  Mr  Lancelot  and
    secondly that she had failed to have regard to the medical report of Dr
    Bryson which was in the bundle.  In the  doctor's  view  the  appellant
    suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder which severely impeded her
    day-to-day functioning.  In failing to take  into  account  the  effect
    that PTSD can have on an individual's ability to recall  evidence  with
    clarity the  judge  had  erred  in  simply  following  the  credibility
    assessments of Judge Rabin.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on the  second  ground  only,  on  the
    basis that the judge had misapplied  the  case  of  Devaseelan  v  SSHD
    [2002] UKIAT 00702 in failing to assess all of the evidence before her.

10. The Respondent served a reply on 16th April 2014 acknowledging that the
    judge had not referred to the report of Dr Bryson but  submitting  that
    it was not material.   The  report  was  brief  and  based  on  limited
    information. The appellant claimed to have left Eritrea in 2005 and was
    only registered at Dr Bryson's practice some seven years later.   There
    was no medical evidence that the symptoms had manifested themselves  at
    an earlier stage.  Furthermore it was  noteworthy  that  the  appellant
    argued before the first judge that her lack of knowledge and  inability
    to  recall  dates  and  times  at  interview  was   due   to   learning
    difficulties.

Submissions

11. Ms Wilson submitted that the judge's failure to take into  account  the
    medical evidence led her into an erroneous approach to the judgment  of
    the previous judge because there was a factual change  of  circumstance
    since that decision, namely the diagnosis of PTSD,  which  should  have
    led the judge to approach the first determination  with  more  caution.
    She relied on a number of reports on the effects of PTSD on memory, and
    in particular traumatic memory. Where trauma is involved, memory is not
    available for updating in the same way as it is  normally  retrievable.
    It should be remembered that the appellant was  interviewed  whilst  in
    detention, and claimed to have been trafficked for  domestic  servitude
    in Sudan. The history of her experiences  would  have  meant  that  the
    interview would have been a  particularly  challenging  experience  for
    her. The decision of Judge Rabin  relied  heavily  on  the  appellant's
    inability to recall basic facts and  inconsistencies  in  her  evidence
    which was explicable by the diagnosis of PTSD.  The judge's failure  to
    consider the medical report infected her conclusions and  the  decision
    ought to be set aside.

12. Mr Wardle acknowledged that the report  had  not  been  considered  but
    submitted that  it  was  inadequate  evidence  upon  which  to  base  a
    conclusion that the claimant had been suffering from PTSD when she  was
    interviewed.  In fact, in the report, memory loss  was  not  a  symptom
    highlighted.  The  appellant  was  represented  by   very   experienced
    representatives at the time of the claim and it  was  significant  that
    the  explanation  at  that  time  for  her  uncertain  performance   at
    interview, and before the first judge, was that she was suffering  from
    learning difficulties. In any event the judge had given  ample  reasons
    for not finding the appellant to be a credible witness particularly  in
    relation to her claim to be an Eritrean national.

Findings and Conclusions

13. Plainly the judge erred in not taking into account all of the  evidence
    before her when reaching her decision and the lack of reference to  the
    medical evidence is a clear error.  However, it would not have made any
    difference to the decision.

14. In Devaseelan the Tribunal set out the  principles  upon  which  judges
    should  approach  previous  determinations  in  relation  to  the  same
    appellant.

15. The first Adjudicator's determination should  always  be  the  starting
    point - the judge said in terms that Judge  Rabin's  decision  was  the
    starting point for her consideration.

16. The Devaseelan Tribunal also stated  that  facts  happening  since  the
    first Adjudicator's determination can always be taken into  account  by
    the second Adjudicator.  It is Ms Wilson's contention that the  medical
    report, dated 21st November 2013 from the Appellant's  GP,  is  such  a
    fact. The diagnosis of  PTSD  would  explain  the  inconsistencies  and
    omissions in the appellant's evidence relied upon by Judge Rabin in her
    decision.

17. However the letter from the doctor cannot properly be characterised  as
    such evidence.  Firstly it is a letter written by a GP  rather  than  a
    specialist in the field.  Secondly it is written in November  2013  and
    the appellant had only been registered  with  the  practice  since  May
    2012, and so it is difficult to see how this  letter  can  properly  be
    said to be evidence of PTSD in 2009.

18. Most importantly, it is significant that this was not  the  explanation
    put forward by the  appellant's  representatives  either  to  the  Home
    Office or to the original Immigration Judge.  It is inconceivable  that
    they would not have done so if there had been evidence of PTSD at  that
    time.  The former representatives  were  aware  of  the  issue  of  her
    responses  at  interview  and  put  forward   an   entirely   different
    explanation.  She was represented by experienced Counsel at the hearing
    and provided a  psychological  report  from  a  chartered  psychologist
    contending that she suffered from learning difficulties.  It  is  clear
    that it was the then representatives'  view  that  this  was  the  most
    probable explanation for the appellant's poor performance at interview.

19. I do not doubt the doctor's diagnosis of depression. She also refers to
    the appellant's avoidance in addressing what has happened and describes
    symptoms at a level to  severely  impede  her  functioning  day-to-day.
    However she also acknowledges  that  the  instability  and  destitution
    which the appellant has suffered  has  had  a  massive  effect  on  her
    psychological health.

20. This is not a letter which can properly be characterised as a  fact  to
    be taken into account by the second judge, namely a diagnosis  that  at
    the time of the interview the appellant was suffering from PTSD.

21. In conclusion, the judge properly assessed whether the  fresh  evidence
    should displace the conclusions of the first judge and gave sustainable
    reasons  for  finding  that  they  did  not.    Her   expression   that
    "insufficient to overturn the previous decision" is loosely worded, but
    the grounds do not establish any legal error in the judge's approach to
    the previous decision so as to render her conclusions unsafe.



Decision

22. The judge did not err in law and her decision stands.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

