
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10878/2015 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|                                 | On 14 July 2020                 |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                AB (ALBANIA)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

I ORDER under rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008
 that no one shall publish or reveal the name or address  of  the  Appellant
who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or  publish  or  reveal   any
information which would be likely to  lead  to  the  identification  of  the
Appellant  or  of  any  member  of  his  family  in  connection  with  these
proceedings.



 1. The appellant is an Albanian national who was born on 17 October  1997.
    He entered the United Kingdom clandestinely in March 2014  and  claimed
    asylum on 17 March 2014, aged 16.



Asylum Claim

 2. The appellant had a screening interview in Croydon on 20 March 2014. He
    said that he was an ethnic Gorani and a Muslim from Shishtavec in north-
    eastern Albania. He said that  he  had  received  little  education  in
    Albania and he made reference to his father having attacked him with  a
    knife.  He gave a short account of his route to  the  UK,  via  Kosovo,
    Macedonia and Hungary.   He  said  that  his  uncle  had  arranged  his
    passport and his journey after he had been threatened  by  his  father:
    "My father said that you will have to come out with me and  sell  drugs
    otherwise I will kill you", he claimed.  It appears that this interview
    was conducted in Albanian.  At the end of the interview, in  bold,  the
    interviewing officer noted that the appellant had  requested  that  any
    further interview should be conducted in Gorani.

 3. The appellant's representatives  submitted  a  completed  Statement  of
    Evidence Form on or about 14 April  2014.   In  the  form  itself,  the
    appellant gave details of his family in Albania and other such matters.
     In the accompanying statement, he set out, over the course of fourteen
    paragraphs, the basis upon which he sought asylum.

 4. The appellant stated that he  was  from  an  ethnic  group  called  the
    Gorani, which speaks a dialect  which  is  "completely  different  from
    Albanian", containing a mixture of Macedonian and  Bulgarian  dialects.
    He gave further details about the composition of his family.  He stated
    that his father had been a  farmer.   He  had  difficulties  at  school
    because Gorani was not a language of instruction and because his father
    refused to buy him the necessary books.  His father had been imprisoned
    in 2005 or 2006 for assaulting someone whilst he  was  drunk.   He  was
    imprisoned for four years, during which time the family  was  supported
    by the appellant's mother and his uncles.

 5. The appellant stated that his father was a changed man upon his release
    from prison.  He became withdrawn and would drink excessively at a  bar
    in Shishtavec,  regularly  returning  home  late  and  inebriated.   He
    started gambling and would be violent towards the appellant, his mother
    and his siblings when  he  lost  money.   The  police  were  called  on
    occasion, to no avail.  The wider family attempted to  intervene,  only
    to be met with threats from the  appellant's  father.  The  appellant's
    mother and his siblings left home but were persuaded to return  by  the
    appellant's father.  The violence continued.

 6. The appellant came to learn, through his mother, that  his  father  was
    transporting bags illegally into  Kosovo.   In  2012,  the  appellant's
    father forced the appellant to accompany him on  one  of  these  trips.
    They met two people in a forest and were given four  shoulder  bags  to
    carry through the forest to a pre-arranged location  in  Kosovo.   They
    gave the bags to two men in Kosovo, and received  a  bag  of  money  in
    return.  They undertook the journey approximately  ten  times,  despite
    the appellant's protestations about the illegality and the presence  of
    mines in the forest.  The appellant's father told  him  that  he  would
    kill him if he discussed these activities with anyone.  After the final
    journey, the appellant's father told the appellant's mother  what  they
    had been doing.  She became concerned about the appellant's safety  and
    her brother made arrangements for the appellant to  obtain  a  passport
    and to leave the country.  He feared to return to  Albania  because  of
    the  threats  from  his  father  and  his  association  with   powerful
    criminals.  He was unable to relocate within  Albania  because  he  was
    still a minor and would have no support.

 7. The appellant then underwent an interview, on 31 October 2014.  He  was
    accompanied by a solicitor and a responsible adult  at  the  interview.
    It is recorded that he was interviewed in Gorani.  He provided  further
    information about his claim.  Amongst other matters, he  described  how
    his mother's family lived in a place called Borje but that he  had  had
    no contact with his family since arriving in the UK.  He provided  some
    further information about where he  had  lived.   He  stated  that  his
    father would kill him if he returned to Albania.  It had been difficult
    when his father was in prison.  His mother had left his father in  late
    2013 and had gone to her family in Borje.  She had remained there until
    January 2014.  He had started taking bags to Kosovo with his father  in
    2012.  It was only on the third trip that he found out  that  the  bags
    contained drugs, when he heard one of the  other  men  talking  to  his
    father.  The appellant had made the trip ten times but his  father  had
    done it many more times.  He had only done so because  his  father  had
    threatened him.  He told his mother in January 2014 and had not done so
    any sooner because he was scared.  The police were eventually called by
    the appellant's family but his father had by that stage left home.  The
    appellant had travelled using a genuine passport arranged by his uncle.



 8. The appellant's  solicitors  made  representations  in  writing  on  19
    December 2014.  They summarised the claim  once  again  and  sought  to
    clarify some of the answers given at interview.

 9. On 2 March 2015, the respondent received information from  the  British
    Embassy in Tirana, which had made contact with the Albanian Ministry of
    the Interior.  The information received corresponded with  the  details
    given by the appellant, both in respect of his  family's  location  and
    composition.  It also confirmed that the appellant  had  used  his  own
    passport to leave the country.

Respondent's Decision

10. On 22 July 2015, the respondent refused the appellant's application for
    asylum.  At this stage, I will confine myself to the following  outline
    of the decision.  The appellant's age and identity were  accepted:  [6]
    and [12]-[15].  The  respondent  noted  that  the  appellant  had  been
    referred to the Competent Authority ("CA") via  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism ("NRM") and that it had been accepted on  conclusive  grounds
    that he was a victim of trafficking: [5] and [16].  It was not accepted
    that the appellant's claim engaged the  Refugee  Convention:  [8]-[11].
    Nor was it accepted that the  appellant  had  been  threatened  by  his
    father at knifepoint, since it was thought that  his  account  in  this
    regard had been inconsistent: [17]-[19].  It was accepted that  he  had
    been involved  in  'forced  criminality'  but  not  that  he  had  been
    threatened by his father: [20].  In any event, the respondent concluded
    that the appellant could avail himself of a sufficiency  of  protection
    in Albania or that he could relocate internally  so  as  to  avoid  any
    threat from his father: [21]-[29] and [30]-[36] respectively.   It  was
    not accepted, in the circumstances, that the  respondent  would  be  in
    breach of her international obligations if she removed the appellant to
    Albania.

Appellate History

11. The appellant gave notice of his  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT") on 6 August 2015.  I need not rehearse the grounds  of  appeal.



12. The appeal was heard before a judge of the FtT on 4  May  2016.   In  a
    decision which was sent to the parties on 18 May 2016, the  appeal  was
    dismissed on all grounds.  Permission to appeal was granted by the  FtT
    later that year, however, and on 8 August 2016, the appeal came  before
    Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins.  In a decision  which  was  sent  to  the
    parties on 26 September 2016, Judge Perkins dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.  The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Court of
    Appeal by Sir Stephen Silber, however, and it was subsequently  ordered
    by consent that the appeal should be remitted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    because Judge Perkins had erred in proceeding in  the  absence  of  the
    appellant and his representatives.

13. The appeal returned to the Upper Tribunal for  fresh  consideration  of
    whether the FtT had erred in law.  In a decision which was sent to  the
    parties on 14 March  2018,  Judge  Smith  concluded  that  two  of  the
    appellant's grounds disclosed no error of law but that the third, which
    related to the judge's  failure  to  consider  an  expert  report  from
    Antonia Young, disclosed an error of approach.  Judge Smith accordingly
    ordered that the appeal would be remitted  to  the  FtT  on  a  limited
    basis.

14. The appellant sought to appeal to the Court of Appeal again, submitting
    that Judge Smith had been wrong to reject the ground of appeal that the
    appellant's claim engaged the Refugee Convention  Permission to  appeal
    was refused by Judge Smith and by Sir Ross Cranston, however,  and  the
    appeal returned to the FtT, where it  was  heard  again  (although  not
    afresh) by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant.  In a  decision  which  was
    sent to the parties on 23 April 2019, Judge Grant dismissed the appeal.
     She accepted (as had the first judge in the FtT and the NRM) that  the
    appellant had given a credible account of his identity and his history.
     She proceeded on the basis (preserved by  Judge  Smith  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal) that the appellant was not a member of  a  Particular  Social
    Group  but  she  considered  whether  he  was  entitled  to  subsidiary
    protection.  She did not consider him to  be  so  entitled  because  he
    could relocate internally so as to live with his mother in Borje: [28].
     She did not accept that the appellant would be shunned by  his  family
    on return.  She considered that he could seek  the  protection  of  the
    Albanian authorities, as there was nothing to suggest that  they  would
    not act against the appellant's father as they had in the  past:  [35].
    The judge did not consider that the appellant would be at risk  of  re-
    trafficking upon return: [36].  She held that  he  was  able  to  speak
    Albanian and that he might be able to use his knowledge of  English  to
    find work in a tourist destination in Albania: [42].

15. Permission to appeal against Judge Grant's decision was refused by  the
    FtT but granted on renewal by Upper Tribunal Judge Keith, who concluded
    that it was arguable that the  judge  had  fallen  into  error  in  her
    conclusion regarding internal relocation to Borje.  In a decision which
    was sent to the parties on 18 October 2019, I found that  the  FtT  had
    fallen into legal error when it concluded that the  appellant's  mother
    was in Borje, when it was quite clear that the appellant's account  was
    that his mother had returned to the family home in Shishtavec.   I  did
    not accept the contention advanced at that stage by Mr Tufan on  behalf
    of the Secretary of  State  that  the  appellant  could  in  any  event
    relocate to another part of Albania in safety.  As noted by Mr  Collins
    of counsel, who has since represented the  appellant  throughout,  that
    submission failed to take account of the appellant's Gorani  ethnicity,
    his status as a victim of trafficking and  his  limited  education.   I
    concluded my decision in the following way:

         "[13]    It follows that the judge's decision will have to  be  set
         aside and the  decision  on  the  appeal  must  be  remade.   As  I
         indicated at the hearing, I consider the Upper Tribunal to  be  the
         proper venue for that exercise, given  the  protracted  proceedings
         which have led to this point.  I will retain the  matter  and  will
         remake the decision on the basis of the primary  facts  found  thus
         far.  In particular, I note the following.  It was accepted by  the
         respondent and the  Competent  Authority  that  the  appellant  was
         involved in smuggling with his father under threat of violence from
         the latter.  It has been accepted throughout that the appellant  is
         Gorani.  It was accepted by Judge Oliver and by  Judge  Smith  that
         there  is  an  extant  threat  from  the  appellant's   father   in
         Shishtavec.  The  principal  focus  of  the  resumed  hearing  will
         therefore be to consider whether the appellant can relocate  so  as
         to avoid the  threat  from  his  father  and  whether  there  is  a
         sufficiency of protection for him in Albania.  Those questions, and
         the question posed by paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration
         Rules  (very  significant  obstacles)  will  be   considered   with
         reference to the reports prepared  by  Antonia  Young  and  to  the
         appellant's mental health condition.  The parties will recall  that
         the question of whether or not the appellant's  claim  engages  the
         Refugee Convention was resolved adversely to him by  the  FtT,  the
         Upper Tribunal and the Court of Appeal, and that is  not  a  matter
         which I am entitled to revisit.  The protection claim which remains
         arises under Article 15 of the Qualification Directive and  Article
         3 ECHR only, although the appellant will be at  liberty  to  submit
         that Article 8 ECHR would be breached by his removal, whether  that
         submission is made  within  the  Private  Life  provisions  of  the
         Immigration Rules or outside those Rules.

         [14] I will direct that the appeal is to be relisted for half a day
         before me on the first available date.  A  native  Gorani  speaking
         interpreter will  be  arranged,  since  Mr  Collins  indicated  his
         intention to call the appellant on the next  occasion.   Given  the
         absolute disarray into which these  papers  have  fallen  over  the
         course of the  litigation,  I  also  direct  that  the  appellant's
         solicitors file and serve a consolidated bundle of all the material
         upon which they propose to rely not later than 10 working  days  in
         advance of the next hearing.  In the event that further  directions
         are sought or further time required, there is liberty to apply."

16. What followed, however, served only to add  to  the  concern  that  the
    proceedings had become protracted.   The  resumed  hearing  was  listed
    before me on 9 December 2019 but the Gorani interpreter  who  had  been
    booked telephoned the Tribunal on the morning of the hearing  to  state
    that she was unwell.  Gorani is such a rare language that  it  was  not
    possible  to  arrange  an  alternative  interpreter.   The  appeal  was
    relisted before me  on  24  January  2020.   The  evening  before  that
    hearing, I was informed that no Gorani interpreter was  available.   At
    very short notice to the parties,  therefore,  that  hearing  was  also
    stood out of the list.

17. The appeal then came before me on 20 March 2020, the day on  which  the
    nationwide 'lockdown'  was  announced  as  a  result  of  the  Covid-19
    pandemic.  The appellant was again  represented  by  Mr  Collins.   The
    respondent was represented by a Senior Presenting  Officer,  Ms  Cunha.
    It transpired that, despite the best efforts  of  the  staff  at  Field
    House, the interpreter who had attended the hearing was  not  a  native
    Gorani speaker.  For reasons which were not entirely clear to  me,  she
    was an Albanian speaker who thought that she would  be  able  to  speak
    Gorani.  On attempting to  converse  with  the  appellant  about  basic
    matters, it was abundantly clear to all concerned  that  the  appellant
    was not able to understand her satisfactorily or at all.  That  hearing
    was therefore adjourned.  After the hearing, I issued  a  note  to  the
    parties.  For reasons which will shortly be apparent, it  is  necessary
    to set [4]-[5] of that note out in full:

         "[4] In light of the extraordinary history of this case,  I  turned
         to Mr Collins and Ms Cunha to agree on the  way  forward.   It  was
         agreed by the advocates that matters would proceed in the following
         way, and it was therefore with their full agreement that I made the
         directions which follow.  I explained  to  the  advocates  that  my
         directions were being issued orally and that I did not expect there
         to be any facility in Filed House for any written record to be sent
         to the parties.   Despite  the  current  closure  of  Field  House,
         however, I understand  there  is  a  facility  for  the  electronic
         issuance of directions.  What  follows,  therefore,  is  a  written
         record the directions previously  issued;  it  is  not  that  I  am
         issuing these directions at today's date.

          i) No later than 4pm on 9 April 2020, the respondent is  to  file
             and serve written questions for the  appellant  which  are  to
             stand in place of cross-examination.

         ii)  No  later  than  4pm  on  7   May   2020,   the   appellant's
             representatives are to file and serve  the  responses  to  the
             questions at (i).

        iii) No later than 4pm on 29 May 2020, the respondent  is  to  file
             and serve any final submissions in the appeal.

         iv)  No  later  than  4pm  on  19  June  2020,   the   appellant's
             representatives are to file and serve any final submissions in
             the appeal.

         [5] In  light  of  the  current  situation,  and  particularly  the
         difficulties  which  might  be  encountered  by   the   appellant's
         representatives in light of the current lockdown, there is  liberty
         to apply.  In the absence of an  application  to  vary  the  agreed
         timetable  above,  however,  a  defaulting  party  may  expect  the
         Tribunal  to  proceed  to  determine  the  appeal  without  further
         notice."

18. Those directions,  which  are  perhaps  more  aptly  described  in  the
    circumstances as an agreed timetable for the progression of the appeal,
    were sent (by an Upper Tribunal Lawyer) by email to the respondent  and
    the appellant's solicitors on 2 April 2020.  A further  copy  was  sent
    (by a member of the administrative staff on this occasion) by email  on
    7 May 2020.

19. On 14 May 2020, the appellant's solicitors wrote in compliance with the
    second of the directions above.  In response to that  communication,  I
    issued another order, which was materially in the following terms:

         "[4] The date for the respondent to comply with the first of  those
         directions has passed.  There has been no compliance with  it,  nor
         has  there  been  any  request  for  an  extension  of  time.   The
         appellant's solicitors have  therefore  complied  with  the  second
         direction to this extent only.  They have written to the  Tribunal,
         noting the  absence  of  any  questions  from  the  respondent  and
         submitting that the respondent  has  foregone  the  opportunity  to
         cross-examine the appellant.  I  consider  that  submission  to  be
         meritorious.  The appellant has provided  his  answers  the  points
         taken in the letter of refusal and the respondent has  elected  not
         to challenge his account by cross-examination.  She must  be  taken
         not to dispute the factual account: MS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA  Civ
         1548, at [14].  The appellant's account has already  been  accepted
         to a large extent by the Competent Authority in any event.

         [5] The third and fourth directions which I issued on 20 March 2020
         remain in force.  Should either party seek to make  submissions  in
         compliance with those directions they will  be  considered  in  the
         final decision upon this appeal."

20. To date, nothing whatsoever has been received from  the  respondent  in
    accordance with any of these directions.  There have  been  no  written
    questions for the appellant,  no  submissions  on  the  merits  and  no
    request for any amendment of the directions.  I am  entirely  satisfied
    that the directions are known to the respondent.  As I was at pains  to
    explain  at  the  hearing,  the  directions  were  agreed  between  the
    representatives.  They were  sent  out  twice,  by  email.   The  email
    address used (UTdirections@homeoffice.gov.uk) is the address which  has
    been agreed for service upon the respondent during the pandemic  and  I
    now have extensive experience of the respondent replying to  directions
    served using that address.  The directions have clearly  been  received
    and acted upon by the appellant's solicitors,  who  complied  with  the
    final direction by filing written submissions from  Mr  Collins  on  24
    June 2020.  Given the history of this case, and the attempts I made  at
    the hearing on 20 March to ensure that realistic timescales were  given
    in light of the pandemic, it is frankly shocking that  there  has  been
    such silence from the respondent.

Remaking the Decision

21. Rule 34(2) requires me to have regard to the  views  expressed  by  the
    parties when deciding whether to hold a hearing.  The appellant remains
    content for the appeal to be decided without a  further  hearing.   The
    only view expressed by the respondent was expressed at the  hearing  on
    20 March 2020, when Ms Cunha expressly agreed to proceed as above.  The
    discretion  to  proceed  without  a  hearing  is  nevertheless  to   be
    considered and I recall, in that connection, what was said in Osborn  v
    The Parole Board [2014] 1 AC 1115.  The scope of the remaining  factual
    issues  is  comparatively  limited.   Both  parties  have   had   ample
    opportunity to consider their positions and to make submissions.  There
    is clearly an interest in concluding  this  appeal.   Form  IAFT-1  was
    lodged nearly five years ago.  The case has been considered  by  judges
    of the FtT, the UT and the Court of Appeal on more than  one  occasion.
    The appellant has been accepted to be a victim of  trafficking.   There
    is nothing, in reality, which serves to dissuade  me  from  the  course
    agreed at the hearing on 20 March 2020.  I will  therefore  remake  the
    decision on the appeal without a further hearing.

22. I undertake that remaking exercise on the basis  that  the  appellant's
    account is reasonably likely to be true.   As  already  noted,  he  was
    accepted by the Competent Authority to be a victim of trafficking.  The
    first judge in the FtT (Judge Oliver) accepted his account and then  it
    was accepted before the second judge in  the  FtT  (Judge  Grant)  that
    those findings should stand.  I note in any event that the  only  point
    taken against the appellant's account in  the  letter  of  refusal  was
    illogical.  It was accepted  that  the  appellant  was  the  victim  of
    'forced criminality' but not that he had been threatened by his father.
     But the only person who is said to have coerced the appellant  is  his
    father, and it makes no sense in those circumstances for the respondent
    to have accepted that there was forced criminality unless it  was  also
    accepted  that  the  appellant's  father  exerted  that   force.    The
    appellant's account was given as a child and  is  to  be  evaluated  in
    light of his minority at the  material  times.   He  was  a  vulnerable
    individual at the time and  he  remains  a  vulnerable  individual,  by
    reference to his accepted status as a victim  of  modern  slavery  (the
    Equal  Treatment  Bench  Book  refers).   His  story  is   nevertheless
    essentially consistent and plausible and I accept the  account  he  has
    given in its totality.

23. At [5] of his excellent written submissions, Mr Collins draws  together
    the essential facts of this protracted case.  I gratefully  adopt  that
    summary, minus his meticulous cross-referencing, and find  as  follows.
    The Appellant is now 22 years of age.  He is an ethnically Gorani  male
    from Shistavec in the far north of Albania.  His village is very small.
     He has never lived anywhere else in Albania. The Appellant  has  never
    visited Tirana  and  he  knows  nobody  there.   The  Appellant  had  a
    disjointed  education,  only  up  to  primary  level.  He  has  limited
    knowledge of  the  Albanian  language;  he  understands  some  but  his
    "speaking and written skills are not very good".  His father and family
    worked the land.  Other than helping on  the  land  the  Appellant  has
    never had a job in Albania.  He has no contact with his family.  Family
    tracing indicated that his father and family remain in Shistavec.   His
    father is an alcoholic and a violent man who  has  served  4  years  in
    prison for stabbing another man.  He has  also  threatened  neighbours.
    His father beat the Appellant's mother and subjected his young children
    to egregious abuse.  The Appellant's uncles have reported his father to
    the police on three occasions and whilst the police attended the family
    home  they  never  arrested  him.   On  one  occasion  when  an   uncle
    intervened, the Appellant's father beat the uncle up.  When  the  uncle
    reported  this  incident  the  police  turned  up  once  only  but  the
    Appellant's father  was  not  there.   The  police  never  returned  in
    relation to this incident and never arrested  the  Appellant's  father.
    The police were fully aware of his father's presence in the village but
    did not arrest him.  The Appellant's extended family are also scared of
    his father.  In 2012 The Appellant's father forced the Appellant - then
    aged 14 - to transport drugs alongside him into Kosovo  threatening  to
    kill him if he did not go with him.  His father threatened to kill  him
    if he told anybody about  the  drug  running.   When  on  occasion  the
    Appellant refused to go with his father to transport drugs  his  father
    would beat him up, threaten to kill him  and  force  him  to  go.   The
    authorities had been paid off and they did not need  to  worry  if  the
    police stopped them.  His father's criminal associates "have a  lot  of
    connections".  When on one occasion in 2013 the Appellant's mother took
    the other children and fled the house the Appellant remained  with  his
    father because his father threatened to kill him if he left.  When  the
    Appellant informed his mother about the drug running his mother was  so
    concerned for his safety she immediately  contacted  her  brothers  and
    they arranged for the Appellant to  flee  Albania.   The  Appellant  is
    afraid of the gang that his father worked for as well as his father. As
    a result of his past experiences the Appellant has received counselling
    in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  is  on  a  waiting  list  for   further
    counselling.

24. Against that backdrop, it is clear that  the  appellant  is  reasonably
    likely to be at risk  in  his  home  area  of  Shishtavec.  His  father
    threatened that he would kill him if he left.  It was for  that  reason
    that the appellant was unable to leave the family home with his mother,
    when she left (temporarily) to go to her own family in  Borje.   It  is
    reasonably likely that the appellant's  dangerous  and  violent  father
    would seek to harm him as a result of his disobedience.

25. I also accept the argument made by  Mr  Collins  at  [12]-[13]  of  his
    written submissions, to the effect that the appellant is also likely to
    be at risk from the drug-trafficking gang with whom his father  is  (or
    was) connected.  It is reasonably likely, in  my  judgment,  that  this
    gang, which was seemingly transporting large amounts of  drugs  between
    Albania and Kosovo on a regular basis would seek to 'cover its  tracks'
    by seeking to silence the appellant if he returned to  his  home  area.
    As  submitted  by  Mr  Collins,  the  appellant  is  clearly  privy  to
    information about the routes used by the gang and the  people  involved
    in the drug trafficking.

26. There has been no indication of any ongoing or extent risk  since  2014
    but the appellant has not been in touch with his  family  and,  in  any
    event, there need not be; corroboration is not a  requirement  in  such
    cases  It is also to be recalled that past ill-treatment  is  probative
    of future ill-treatment: Article 4(4) of  the  Qualification  Directive
    refers, reflecting pre-existing jurisprudence in the UK in the form  of
    Demirkaya [1999] Imm AR  498.   Given  the  threats  and  ill-treatment
    suffered by the appellant in the past, there is no good reason to think
    that he would not be exposed to the same treatment in the future,  were
    he to return to Shishtavec.

27. Having concluded that the appellant remains at risk in his home area, I
    turn to consider the submission made by the respondent at [21]-[29]  of
    the letter of refusal: sufficiency of domestic protection.  In reaching
    the conclusion that the appellant  would  receive  adequate  protection
    from the Albanian authorities, the respondent took account of the facts
    of his case, the background material then available  to  her,  and  the
    country guidance decisions in VD (Albania) CG [2004] UKIAT 115 and AM &
    BM (Albania) CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC).  Neither of those decisions,  nor
    TD & AD (Albania) CG [2016] UKUT 92 (IAC) and EH  (Albania)  CG  [2012]
    UKUT 348 (IAC) are directly on point.  The  trafficking  cases  concern
    female victims of sex  trafficking  and  EH  (Albania)  concerns  blood
    feuds.  To the extent that they provide a certain level  of  background
    information about the situation in Albania, however, it is  appropriate
    to take those decisions into account.  Having done so, and having  also
    considered the Asylos report of May 2019, upon which Mr Collins  relies
    throughout is written submissions, I consider the position  in  Albania
    to be as follows.  As was recognised in  TD  &  AD,  Albania  has  made
    significant progress in respect of  the  detection  and  prevention  of
    trafficking and the prosecution of those involved in  it.   The  Asylos
    report notes, at p63, that there is in place a strong  legislative  and
    policy framework in place. It is  this  framework  which  prompted  the
    Upper Tribunal to conclude in TD & AD that  there  is,  in  general,  a
    sufficiency of  protection  for  (female)  victims  of  trafficking  in
    Albania.

28. As Auld LJ explained at [55](6) of Bagdanavicius [2003] EWCA Civ  1605;
    [2004] 1 WLR 1207, however, even where there is a systemic  sufficiency
    of state protection, it  remains  necessary  to  take  account  of  the
    particular circumstances of an individual case.  At [182] of TD  &  AD,
    the Upper Tribunal emphasised that it was not possible to reach a clear
    conclusion that there was - in all trafficking cases - a sufficiency of
    protection from the former traffickers.  Instead, it was  necessary  to
    make an assessment taking into account the particular circumstances  of
    the individual.  In applying that approach to the facts of this case, I
    accept the submission made  by  Mr  Collins  that  the  source  of  the
    principal risk to the appellant is relevant.  It is relevant, in  other
    words, that he fears his father.  TD & AD shows, as does EH  (Albania),
    a degree of unwillingness on  the  part  of  the  Albanian  authorities
    (particularly in Northern Albania) to become involved in matters  which
    they perceive to be family disputes.

29. The respondent notes in the letter of  refusal  that  the  police  were
    previously called and that they attended the family home in response to
    allegations of domestic violence.  As Mr Collins notes in  his  written
    submissions, however, to  attach  weight  to  this  is  to  ignore  the
    remaining facts of the case.  When the police attended, the appellant's
    father was not there.  They did not wait for him or search for him  and
    they left, taking no further action.  This is suggestive of, at best, a
    'box ticking' approach, and not one in which the police were determined
    to detect and prosecute an  offender.   It  was  as  a  result  of  the
    police's inaction that the appellant's mother took matters into her own
    hands and left the family home to relocate to Borje.

30. Neither the appellant nor, it seems, his family members, have  informed
    the Albanian authorities about the appellant's father's  role  in  drug
    trafficking between Albania and Kosovo.  Were that  information  to  be
    given, it is reasonably likely that it would  serve  to  reduce  rather
    than to increase the appellant's chances of receiving a sufficiency  of
    protection.  He stated in his claim that the authorities had been 'paid
    off' and that the gang had a lot of connections.  Section  4.6  of  the
    Asylos report, which draws on evidence from many respected commentators
    including Dr Stephanie Schwandner-Sievers, demonstrates  how  plausible
    this assertion is.  Unfortunately, corruption within the police and the
    judiciary remains widespread in  Albania.   Given  the  involvement  or
    acquiescence of the police in the appellant's father's operation, it is
    reasonably likely that  they  would  take  no  action  to  protect  the
    appellant, given their vested interest in the activities of the gang.

31. Mr Collins also highlights, at [15]-[16] of  his  written  submissions,
    the list of factors which were said by the Tribunal in TD &  AD  to  be
    relevant to the ability of an individual to  access  a  sufficiency  of
    protection on return to Albania.  Those  factors  are  accepted  to  be
    correct by the respondent, since they feature at [2.4.2] of the 5 March
    2019 CPIN entitled  Albania:  People  Trafficking.   I  consider  those
    factors in turn.

32. The social status and economic standing of the family.  The appellant's
    family is of low social standing, having tended a small area of land in
    rural northern Albania.

33. The level of education of the victim of trafficking  or  their  family.
    The appellant received very little education because  of  the  language
    problems discussed above and his  father's  reluctance  to  buy  school
    books for him.  As a Gorani speaker, the appellant will be less able to
    advocate on his own behalf than a fluent Albanian speaker.

34. The victim  of  trafficking's  state  of  health,  particularly  mental
    health.  The  appellant  does  not  suffer  from  acute  mental  health
    problems but he has received counselling in the  past  and  is  on  the
    waiting list for more.

35. The presence of an illegitimate child.  This factor  is  obviously  not
    relevant.  The area of origin.  As above.  Age of victim.  22.

36. What support network will be available.  I consider that there will  be
    no support network available to the appellant.  He would not be able to
    return to his family in Shishtavec.  Borje, where his  maternal  family
    live, is nearby and I consider that the appellant would be at  risk  if
    he went there, for reasons considered more fully below.

37. It follows that consideration of many of the factors set out in TD & AD
    also points to the appellant's inability to  access  a  sufficiency  of
    protection on return.  In the circumstances, and  despite  the  inroads
    which Albania has made against traffickers and their  pernicious  trade
    in recent years, I conclude that this appellant  would  not  receive  a
    sufficiency of protection on the facts of his individual case.

38. In the further alternative, the respondent relies  at  [30]-[46]  on  a
    submission that the appellant  could  relocate  safely  and  reasonably
    within Albania, so as to avoid the  threat  from  his  father  and  his
    associates.   As  foreshadowed  above,  I  do  not  consider  that  the
    appellant would be safe in the event that he relocated to  a  different
    part of Albania.  It is  well  established  that  Albania  is  a  small
    country in with a small population, in which "there would be an attempt
    by those with whom the victims came into  contact,  either  officially,
    starting with the border police or when they attempted to find work  or
    merely acquaintances whom they would meet, to place them  within  their
    family context and to endeavour to find mutual acquaintances.": AM & BM
    refers, at [165].  That would be particularly so in  the  case  of  the
    appellant who would, as Mr Collins puts  it  at  [22]  of  his  written
    submissions 'stand out' as a Gorani who does not speak a great deal  of
    Albanian.  Many Gorani have migrated  to  Tirana  (the  CPIN  on  Ethic
    Minority Groups in Albania refers, at [10.1.2]).  There is a  risk,  on
    the facts of the appellant's particular case, that those with  whom  he
    came into contact, and particularly those Gorani with whom he came into
    contact, would attempt to trace his family back  to  Shishtavec.   Were
    they to do so, there is a reasonable likelihood  that  the  appellant's
    father or his associates would seek to harm the appellant in a place of
    relocation.  These are dangerous people with an extant grudge who would
    wish to silence the appellant if they came to know his location  which,
    on the facts of this case, seems entirely likely.  This risk  would  be
    particularly acute, in my judgment, were the appellant  to  attempt  to
    relocate to Borje.  This is near to his family home in  Shishtavec  and
    is known by his father to be the location of the  appellant's  mother's
    family.  It is reasonably likely that the appellant would  be  detected
    swiftly if he went there.

39. In any event, I accept the submissions made by  Mr  Collins  about  the
    undue harshness of the appellant relocating to Tirana or  another  part
    of Albania.  He has never lived elsewhere in that country  and  he  has
    never had any employment.  He has limited knowledge of Albanian.  He is
    an ethnic minority  and  his  ethnic  group  are  perceived  as  having
    collaborated with the  Yugoslav  aggressors  during  the  conflict:  MB
    (Serbia and Montenegro) [2003] UKIAT 105  refers.   Members  of  ethnic
    minorities are known to  face  difficulty  in  obtaining  formal  civic
    registration: 13.1.1 of the July 2017 Albanian  Background  Information
    CPIN.  Unlike female victims of  trafficking,  who  can  expect  to  be
    placed in a shelter for anything up to two  years,  the  Asylos  report
    shows that there are no such shelters for male victims of  trafficking.
    In the event that the appellant was able to engage with these  services
    in any realistic way (given his linguistic difficulties), the most that
    he could hope to be provided with would be a rented apartment: page 150
    of the Asylos report refers.  Even assuming, contrary to  the  findings
    of I have reached above, that the appellant would be  safe  in  such  a
    place, I do not consider that he would be able  to  live  a  relatively
    normal life by local standards.  The challenges he  would  face,  as  a
    young man from an ethnic minority background with little education  and
    life experience, are such that he would find it particularly  difficult
    to survive.  Having considered the Asylos report as a  whole,  and  the
    sections highlighted at [29] of Mr Collins' submissions in  particular,
    I find that it would be unduly harsh  for  the  appellant  to  relocate
    within Albania.

40. I have reserved to the end of my decision the question addressed by  Mr
    Collins at an earlier stage in his written submissions:  the  existence
    of a Refugee Convention Reason.  Mr Collins submits that the  appellant
    belongs to a  Particular  Social  Group  of  a  'young  adult  who  was
    trafficked under duress by his father into criminality' but  I  do  not
    consider this question to be before me.  The FtT previously found  that
    such young men would not be perceived as different by  the  surrounding
    society in Albania, and therefore that the group identified  could  not
    satisfy the second of the two tests in regulation  6(1)(d)(ii)  of  The
    Refugee or Person in Need of International  Protection  (Qualification)
    Regulations 2006.  Upper Tribunal Judge Smith rejected  the  ground  of
    appeal which was advanced against that conclusion.   She  then  refused
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal on  that  ground.   In  his
    decision refusing permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal, Sir Ross
    Cranston said:

         "The applicant was forced by  his  father  to  traffic  drugs  from
         Albania to Kosovo.  He therefore falls  within  the  definition  of
         being a victim of trafficking/modern slavery.  Both the FtT and the
         UT determined that he was not a member of a particular social group
         for the purposes of the Convention.  Both  drew  the  sensible  and
         reasonable distinction with trafficked Albanian women  forced  into
         prostitution.    Further,   here   [sic]   was   no   evidence   of
         discrimination against persons like him.  I cannot see  that  there
         is any reasonable prospects of the Court of Appeal  differing  from
         the conclusions of both the FtT and the UT."

41. Mr Collins does not  engage  with  these  conclusions  in  his  written
    submissions, reverting instead to the analysis which  was  rejected  by
    the FtT, UT and Court of Appeal,  that  the  appellant's  situation  is
    comparable  to  that  of  a  woman  who  was  trafficked   for   sexual
    exploitation.  That submission having been rejected in the past,  I  do
    not consider that I am able to find that the  appellant  belongs  to  a
    Particular Social Group for the purposes of the  1951  Convention.   It
    follows that the appeal stands dismissed on Refugee Convention  grounds
    but is allowed  on  Humanitarian  Protection  (Article  15(b)  QD)  and
    Article 3 ECHR grounds.

42. In light of the  findings  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  I  will  not
    consider the alternative submissions made by Mr Collins  on  Article  8
    ECHR.



Notice of Decision

I remake the  decision  in  this  appeal  by  allowing  it  on  Humanitarian
Protection and Article 3 ECHR grounds.


                                M.J.Blundell
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell

                                14 July 2020

        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

