
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10051/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2015                  |On 8 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R. Akther, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Majid sitting at Taylor House on 18 February
    2015) allowing on human rights grounds the  claimant's  appeal  against
    the decision to remove him from the UK as an illegal entrant by way  of
    directions under paragraphs 8 to 10, Schedule 2 of the Immigration  Act
    1971.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction  but
    as the  claimant  has  advanced  an  asylum  claim  I  consider  it  is
    appropriate that he is accorded anonymity for these proceedings in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant, whose date of birth is 1 January 1984,  claims  to  be  a
    national of Burma.  He says he resided for a long  time  in  Bangladesh
    from the age of 8 without residency status before travelling to  Europe
    in 2006 and entering the United Kingdom that year, hidden in  the  back
    of a lorry.  He claimed asylum on 1 October 2013.

 3. His core claim is that he is a Rohingyan and as such he is a member  of
    a persecuted ethnic minority group in Burma.   He  says  he  cannot  be
    returned to Burma  on  that  account  and  he  cannot  be  returned  to
    Bangladesh as he has no status there.

 4. In the refusal letter the Secretary of State rejected his claim to be a
    Burmese Rohingyan and contended that  the  claimant  is  a  Bangladeshi
    national.  In support of this contention the Secretary of State  relied
    at paragraph  30  on  the  findings  of  a  qualified  and  experienced
    linguistic expert to the effect that the claimant is a Bangladeshi to a
    very high degree of certainty and that it is very unlikely that he  has
    a Burmese linguistic background as he has claimed.   The  Secretary  of
    State reached the following conclusion at paragraph 63:

         "It is however considered that you are Bangladeshi.  You  have  not
         given a reason  of  fear  of  why  you  are  unable  to  return  to
         Bangladesh.  Given that you did not claim asylum  for  eight  years
         despite claiming to leave Bangladesh in fear of  your  life  it  is
         considered you came to the UK for alternative means.  You have  not
         provided a reason why you really came to the UK.  However it  would
         be reasonable to conclude given that you  found  employment  almost
         immediately in the UK that you came to the UK for economic reasons.
          Either way it is considered that you do not have a genuine fear to
         return to Bangladesh or indeed Burma if your account  was  accepted
         which it has not been."

 5. I now refer to Judge Majid's decision.  At paragraph [23] he said:

         "In the light of the preceding legal rules it is only fair that  in
         a particular case an individual is not deprived of  the  protection
         of the Convention where that course is justified by compelling  and
         exceptional circumstances.  Powerful factors are outlined above  in
         the  decision  which  justify  the  grant  of  application  of  the
         Convention  particularly  the  right  to  life  can  protect   this
         appellant because he cannot be sent to Bangladesh  since  the  Home
         Office is alleging that he is not a Bengli and is  only  pretending
         to belong to that nationality.  Also the judges cannot forget  that
         all objective reports about Burma are clear to establish  that  the
         Rohingya Muslims are maltreated in that  country  and  relevant  to
         this decision, the Bangladeshis do not welcome the refugees  coming
         from Burma."

    At paragraph [24] he said:

         "The appellant can only be sent to Burma the nationality  of  which
         he asserts and as given in  the  asylum  application  to  the  Home
         Office, screening interview and asylum interview."

    At paragraph [27] he reached the following conclusion:

         "Accordingly  in  view  of  my  deliberations  in   the   preceding
         paragraphs and having taken  into  account  all  of  the  oral  and
         documentary evidence as well as the  submissions  at  my  disposal,
         cognisant of the fact the burden of proof is on the  appellant  and
         the standard of proof is on the  balance  of  probabilities,  I  am
         motivated to allow this appeal under human rights due to  the  fact
         that the appellant can only be returned to Burma."

 6. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal raising,  inter
    alia, the following grounds:

          1) The determination was devoted largely to an extraordinary  and
             irrelevant discourse on a  number  of  matters  including  the
             political motivation of the human rights legislation.

          2) The judge failed to make  any  findings  on  any  of  the  key
             issues, most notably whether the appellant is  a  national  of
             Bangladesh or Burma.  The refusal letter makes it plain that a
             language analysis had found the claimant with a high degree of
             certainty to be a national of Bangladesh.  The judge  made  no
             reference to this.

          3) The judge made an extraordinary finding in paragraph [26] that
             it would be absurd to contemplate that the appellant would  be
             safe to be returned to Burma, and  therefore  he  allowed  the
             appeal on human rights and he would let the Secretary of State
             cope with the  situation  under  whichever  Rule  she  thought
             appropriate:  "Of  course   the   Home   Secretary   has   the
             administrative discretion to obviate any absurdity which leads
             to injustice." It  was  for  the  judge  to  avoid  injustice:
             removal directions were to Bangladesh. There was no indication
             as to which Article of the Human Rights Convention  the  judge
             felt was appropriate.

          4) The judge made no findings at all in relation to  the  Refugee
             Convention.

 7. Today I have had the benefit of  receiving  submissions  from  both  Mr
    Tufan and Ms Akther who appears on behalf of the claimant.   Ms  Akther
    is in agreement that the decision of the judge failed to make  relevant
    findings, and that he misdirected himself on the Secretary  of  State's
    case, including on the crucial fact that  she  believed  him  to  be  a
    Bangladeshi national; and so she proposed to remove him to  Bangladesh,
    not Burma. Both parties have been deprived a fair hearing on the issues
    in controversy, and I am in no doubt that the decision is vitiated by a
    material error of law for the reasons set out in  the  application  for
    permission; and I find that this is an appropriate case for the  appeal
    to be re-heard in its entirety in the First-tier Tribunal,  before  any
    judge apart from Judge Majid.  Accordingly,  I  will  make  appropriate
    directions to reflect this decision.

Conclusion

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law  and
accordingly the decision is set aside and it is remitted to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for a de novo hearing to  remake  the  decision  before  any  judge
apart from Judge Majid. None  of  the  findings  of  fact  of  the  previous
tribunal will be preserved.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
