

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
AA/10097/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 3 April 2019                          |On 8 May 2019                          |
|                                         |                                       |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                    M J M
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms N Braganza, Counsel instructed by Camden
                  Community Law       Centre
For the Respondent:   Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was not made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  However,  as
this  appeal  raises  protection  issues,  it  is  appropriate  to  make  an
anonymity order.  Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,
the Appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





                            DECISION AND REASONS

      BACKGROUND

    1. The Appellant appeals against a decision  of  Designated  First-Tier
       Tribunal  Judge  Shaerf  promulgated  on  29  January   2019   ("the
       Decision") allowing her appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision
       dated 25 April 2013 on human rights grounds  but  dismissing  it  on
       asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.  The Respondent has  not
       appealed the allowing of the appeal on human rights grounds and I am
       therefore only concerned with the appeal on asylum and  humanitarian
       protection grounds.


    2.  The  Appellant's  appeal  was  initially  dismissed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Prior on 9 December 2013 on all grounds, but she  was
       granted permission to appeal and by a  decision  promulgated  on  27
       March 2014, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey found that Judge Prior
       had erred.  He remitted the appeal for reconsideration afresh.  By a
       decision promulgated on 29 December 2014, First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       Lobo allowed the appeal.  However, the Respondent then appealed and,
       following a hearing before Mr Justice Edis and Deputy Upper Tribunal
       Judge Campbell, an error of law was once again found  in  particular
       in relation to the Appellant's nationality.   The  appeal  was  once
       again remitted for redetermination.


    ERROR OF LAW


    The Decision


    3. The Respondent in his decision disputed the Appellant's nationality.
        He asserted that  she  is  a  citizen  of  the  Republic  of  Congo
       (Brazzaville) whereas the Appellant claims  that  she  is  from  the
       Democratic Republic of Congo ("DRC").  The Respondent confirmed that
       the sole destination for removal was the Republic of  Congo.   Judge
       Lobo found that the Appellant was from the Republic of Congo but, as
       noted above, his decision was found to  contain  an  error  of  law.
       That issue was redetermined  by  Judge  Shaerf  in  the  Appellant's
       favour ([35] of the Decision). There is no challenge to that finding
       by the Respondent.  The Judge therefore allowed the  appeal  on  the
       basis that the Appellant is not a national or a  legal  resident  of
       the Republic  of  Congo  and  there  would  be  no  reason  for  the
       authorities of that country to accept her ([37] of the Decision).


    4. The Judge then went on to consider the substance of  her  appeal  in
       the context of return  to  DRC.   He  concluded  that,  due  to  the
       Appellant's vulnerable state,  she  would  be  unable  to  care  for
       herself, or to access medical or other support  in  order  to  trace
       family members in DRC.  He found that she would  be  "destitute  and
       likely to perish within a very short period of time".  He  therefore
       concluded that Article 3 ECHR would be breached  on  return.   As  I
       have already noted, the Respondent has not appealed that conclusion.

    5. The Judge went on to consider whether  the  Appellant  had  a  well-
       founded fear of persecution for a  Refugee  Convention  reason.   He
       made the following findings:


            "[39] I now turn to consider the Appellant's asylum  claim.   I
           have for the reasons already outlined found that on leaving  the
           DRC she had a well-founded fear of persecution  for  actual  and
           imputed political opinions, having regard to the reason why  she
           was raped in Kinshasa and in Goma.  There is  no  evidence  that
           the  DRC  authorities  have  any  continuing  interest  in   the
           Appellant and indeed that has not been argued for her.   Coupled
           with the medical evidence I find the Appellant is unlikely to be
           of interest to any of the authorities in the DRC who in the past
           persecuted her in the case of the Kinshasa incident or failed to
           provide a sufficiency of protection against attacks  by  members
           of M23.  There was no claim made that the conditions in the  DRC
           even for a person in a psychological state similar  to  that  of
           the Appellant would be entitled to humanitarian protection under
           Article 15(c) of the Qualifying Directive.
            [40] It may be that when the Appellant left  the  DRC  or  even
           later when she arrived in the United Kingdom that  psychological
           condition has not so deteriorated that she would  be  unable  to
           care for herself in the DRC and so she  might  then  still  have
           been  of  interest  to  the  DRC  authorities  and  at  risk  of
           persecution.  In the intervening period as already mentioned her
           psychological health has markedly deteriorated to such an extent
           that she is incapable of caring for herself  or  even  accessing
           any care  facilities  which  might  be  available.   I  have  to
           consider the Appellant's  asylum  claim  in  this  context.   At
           paragraph 33 of the judgment of the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
           European Union in MP v SSHD (C-353/16) the Court found that:
                 "..under Article 4(4) of Directive 2004/83, the  fact  that
                 an applicant has in the past been subject to  serious  harm
                 is a serious indication  that  he  faces  a  real  risk  of
                 suffering such harm  again.   However,  that  article  also
                 states that that  does  not  apply  where  there  are  good
                 reasons for believing  that  the  serious  harm  previously
                 suffered will not be repeated or continued."
           There was no  evidence  the  Appellant  might  be  discriminated
           against for any Refugee Convention reason such  that  she  might
           qualify  for  asylum  or  subsidiary  protection  as  the  Court
           contemplated   paragraphs   57   and   58   of   its   judgment.
           Consequently, while  the  Applicant  might  have  qualified  for
           asylum  or  subsidiary  protection  on  arrival  in  the  United
           Kingdom, the jurisprudence in MP means that at the present time,
           strictly speaking she does not qualify."


      The Appellant's Grounds and the Grant of Permission


    6. The Appellant's grounds continue to rely on a risk to the  Appellant
       based on actual and imputed political  opinion.   It  is  said  that
       there was no basis for the Judge to find as he did  on  this  issue.
       However, the focus of the grounds is that the Judge ignored  another
       prominent aspect of the asylum claim, namely that the Appellant is a
       member of a particular  social  group,  being  women  or  vulnerable
       women.  It is said that "[t]he evidence as to the treatment of women
       as PSG in DRC is compelling".  Reliance  is  placed  on  the  expert
       reports of Dr Kodi both  as  to  risk  based  on  imputed  political
       opinion and as a vulnerable  woman.   It  is  said  that  the  Judge
       ignored those reports.  The grounds  are  thereafter  formulated  as
       follows:
       Ground one: The Judge erred in failing to engage  with  or  consider
       the Appellant's claim that she was at risk on return  to  DRC  as  a
       member of a  particular  social  group.   This  was  raised  in  the
       skeleton argument, background material and the expert reports;
       Ground two: The Judge erred in failing to find  that  the  Appellant
       would be at risk on this account, having regard to his findings  and
       the evidence relied upon.  The appeal  should  therefore  have  been
       allowed on asylum grounds;
       Ground three: The Judge erred in failing to find on the basis of his
       favourable credibility findings that the Appellant would be at  risk
       by reason of her past persecution  for  imputed  political  reasons.
       This was addressed by Dr Kodi in his expert reports.


    7. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge McCarthy on 27 February 2019 in the following terms:


            "1.  Although I am reluctant to grant permission to  appeal  in
           this case given its protracted history and the mental health  of
           the appellant, the grounds advanced by Ms Braganza  identify  an
           arguable legal error in the decision and  reasons  statement  of
           Designated FtT Judge Shaerf that was issued on 9 January 2019.
            2.   There is no complaint  regarding  Judge  Shaerf's  finding
           that the appellant satisfies the high threshold in  relation  to
           article 3 ECHR and his decision to  allow  the  appeal  on  that
           basis.  As far as I can tell, there has been no application  for
           permission by the respondent against  that  decision  and  Judge
           Shaerf's findings will stand irrespective of the outcome of  any
           appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
            3.   The complaint is that Judge Shaerf failed to  have  regard
           to paragraph  15  of  Ms  Braganza's  skeleton  argument  of  10
           December 2018.  Judge Shaerf had this before him as is clear  by
           the fact he recorded it at paragraph 14(9) and commented on  its
           contents at paragraph 29.  Unfortunately, Judge  Shaerf  appears
           to have overlooked the contents of  paragraph  15  in  which  Ms
           Braganza  argued  the  appellant  is  a  refugee   because   the
           developments in her case, particularly the extreme vulnerability
           arising from her mental health condition, brings her within  the
           meaning of particular social group.
            4.   I can find no consideration  of  this  argument  in  Judge
           Shaerf's findings.  If the appellant is a member of a PSG,  then
           when taken with  his  findings  that  the  appellant  meets  the
           article 3 threshold, the likely conclusion  would  be  that  the
           appellant is a refugee.  But in the absence of findings on  this
           issue, it cannot simply be read across and the  omission  is  an
           arguable legal error because it  would  affect  the  outcome  in
           terms of the protection status granted to the appellant.
            5.   Although I think the above will be the central  issue  for
           the Upper Tribunal to consider, I note that the final ground  of
           application argues that the  appellant's  past  persecution  for
           imputed political opinion would be a further refugee  convention
           reason.  Although  I  find  this  argument  weaker,  because  it
           overlaps with the reasons why the appellant might  face  a  real
           risk of serious harm as a member of a particular social group, I
           do not exclude it."

    8. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision  or  remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.


    Submissions and Conclusions in relation to Error of Law

    9. Ms Braganza submitted that key to the Appellant's  case  is  whether
       she is a member of a particular social group.   The  Judge  did  not
       consider this.  The issue needs to be  determined  even  though  the
       Appellant is being granted  status  based  on  the  Article  3  ECHR
       finding.  The  particular  social  group  for  which  the  Appellant
       contends is that of a woman, a lone woman or a woman with particular
       vulnerabilities.  If it is accepted that the Appellant is  a  member
       of a particular social group then, on the basis of the Judge's other
       findings, her appeal should be allowed on that basis  as  she  would
       remain at risk on return to DRC.  Ms Braganza  took  me  to  various
       items of background evidence, some of  which  did  not  support  her
       submissions.  However, she also took me to the expert reports of  Dr
       Kodi and the Home  Office's  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note
       entitled "Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC): Women fearing  gender-
       based harm or violence" and dated June 2017  ("the  2017  CPIN").  I
       will deal with the substance of that evidence later in my decision.


   10. Mr Avery accepted that the Judge did not deal  with  the  appeal  on
       this basis.  The issue then becomes  one  whether  the  evidence  is
       sufficient to justify a finding that the Appellant is at risk  as  a
       member of that particular social group.  This would be a question of
       considering the Appellant's personal circumstances in light  of  the
       country evidence.


   11. In light of Mr Avery's concession, I found an error of  law  in  the
       Decision based on  the  Judge's  failure  to  consider  whether  the
       Appellant is a member of a particular social group  as  the  Refugee
       Convention reason engaged in this case. I also found that the  Judge
       had failed to consider the expert reports of Dr Kodi.

   12. Both parties agreed that I should redetermine the appeal rather than
       remitting it.  Both agreed that I could do so  on  the  papers.   In
       light of that concession, it is appropriate to preserve a large part
       of the Decision which contains the Judge's report of the evidence he
       heard and  considered  and  his  findings.   It  is  also  obviously
       appropriate to preserve his conclusion that  the  appeal  is  to  be
       allowed on Article 3 grounds and his finding as to  the  Appellant's
       nationality, which were not challenged.


   13. For that reason, although I set aside the Decision consequent on  my
       conclusion that there is an error of law disclosed, I  preserve  the
       whole of the Decision save  for  paragraphs  [39]  to  [41]  of  the
       Decision.  The latter paragraph  concerns  the  possibility  of  the
       Respondent exercising discretion in relation to  the  asylum  claim.
       Strictly, that does not fall  to  be  set  aside  but,  since  I  am
       redetermining the asylum claim, it is appropriate to do so.




    RE-MAKING OF THE DECISION


   14.  I begin by adopting what is said at [13] of the Decision as to  the
       relevant law concerning the burden  and  standard  of  proof  in  an
       asylum case.  That does not need to be repeated.  I apply the  lower
       standard of proof.  I recognise that, as submitted, the  issue  here
       is whether a Refugee Convention reason applies in  relation  to  the
       position which the Appellant will face on return to  DRC.   In  that
       regard, although Ms Braganza did not develop submissions  concerning
       her ground three concerning the continued risk on account of imputed
       political opinion, this was an issue on which  permission  was  also
       granted and it is appropriate to consider continuing  risk  on  both
       bases.  I have of course set aside [39] of the Decision where  Judge
       Shaerf made the finding that  the  DRC  authorities  would  have  no
       continuing interest in the Appellant.


   15. I turn then to the Judge's finding as to the Appellant's core claim.
        At [36] and [37] of the Decision, he made the following findings:


            "[36]      With this background as to her nationality, age  and
           the medical evidence, I accept on the lower  standard  of  proof
           that at least the core of the Appellant's account  is  credible:
           that she was born and lived in the DRC until she fled Goma; that
           she married into the military and had a number of children; that
           she was arrested and ill-treated at a demonstration in  Kinshasa
           supporting the rights of women and  subsequently  witnessed  the
           murder of her husband when she and two  of  her  daughters  were
           raped by soldiers of the rebel Mouvement du 23 Mars (M23).
            [37] ... I am satisfied the Appellant left the DRC  because  of
           what happened to her and her family in Goma, including the death
           of her husband.  I am also satisfied that by  the  time  of  the
           hearing before me, the Appellant is a broken woman and  entirely
           reliant on her niece, [A], who may be occasionally  assisted  by
           her sister, [O].


   16. It follows  from  the  above  citation  that  past  persecution  was
       accepted.  As I have  already  noted  above,  "[t]he  fact  that  an
       applicant has already been subject to persecution or serious harm or
       to direct threats of such persecution or such  harm,  is  a  serious
       indication of the applicant's well-founded fear  of  persecution  or
       real risk of suffering serious harm, unless there are  good  reasons
       to consider that such  persecution  or  serious  harm  will  not  be
       repeated" (Article 4(4) of Directive 2004/83).


    The Evidence


    Country Expert Reports: Dr Muzong Kodi


   17. Dr Kodi has provided two reports dated 28  June  2014  and  21  July
       2017. He is a British citizen of Congolese  origin.   From  2005  to
       2016, he was an Associate Fellow in the Africa Department of Chatham
       House.  He is now an International Consultant.  He has a lengthy  CV
       showing working experience in international NGos focusing  on  human
       rights, governance and anti-corruption, in think tanks and  research
       and teaching in African  universities.   He  regularly  visits  DRC.
       Prior to his report dated 21 July 2017, he was in DRC from March  to
       April 2017.


   18. In his first report, Dr Kodi was asked whether the  Appellant  could
       return to DRC  and  live  safely  in  Kinshasa  notwithstanding  her
       profile.  He opined that it was unlikely that she would be  able  to
       do so as a failed asylum seeker returning from the UK diaspora which
       is viewed as an enemy of the DRC regime.  He said that  there  would
       be no protection for the Appellant anywhere in DRC, that there  were
       no government agencies which could offer protection to civilians and
       that Congolese NGOs could not provide effective  protection.   There
       would not be any area in the country to which  the  Appellant  could
       safely relocate.  I pause there to note that Dr Kodi's opinion which
       was given in June 2014 is overtaken by the Tribunal's decision in BM
       and Others (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] 293
       (IAC) where the guidance given was that  "[a] national  of  the  DRC
       whose attempts to acquire refugee status in the United Kingdom  have
       been unsuccessful is not, without more, exposed to a  real  risk  of
       persecution or serious harm  or  proscribed  treatment  contrary  to
       Article 3 ECHR in the event of enforced return to DRC."


   19. In his second report,  Dr  Kodi  was  asked  about  the  Appellant's
       situation as a lone woman in DRC if she were returned.  He said  the
       following:


            "[13]      As a lone woman without family support  and  without
           recent experience of living  in  DRC,  the  Appellant  would  be
           confused and disoriented in a country that she left a few  years
           ago and has changed for the  worse  since  then.   Without  male
           protection, she would likely be  at  very  high  risk  of  being
           raped.  As the Home Office rightly notes,  "sexual  and  gender-
           based violence remain serious and widespread  problems"  in  the
           DRC.  Violence against women of  any  age,  including  rape  and
           sexual slavery, has increased exponentially since the war  began
           in the country in 1998.  In  the  DRC,  including  in  Kinshasa,
           women are routinely raped, as numerous reports by  human  rights
           organisations testify.  Human Rights Watch,  for  instance,  has
           reported several such cases, including that of women detained at
           the Kin-Maziere detention centre in Kinshasa who were repeatedly
           tortured  with  an  electric  baton.   One  of  the  women   was
           reportedly  gang-raped  by  five  policemen.   With   guaranteed
           impunity, rapes of women and girls by state and non-state actors
           have continued unabated throughout the country."


   20.  After  making  reference  to  the  worsening   security   situation
       throughout DRC, Dr Kodi goes on to say that:


            "[16]      After so many years of conflict, with a large number
           of women and girls raped regularly by both the military,  rebels
           and  civilians,  sexual  violence  has   become   tolerated   or
           "normalized" in most regions of the DRC...Even at  the  societal
           level, where protection could be offered  by  the  community  to
           victims of rape by rebels, the impact of many years of  conflict
           has been devastating...
            [17] This is confirmed by the Home Office who state that:
           "Patriarchal attitudes  and  discrimination  are  prevalent  and
           women and girls can be subject to rape and other forms of sexual
           violence."
            ...
            [19] Notwithstanding the fact that the  DRC  has  adopted  very
           progressive laws on  sexual  violence,  they  are  not  enforced
           because of the general tolerance of  sexual  violence,  lack  of
           political and a corrupt and ill-equipped justice  sector.   This
           has resulted in an enduring culture of impunity and  total  lack
           of protection for the victims of rape.
            [20] Congolese NGOs cannot provide effective protection to  the
           Appellant  either.   They  are  weak,   politicized   and   lack
           credibility.  Congolese NGO activists are themselves in a rather
           precarious situation and are regularly  harassed,  arrested  and
           even killed by the security forces...
            [21] The United Nations Mission for the  Stabilisation  of  the
           Congo (...MONUSCO) does not do police work, as it is not part of
           its mandate.  It may intervene - but does not always do so -  in
           a case  of  mass  repression  of  civilians  but,  from  my  own
           experience, it does not provide  protection  to  an  individual,
           such as a rape victim..."


       Although much of this passage of the report is cross-referenced to a
       2010 Oxfam report, the other, more recent background  evidence  does
       not suggest that this situation has changed for the better.


   21. Asked whether the Appellant could safely internally relocate  within
       DRC, Dr Kodi provides the following analysis:


            "[22]      It is  unlikely  that  it  would  be  safe  for  the
           Appellant to be relocated.  Because of her association with  her
           husband who conducted activities on behalf of the MLC, a radical
           anti-Kabila political party, it is  likely  that  the  Appellant
           would be at risk of being arrested on arrival in Kinshasa or any
           other part of  the  DRC,  if  she  were  to  be  relocated.   As
           explained above, the government of the DRC has  for  many  years
           arrested members  of  opposition  political  parties,  including
           members of the MLC, and those associated with them.
            [23] The Appellant would likely be identified as the wife of an
           MLC-supporting soldier during her interrogation  by  immigration
           officers on arrival in Kinshasa.  She would likely be asked  why
           she had fled from the Congo.  It is  unlikely,  considering  the
           information that I collected during my last visit to the DRC  in
           June-July 2014, that the Appellant would be allowed to leave the
           airport as a free woman.  She would  instead  run  the  risk  of
           being detained on arrival.  She would be tortured  in  detention
           and her human rights would be violated.
            [24] As  explained  above,  the  MLC,  its  members  and  those
           perceived to be associated to  them,  like  the  Appellant,  are
           being targeted because the MLC is one  of  the  main  opposition
           parties to President Kabila's regime and one of the parties that
           are the most opposed to allowing Mr Kabila standing for a  third
           term in 2016.  The MLC and its supporters are still  seen  as  a
           serious threat to the present regime."


       Although the reference back to a  previous  section  of  the  report
       which refers to arrests of political opponents relates to  a  period
       between 2007 and 2012, the other background  evidence  continues  to
       refer to the DRC authorities targeting political opponents or  those
       perceived as such, albeit there is scant mention of the MLC in  more
       recent reports.

      The Home Office CPINs


   22. At [2.2] of the 2017 CPIN relied upon by the Appellant, guidance  is
       given on women as a particular social group as follows:


            "2.2.1     Women in DRC form a PSG within the  meaning  of  the
           Refugee Convention because they share an  innate  characteristic
           or a common background  that  cannot  be  changed,  or  share  a
           characteristic  or  belief  that  is  so  fundamental  to  their
           identity or  conscience  that  they  should  not  be  forced  to
           renounce it, and have a distinct identity which is perceived  as
           being different by the surrounding society.
            2.2.2      Although women in DRC form a PSG, this does not mean
           that establishing such membership will be sufficient to make out
           a case to be recognised  as  a  refugee.   The  question  to  be
           addressed in each case will be  whether  the  particular  person
           will face a  real  risk  of  persecution  on  account  of  their
           gender."


   23. Under the heading of "Assessment of Risk",  the  guidance  considers
       discrimination, sexual harassment and rape, domestic violence (which
       does not apply in this case)  and  conflict  related  violence.   In
       relation to discrimination, the following guidance is given:


            "2.3.2     Being female does not on its own  establish  a  need
           for   international   protection.    The   general   level    of
           discrimination against women in DRC is not sufficiently  serious
           by its nature and repetition as  to  amount  to  persecution  or
           serious harm.  However, decision makers  must  consider  whether
           there are particular factors relevant to the person which  might
           make the discrimination experienced so serious by its nature and
           repetition as to amount to serious  harm  or  persecution.   The
           onus is on the woman to demonstrate that she would be personally
           at risk of gender-based persecution, with each  case  considered
           on its merits."


       Similarly, the section dealing with sexual harassment and rape makes
       the point that although this does occur, not all women  will  be  at
       risk and it will be up to the individual  to  demonstrate  that  she
       will be personally at  risk.   Likewise,  in  relation  to  conflict
       related violence, the point is made that "single women without  male
       support and protection may be able to demonstrate  that  within  the
       conflict zone they would be at risk of serious harm".


   24. In terms of protection, the 2017 CPIN accepts that "[a]lthough  laws
       exist to protect women  from  sexual-based  violence  they  are  not
       always effectively enforced" and  the  same  applies  to  deal  with
       conflict related sexual violence.   Although it is recorded that the
       government is working with international  organisations  to  improve
       the protection offered and  to  implement  a  national  strategy  on
       sexual and gender-based violence, the report accepts that  "progress
       is slow and although the state appears willing, it is unlikely to be
       able to provide effective protection to  women  living  in  conflict
       area who are at risk of gender-based violence".


   25. Of course, the Appellant does not have to return to a conflict  zone
       in DRC.  The 2017 CPIN records at [2.5.3] that  "[c]onflict  related
       violence is predominantly  in  the  eastern  provinces  so  internal
       relocation to Kinshasa and other areas of the country  not  affected
       by civil conflict will generally be a reasonable option for a woman,
       provided it would not be unreasonable for her to do so."


   26. Although I was told by the parties that the Home  Office's  guidance
       had not been updated since the 2017 CPIN, that is not the  position.
       A cursory check of the published guidance reveals  two  CPINs,  both
       dated September 2018, one relating to gender-based violence and  the
       other to opposition to the government.  As reports published by  the
       Respondent to which my attention should have been drawn  by  one  or
       other of the parties, I consider it appropriate to  have  regard  to
       what is the most up-to-date published guidance.

   27. I deal first with the update to the 2017  CPIN.   That  is  entitled
       "Gender-based Violence" and is dated September 2018 ("the First 2018
       CPIN").  It repeats the guidance given in the 2017  CPIN  concerning
       women as a particular social group.  However, when dealing with  the
       assessment of risk of discrimination, the passage cited above  reads
       slightly differently as follows:


           "2.4.3      The general level of discrimination by state and non-
           state actors against women is not sufficiently  serious  by  its
           nature and repetition as to amount  to  persecution  or  serious
           harm. However, widows and/or female-headed households may be  at
           greater risk. Decision makers must consider  whether  there  are
           particular factors relevant to the person which might  make  the
           discrimination  experienced  so  serious  by  its   nature   and
           repetition as to amount to serious harm or persecution. The onus
           is on the woman to demonstrate that she would be  personally  at
           risk of gender-based persecution, with each case  considered  on
           its merits."


   28. Similarly, when dealing with sexual  harassment  and  violence,  the
       passage has been slightly amended to the following:


           "2.4.6       Although  sexual  harassment   and   violence   are
           prevalent, the likelihood of it occurring  may  be  affected  by
           factors such as location and socio-economic circumstances of the
           girl or woman, and not all women will be at risk. The onus is on
           the  person  to  demonstrate  that  she  will,  on  return,   be
           personally at real risk of  treatment  that  by  its  nature  or
           repetition amounts to persecution or serious harm."


   29. The sections dealing with effectiveness of protection  and  internal
       relocation are broadly the same as those in the 2017 CPIN.


   30. Having regard to the Appellant's case  that  she  is  also  at  risk
       because of her imputed political  opinion  as  an  opponent  of  the
       regime, I also have regard to the CPIN entitled "Democratic Republic
       of Congo (DRC): Opposition to Government" also dated September  2018
       ("the Second 2018 CPIN").

   31. The Second 2018 CPIN continues to rely on decided  country  guidance
       cases which are broadly to the effect that it is  only  high-profile
       opponents who are at risk and that mere membership  of  an  opposing
       political party or low-level activism is generally  insufficient  to
       excite the interest of the DRC  authorities.   However,  the  Second
       2018 CPIN goes on to say this:


           "2.4.10     Given the political crisis since December  2016  and
           the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  build-up  to  the  scheduled
           elections in December  2018,  the  country  is  in  a  state  of
           heightened political tension, and  political  opponents  are  at
           increased risk of intimidation and arbitrary arrest.  The  state
           authorities are likely to be volatile and unpredictable  in  the
           uncertain political climate, and may react  with  harshness  and
           brutality  towards  political  opponents.  Those  with  a  known
           political  profile  or  position  in  an  opposition  party  are
           generally more at risk than ordinary members. 2.4.11 In general,
           opposition party leaders and/or high-profile activists who  have
           come to the attention of the authorities and who are  considered
           a threat  may  be  at  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm,
           particularly at times of political tension and unrest. Rank  and
           file  party  members  and  low-level  activists  are   generally
           unlikely to be at risk of such  treatment.  However,  whether  a
           person is at risk of persecution depends on:
           . the prevailing political climate;
           .  the  nature  and  profile  of  their   activities   and   the
           organisation they represent;
           . whether they have come to the  attention  of  the  authorities
           previously; and
           . if so, the nature of this interest."

      Discussion and Conclusions


   32. I begin with the Appellant's claim to be at  risk  on  return  as  a
       member of a particular social group.  I have referred at  [4]  above
       to Judge Shaerf's finding in relation to the Article 3 case that the
       Appellant is a highly vulnerable woman with mental  health  concerns
       and no contact with family members in DRC.  She is a widow.  Whether
       or not her fears of being targeted by  the  DRC  authorities  and/or
       rebel groups are objectively well-founded, she has subjective  fears
       that she will be so targeted.  She has lived previously in  Kinshasa
       and Goma neither  of  which  places  are  in  a  conflict  zone  and
       therefore internal  relocation  does  not  arise.   However,  having
       regard to the fact that the Appellant would be returning alone to  a
       place where discrimination against women is accepted  to  exist,  in
       her mentally vulnerable state, without family support and where  she
       would be returning as a lone woman to a  place  where  she  has  not
       lived for a number of years, I find  that  the  seriousness  of  the
       discrimination she would face in  her  situation  is  sufficient  to
       amount to persecution.  I have  in  mind  in  particular  Dr  Kodi's
       opinion as cited at [19] above.


   33. My finding to that effect takes into account also the high level  of
       sexual violence against women in  DRC.  Whilst  I  accept  that  the
       Second 2018 CPIN points to a lower level of gender-based violence in
       Kinshasa in particular, I take into account the  Appellant's  highly
       vulnerable mental health, that she would be returning alone  without
       support and unprotected by her husband.  She is,  according  to  her
       witness statement dated 6 December 2013, uneducated, she cannot read
       or write except for her name, was married young and had a number  of
       children.  Having regard to what is said about the  relevance  of  a
       woman's socio-economic situation,  and  the  Appellant's  particular
       situation and vulnerabilities, I accept  that  she  is  at  risk  on
       return as a lone woman, even if returning to Kinshasa where the risk
       of the otherwise prevalent incidence of sexual violence is  said  to
       be lower.


   34. For those reasons, I  accept  that  the  Appellant  is  at  risk  of
       discrimination amounting to persecution when coupled with  the  risk
       of sexual violence on account of her being a member of a  particular
       social group namely a woman with  particular  vulnerabilities  or  a
       lone woman.

   35. Strictly, it is not thereafter necessary for me to consider  whether
       the Appellant is also at risk on return due to a  political  opinion
       which will be imputed to  her  based  on  her  previous  arrest  and
       detention.  However, I do  so  for  the  sake  of  completeness  and
       because I have set aside Judge Shaerf's findings in this regard.


   36. I begin by noting that the incidents on which the  Appellant  relies
       in her claim occurred mainly in 2011 and 2012 which is  not  a  very
       long time ago.  Although her own political involvement was  limited,
       her claim is founded mainly on the fact that she  was  arrested  and
       detained in the past and will therefore be of interest now.


   37. I do not accept Dr Kodi's opinion expressed in his first report that
       the Appellant will be at risk as a failed asylum seeker from the UK.
         His  opinion  runs  contrary  to  later  country  guidance   which
       considered all the material at that date.  That country guidance has
       not been set aside.


   38. I have some difficulty accepting that Dr Kodi's  opinion  concerning
       the risk to the Appellant on account of imputed political opinion in
       his second report assists the Appellant's case.  He suggests that at
       least part  if  not  most  of  that  risk  arises  because  the  DRC
       authorities would view her as an opponent due  to  her  relationship
       with her late husband who Dr Kodi says was a  MLC  supporter.   This
       appears to rely on what is said at  [6]  of  his  second  report  as
       follows:


            "[6] It is plausible that the Appellant and her family lived in
           Goma in 2012.  Her explanation of the reason why her husband,  a
           soldier in the national army, was transferred to  Goma  is  also
           plausible.  In fact, she testified that  her  husband  got  into
           trouble for his political activities on behalf  of  the  MLC...,
           one of the main opposition parties to President Joseph  Kabila's
           regime...
            [7]  I can hereby confirm that the Appellant's account is  both
           consistent and plausible  in  the  light  of  my  knowledge  and
           expertise of the circumstances of the DRC.  Her testimony of the
           punishment of her husband, like other people who were considered
           by the government as close to opposition parties, and especially
           those, like her husband, who were perceived to be supporters  of
           the MLC (which at the time represented  the  biggest  threat  to
           President Joseph Kabila's hold on power) is consistent with  the
           accounts  of  human  rights  organisations,  such   as   Amnesty
           International and Human Rights Watch..."


   39. Dr Kodi appears to rely in this  regard  on  what  is  said  by  the
       Appellant in her asylum interview (see list of documents referred to
       in his second report). However, I am unable to check that  as  there
       is no copy of the asylum interview in the bundles  before  me.   The
       Appellant's witness statement makes no mention of this aspect of her
       claim.  That statement is dated 6 December 2013.  It  pre-dates  her
       referral for mental health assessment.  There is no mention  of  the
       evidence in this  regard  in  the  earlier  determinations  nor  any
       finding reached whether this part of her case is  credible.   I  was
       not asked to hear evidence from the Appellant.  Her mental state  is
       such that she has not been able to give evidence at recent hearings.
         This element of her case is  not  referred  to  in  her  Counsel's
       skeleton argument before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Based  on  the
       insufficiency of evidence about this part of her case, I  am  unable
       to place any weight on this part of the Appellant's account.


   40. That leaves only the risk based on the Appellant's previous  arrest,
       detention and ill-treatment for taking  part  in  a  protest.   That
       protest concerned the rights of women.  Although I accept  that  the
       DRC authorities might perceive that also as opposition to the regime
       (since it is they who arrested, detained and ill-treated her at  the
       time), based on the background evidence and the  guidance  given  in
       the Second 2018 CPIN, I am unable to accept that this  is  a  reason
       why the authorities would be interested her  now.  Indeed,  Dr  Kodi
       does not suggest that  it  would  be.   His  analysis  is  based  on
       acceptance of her case that the authorities would be  interested  in
       her due to her link with her late husband and his MLC support.  I do
       not accept this part of the  claim  due  to  lack  of  evidence.   I
       therefore reject the Appellant's claim that she would be at risk due
       to imputed political opinion.


   41. However, as I have already found that the Appellant would be at risk
       due to her membership of a particular social group, it follows  that
       I allow her appeal on asylum grounds.

      DECISION

    I am satisfied that the Decision contains a material error of law.  The
    decision of Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Shaerf promulgated  on
    9 January 2019 is set aside.  However, I  preserve  paragraphs  [1]  to
    [38] of the Decision for the reasons given above.
    I re-make the decision.  I  allow  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.  The Appellant's appeal was also allowed by  Judge  Shaerf  on
    human rights grounds (Article 3 ECHR) and that part of the Decision was
    not challenged.


    The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.
    The appeal is allowed on human rights (Article 3) grounds

    Signed
            [pic]            Dated:  2 May 2019
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
