
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10941/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination promulgated  |
|on 3rd June 2013                                |on 6th June 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                          caroline netsai chingono
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal is against a determination dated 17th January 2013 by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Agnew, dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal  against
    refusal of her fresh claim to recognition as a refugee from Zimbabwe.

 2. Judge Agnew rejected the Appellant's account that she would  be  unable
    to show loyalty to ZANU-PF, seeing no reason to depart from findings in
    a previous determination.  Permission to appeal to the UT  was  granted
    on 8th February 2013.  It was thought arguable that the judge's finding
    at paragraph 26 that the Appellant had not provided evidence  that  she
    would not be able to demonstrate loyalty was a misdirection in light of
    RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] 3 WLR 345, in which the Supreme Court held that an
    individual could not be compelled to lie about her  beliefs,  and  that
    the judge's findings "...did not  examine  with  sufficient  depth  the
    potential that the Appellant  might  be  interviewed  and  required  to
    declare loyalty".

 3. In a Rule 24 reply to the grant of permission, dated 22 February  2013,
    the Respondent submitted that it was clear that  the  judge  considered
    the case law in light  of  the  background  evidence.   The  Respondent
    further says that CM (Zimbabwe) CG [2013]  UKUT  59,  "...  promulgated
    soon after promulgation of the Appellant's determination, confirms that
    the Appellant with her specific factual matrix will not be required  to
    show loyalty to ZANU-PF".

 4. The Appellant's response to that, dated 19th March 2013,  is  that  the
    judge did not consider risk on return " ... in line with  the  relevant
    case law at the time of the  hearing  of  RT  ...  and  RN  (returnees)
    Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083 ...   the  decision  should  be  remade,
    albeit on the basis of ... CM ..."

 5. Mr Caskie submitted that the grant of permission  correctly  identified
    error of law, and the judge's finding that the Appellant would be  able
    to demonstrate loyalty was a "leap in the dark".  Mr  Caskie  had  only
    recently been instructed in the  case.   He  considered  that  detailed
    witness statements should be  made  available,  going  to  whether  the
    requirements of CM  could  be  met.   There  were,  as  matters  stood,
    insufficient findings to reach a conclusion on the  "CM  matrix".   The
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal should be allowed and a re-hearing  fixed,
    possibly by way of a Case Management Review hearing, for  the  purposes
    of which the Appellant might be directed to file  a  skeleton  argument
    explaining how she might meet the criteria of CM.

 6. Mr Matthews submitted that while  the  determination  might  have  been
    better expressed on the approach to be taken in the light  of  RT,  the
    only reasonable reading was that the Appellant would be in  a  position
    to demonstrate loyalty, given her personal background, her relationship
    to a senior person in ZANU-PF, and the established negative conclusions
    on her credibility.  Even if there were any error, there  was  no  need
    for a further hearing.  On the findings reached firstly by  Judge  Wood
    and later by Judge Agnew the claim was not established by reference  to
    the criteria in CM.  The Appellant has family in Zimbabwe, and  has  at
    times lived in Bulawayo.  There was no reason for the CIO to  have  any
    interest in her on her return through Harare  Airport.   If  necessary,
    there was no reason why the  Appellant  could  not  live  in  Bulawayo.
    There was no reason for a different outcome.

 7. Mr Caskie in reply submitted that the calculation whether the Appellant
    could succeed within the requirements of CM was a complex one, on which
    she should have the opportunity to make further submissions.  She might
    not in the end be able to make out a tenable case, but she should  have
    further opportunity to explore that possibility, with the  onus  placed
    upon her in respect of further evidence and submissions.  The  disposal
    of the case had to be seen to be fair, and at no judicial stage so  far
    had submissions been made on whether the Appellant could succeed within
    the terms of CM.

 8. I reserved my determination.

 9. At paragraph 26 of the determination Judge Agnew says,  "The  Appellant
    has not produced evidence which can be relied upon that she  would  not
    be  able  to  demonstrate  loyalty,  which  Judge  Wood  found  in  his
    determination ... that she could".  Whether or not that  is  best  put,
    the finding of Judge Wood stands.  Judge Agnew  went  on  in  her  next
    paragraph to  find  that  the  Appellant  was  no  more  credible  than
    previously, a finding not capable of any  legal  challenge.   She  then
    found that the Appellant has not established that she or any member  of
    her family has MDC connections, but that on the contrary she  would  be
    able to establish connections with and loyalty to ZANU-PF.

10. CM is head noted as follows:

 (1) There is no general duty of disclosure on the  Secretary  of  State  in
asylum appeals generally  or  Country  Guidance  cases  in  particular.  The
extent of the Secretary of State's obligation is set out in R v  SSHD  ex  p
Kerrouche No 1 [1997] Imm AR 610, as  explained  in  R  (ota  Cindo)  v  IAT
[2002] EWHC 246 (Admin); namely, that  she  must  not  knowingly  mislead  a
court or tribunal by omission of material that was known or  ought  to  have
been known to her.

(2)   The  Country  Guidance  given  by  the  Tribunal  in  EM  and   Others
(Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC) on the position in Zimbabwe  as
at the end of January 2011 was not vitiated in any respect by the  use  made
of anonymous evidence from certain sources in the Secretary of State's  Fact
Finding Mission report of 2010. The  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  find  that
there had been a durable change since  RN  (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2008]
UKAIT 00083. The Country Guidance in EM does not require to be  amended,  as
regards the position at that time, in the light of-

     (a) the disclosure by the Secretary of State of any of  the  materials
    subsequently disclosed in response to the orders of the Court of Appeal
    and related directions of the Tribunal in the current proceedings; or


     (b) any fresh material adduced by the  parties  in  those  proceedings
    that might have a bearing on the position at that time.

(3)  The only change to the EM Country Guidance  that  it  is  necessary  to
make as regards the position as at the end of January 2011 arises  from  the
judgments in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC  38.  The  EM  Country  Guidance  is,
accordingly, re-stated as follows (with the change underlined  in  paragraph
(5) below):

    (1)      As a general matter, there is significantly  less  politically
         motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe,  compared  with  the   situation
         considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the evidence does  not
         show that, as a general matter,  the  return  of  a  failed  asylum
         seeker from the United Kingdom, having no significant MDC  profile,
         would result in that  person  facing  a  real  risk  of  having  to
         demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.


    (2)   The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in the case of a
         person without  ZANU-PF  connections,  returning  from  the  United
         Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural  area  of  Zimbabwe,
         other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South. Such a  person
         may well find it difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to
         serious ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF  authority  figures  and  those
         they control.  The adverse attention may well involve a requirement
         to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF, with  the  prospect  of  serious
         harm in the event of failure.  Persons who  have  shown  themselves
         not  to  be  favourably  disposed  to  ZANU-PF  are   entitled   to
         international protection, whether or not they could  and  would  do
         whatever  might  be  necessary  to  demonstrate  such  loyalty  (RT
         (Zimbabwe)).


    (3)   The situation is not uniform across the relevant rural areas  and
         there may be reasons why a particular individual, although at first
         sight appearing to  fall  within  the  category  described  in  the
         preceding paragraph, in reality does not do so.  For  example,  the
         evidence might disclose that, in the home  village,  ZANU-PF  power
         structures or other means of coercion are weak or absent.


    (4)    In  general,  a  returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  rural
         Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely to face
         significant  difficulty  from  ZANU-PF  elements,   including   the
         security forces, even if the returnee is a MDC member or supporter.
         A person may, however, be able to show that his or her  village  or
         area is one that, unusually, is under the sway of a ZANU-PF  chief,
         or the like.


    (5)      A returnee to Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
         difficulties, if going to a  low-density  or  medium-density  area.
         Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas  is  more
         challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
         not face significant problems there (including a  "loyalty  test"),
         unless he or she has a significant MDC profile, which  might  cause
         him or her to feature on a list of those targeted  for  harassment,
         or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract
         the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely  to
         engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF.


    (6)      A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not suffer the  adverse
         attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces, even if he  or
         she has a significant MDC profile.


    (7)      The issue of what is a  person's  home  for  the  purposes  of
         internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of fact and is not
         necessarily to be determined by reference to  the  place  a  person
         from Zimbabwe regards as his or her rural homeland.  As  a  general
         matter, it is unlikely that a person with a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in a major urban centre such  as  Harare  will  have  a
         viable internal relocation alternative  to  a  rural  area  in  the
         Eastern provinces. Relocation to Matabeleland (including  Bulawayo)
         may be negated by discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.


    (8)  Internal relocation from a rural area to  Harare  or  (subject  to
         what we have just said) Bulawayo is, in  general,  more  realistic;
         but  the  socio-economic  circumstances  in   which   persons   are
         reasonably likely to find themselves will need to be considered, in
         order to determine whether it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         to expect them to relocate.


    (9)  The economy of Zimbabwe has markedly  improved  since  the  period
         considered in RN. The replacement of the Zimbabwean currency by the
         US  dollar  and  the  South  African  rand  has  ended  the  recent
         hyperinflation. The availability of food and other goods  in  shops
         has likewise improved, as has  the  availability  of  utilities  in
         Harare. Although these improvements are not being felt by everyone,
         with 15% of the population still requiring food aid, there has  not
         been any deterioration in the  humanitarian  situation  since  late
         2008. Zimbabwe has a large informal economy,  ranging  from  street
         traders  to  home-based  enterprises,  which  (depending   on   the
         circumstances) returnees may be expected to enter.


    (10)     As was the position in RN, those who are or have been teachers
         require to have their cases determined on the basis that this  fact
         places them  in  an  enhanced  or  heightened  risk  category,  the
         significance of which will need to be  assessed  on  an  individual
         basis.


    (11)  In certain cases,  persons  found  to  be  seriously  lacking  in
         credibility may properly be found as a result  to  have  failed  to
         show a reasonable likelihood (a) that they would not, in  fact,  be
         regarded, on return, as aligned with ZANU-PF and/or (b)  that  they
         would be returning to a socio-economic  milieu  in  which  problems
         with ZANU-PF will arise. This important point was identified in  RN
         ... and remains valid.

(4) In the course of deciding CM's appeal, the present Tribunal has made  an
assessment of certain general  matters  regarding  Zimbabwe  as  at  October
2012. As a result, the following country information may  be  of  assistance
to decision-makers and judges. It is, however, not Country  Guidance  within
the scope of Practice Direction 12 and is based on  evidence  which  neither
party claimed to be comprehensive:

    a) The picture presented by  the  fresh  evidence  as  to  the  general
       position of politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe as at October
       2012 does not differ  in  any  material  respect  from  the  Country
       Guidance in EM.


    b)  Elections are due to be held in 2013; but it is unclear when.


    c) In the light of the evidence regarding the activities of Chipangano,
       judicial-fact finders may need to pay particular regard to whether a
       person, who is reasonably likely to go to Mbare  or  a  neighbouring
       high density area of Harare, will come to the adverse  attention  of
       that group; in particular, if he or she is reasonably likely to have
       to find employment of a kind that Chipangano  seeks  to  control  or
       otherwise exploit for economic, rather than political, reasons.

       The fresh evidence regarding the position at  the  point  of  return
       does not indicate any increase in risk since  the  Country  Guidance
       was given in HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007]  UKAIT
       00094. On the contrary, the available evidence as to  the  treatment
       of those who have been returned to Harare Airport since 2007 and the
       absence of any reliable evidence of risk there means that  there  is
       no justification for extending the scope of who might be regarded by
       the CIO as an MDC activist.

11. CM was added to the country guidance list  on  1  February  2013.   The
    Zimbabwean refugee recognition issues with which  it  deals  were  well
    known before then. The Appellant has had ample opportunity  to  advance
    her claim to recognition as a refugee.  There is no new element in  the
    factual matrix  established  in  CM  which  she  has  not  had  a  fair
    opportunity  to  address.   Her  proof  has  fallen   well   short   of
    establishing  any  entitlement  to  recognition.   She  has  tried   to
    establish an MDC profile, and has been found to have none.  There is no
    reason  why  she  should  attract  adverse   attention,   involving   a
    requirement to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF.  There is nothing within
    the matrix of CM to suggest that she should have another opportunity to
    reformulate her case, or that there is any prospect  of  her  doing  so
    successfully.

12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not err in any  point
    of law, such as to require it to be set aside.  Alternatively,  if  the
    decision were to be remade, then on the basis of the findings  made  in
    the First-tier Tribunal, and in light of CM, the appeal would again  be
    dismissed.

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

14. No order for anonymity has been requested or made.



[pic]

4 June 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
