
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10543/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On Wednesday 28 September 2016       |On Friday 30 September 2016          |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    B B B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford, Counsel instructed by Wilson
solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. It is appropriate to  continue  the  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

      1. The Appellant appeals against a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
         Judge  Bennett  promulgated  on  25  July  2016  ("the   Decision")
         dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's
         decision dated 15 July  2015  refusing  his  protection  and  human
         rights claims.  The appeal is on protection grounds only.

      2. The Appellant is a national of DRC.  There is no official record of
         the date on  which  he  entered  the  UK.   He  claimed  asylum  by
         telephone on 23 January 2015 and in person on 4 February 2015.

      3. The basis of the Appellant's claim stems from his activities in DRC
         as a preacher in a church named "Ministere  De  Deliverance:  Allez
         les Delier".  He claims that, as a result of sermons delivered in a
         three day seminar on 27-29 December 2013 he was detained by the DRC
         authorities on 30 December 2013 until  January  2015  when  he  had
         managed to escape with the assistance of a friend  of  his  brother
         and had thereafter fled to the UK where  he  claimed  asylum.   The
         Appellant claims that he was  tortured  during  his  detention  and
         bears scarring injuries in  consequence.   He  says  that  the  DRC
         authorities had taken an interest in him as a result of the subject
         matter of the seminar in December 2013 which they had taken  to  be
         an implicit criticism of the Government and also as a supporter  of
         Mr MB, a high profile critic of the authorities.

      4. The Judge did not believe the Appellant's claim.  He found  in  the
         alternative that the Appellant would no longer be  of  interest  to
         the authorities and/or that they would not be  aware  of  his  past
         history.  As a result he found that the Appellant would not  be  at
         real risk of persecution or ill treatment on return.

      5. The Appellant has raised three grounds of challenge to the Decision
         with which I deal below.  Permission was granted on all grounds  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen on 17  August  2016.  The  matter
         comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a  material
         error of law and, if so, to  re-make  the  decision  or  remit  the
         appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

    The grounds and submissions

      6. Ground one concerns the Judge's treatment of the medical report  of
         Mr Andrew Mason dated 14 April 2016.  Mr Mason is a  specialist  in
         accident  and  emergency  medicine.   The  report  deals  with  the
         Appellant's scarring injuries.  Mr  Mason's  report  records  three
         scars which he considers were caused more than twelve months  prior
         to his report.  The first two he describes as "non-specific" and of
         a type which might arise as a result  of  accidental  injuries  but
         which  he  accepts  are  "consistent"  with  the  cause  which  the
         Appellant describes.  The third is the source  of  the  Appellant's
         complaint.  That is an injury which the Appellant says  was  caused
         by the crushing of his finger with a metal pincer.  Mr  Mason  says
         that the scarring is "typical" of that sort of crushing injury  and
         that "it is hard to conceive of any accidental way in which a  scar
         of this type might arise".

      7. The Judge deals with Mr Mason's report  at  [17]  to  [20]  of  the
         Decision.  Ms Radford submitted that, although, at [20]  the  Judge
         purported to accept the evidence, he had  nonetheless  gone  on  to
         find that the scarring to the Appellant's finger  could  have  been
         caused by other types of crushing injury such as by an accident  at
         work or by the slamming of a gate on  the  finger.   She  submitted
         that the Judge had erred in failing to give appropriate  weight  to
         Mr Masons's view not only that the injury is "typical" of the cause
         attributed by the Appellant (such that he accepts that  it  is  the
         type of injury which one would expect to  see  with  this  type  of
         trauma even if there may be other  possible  causes)  but  also  Mr
         Mason's opinion that it would be difficult to conceive of any other
         accidental cause.  Ms Radford submitted that it was not open to the
         Judge to substitute his own view for that of the  expert  at  least
         not without good reason being given.  She also submitted  that  the
         Judge had failed to note Mr Mason's opinion that the scarring  when
         considered overall was "typical" of the torture described.

      8. The second ground concerns the treatment  of  the  evidence  of  Dr
         Muzong Kodi whose report was put forward as  a  country  expert  in
         relation to DRC.  Dr Kodi commented on the core of the  Appellant's
         claim and on the plausibility of certain aspects of the Appellant's
         account.  The Judge set out the main elements of Dr  Kodi's  report
         at [21] of the Decision. He dealt with Dr Kodi's  evidence  in  the
         context of the credibility findings at  [32(d)]  of  the  Decision.
         That followed an acceptance at [23] of the Decision  of  Dr  Kodi's
         evidence that Mr MB was detained by the DRC authorities in December
         2013 at the time when the Appellant said that he was detained.

      9. The passage at [32(d)] reads as follows:-

             "On the basis of the documentary  evidence  submitted  and  Dr
             Kodi's report, the attack by security forces on Mr  MB's  home
             at Lubumbashi and the violent response of Mr  MB's  supporters
             in Kinshasa, Lubumbashi and Kindu (including the attack on the
             airport and the state broadcasting company (with c103  persons
             killed)) occurred on 30 December 2013, the day on which  Mr  B
             was, according to his own account, arrested.  Necessarily,  if
             what he stated was true, information  against  him  must  have
             been given by one or more of the young men and women  who  had
             attended the third of his seminars, that of 29  December  2013
             (Mr B's evidence was, see paragraph 22 of his 2015  statement,
             that it had been on that day, the last of the three,  that  he
             had applied the text from Luke Chapter  3,  Verse  9,  in  the
             context of the misdoings by the Government).  Mr B's  evidence
             was there had  been  between  100  and  200  persons  who  had
             attended on each day.  Although Dr Kodi (paragraph 3) referred
             to there being "anecdotal evidence" that

                  "Spies from [the national  intelligence  services  in  the
                  DRC]  keep  a  close  eye  on   organisations,   including
                  churches, which are suspected  of  expressing  anti-regime
                  views"

             it was no part of Mr B's  case  and  no  evidence  was  placed
             before me to support the proposition, and I am not  satisfied,
             that the church had either previously fallen  under  suspicion
             or that spies of persons who were not regular members  of  the
             congregation had been observed attending  either  services  at
             the church or at events which the church had organised such as
             Mr B's seminars.  Nor was it any part  of  Mr  B's  case,  and
             there  was  no  evidence  placed  before  me  to  support  the
             proposition, and I am not satisfied, that before he had (if he
             had) said what he claims to have said on the third day of  the
             seminar, Mr JM (the Pastor) or any other officials or  members
             of the church  had  said  or  done  anything  which  might  be
             construed, or had been construed, as the expression  of  anti-
             regime views.  Nor was there anything on  the  copies  of  the
             leaflets with which I was provided (see above,  paragraph  15)
             to indicate  that  Mr  B  was  likely  to  express  any  anti-
             Government view in any of his seminars.  The attack on Mr MB's
             home and the violent reaction of his supporters did  not  take
             place until  after  Mr  B  had  completed  the  third  of  his
             seminars.   Against  that  background,  there  is  no  obvious
             reason, even taking into account Dr Kodi's  evidence  (above),
             why the national intelligence services should have sent a  spy
             to sit through Mr B's seminars on the  chance  that  he  might
             make an anti-Government remark.  And in those circumstances, I
             am therefore not satisfied that the chance that  there  was  a
             spy (or spies) from the national intelligence services present
             on the third day of Mr B's seminar or that any "outsiders" who
             had attended on that day gave information about what Mr B  had
             stated that day,  is  within  the  realms  of  the  reasonably
             likely, rather than being a mere possibility."

     10. I pointed out to Ms Radford that the reason the  Judge  refused  to
         accept  the  Appellant's  account  about  the   interest   of   the
         authorities arising from the seminar arises in large part from  the
         timing of the detention. The seminar took place on  27-29  December
         2013 with  the  remarks  which  the  Appellant  says  provoked  the
         interest coming on the third and final day.  The Appellant says  he
         was arrested a day later.  The point made  by  the  Judge  is  that
         there was nothing prior to the seminar to excite  the  authorities'
         interest and nor could it  have  arisen  from  any  suspected  link
         between the Appellant and Mr MB because  Mr  MB  was  not  detained
         until after the date of the seminar and it was that detention which
         had led to the violent reaction  by  his  supporters  which  caused
         arrest of those supporters.  In response, Ms Radford pointed me  to
         the leaflets advertising the seminar which contained  the  biblical
         reference which, on the Appellant's  account,  the  Government  had
         understood as being a criticism of it.  She also pointed to [32(e)]
         of the Decision  where  the  Judge  rejected  any  suggestion  that
         information about the seminar might have come from those  attending
         it because they were part of the Appellant's congregation and would
         be loyal to him.  She pointed out that the  seminar  was  a  public
         event and would not therefore be attended only by  members  of  the
         existing congregation.

     11. Ms Radford submitted that the Judge's findings were  based  on  his
         own views of what was "plausible".  Although Dr Kodi's evidence was
         based on whether the account was plausible, she asserted  that  the
         Judge had failed to give Dr Kodi's views weight and had substituted
         his own opinion which on certain  points  was  highly  speculative.
         She submitted that those findings could not therefore stand.

     12. The Appellant's third and final ground concerns the application  of
         the country guidance case of BM and others  (Returnees  -  criminal
         and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] 0029.  The Judge referred  to  that
         decision at [40(c)] of the Decision but  only  in  the  context  of
         whether a failed asylum seeker would be at risk on return to DRC on
         account of his asylum claim.

     13. The Judge found at [38] to [40] of the Decision that, even  if  the
         Appellant's account were accepted, he  would  not  be  at  risk  on
         return due to his ability to return on his own passport or  ability
         to obtain a document without  disclosing  the  previous  detention,
         that the authorities would not be aware of his  previous  detention
         or would have no continuing interest in him on that account.

     14. Ms Radford submitted that those (and indeed other of his)  findings
         were simply not open to the Judge on  a  fair  reading  of  BM  and
         others when considered with other case law and  material.  Firstly,
         BM and others refers to the desire of the DRC authorities  to  seek
         out  those  who  have  unexecuted  prison  sentences.   They  would
         therefore have an interest in the Appellant.  Second,  the  country
         guidance decision undermines the Judge's  findings  concerning  the
         record keeping of the authorities.  It is said that the authorities
         have a black list of those wanted where, for example, there  is  an
         unexecuted arrest warrant. The Judge also failed  to  consider  the
         risk to the Appellant when questioned at the airport  on  return  -
         the risk of coming to the attention  of  the  authorities  did  not
         arise only in the context of the obtaining of documents to  return.
         BM and others supports a  submission  that  leaving  DRC  on  false
         papers (as the Appellant said he had done) may lead to interest  by
         the authorities at the airport and detention. Third, the Judge  did
         not accept that the  Appellant  would  have  been  able  to  escape
         detention as he asserted. However, that failed to take into account
         background material which supported the ease with  which  detainees
         could escape.

     15. Ms Radford also pointed out that the Judge's consideration  of  the
         current situation in  DRC  runs  contrary  to  the  evidence.   The
         Judge's assertion at [38(h)(1)] that there was no evidence that the
         authorities continued to be interested in Mr MB and his  supporters
         failed to note the evidence of Dr Kodi that as recently as  January
         2016 the DRC authorities continued to hunt down supporters of Mr MB
         ([15] of the report).  Ms Radford also pointed out that  the  Judge
         had before him evidence which showed that DRC authorities continued
         to suppress  dissenters.   If  anything,  the  background  evidence
         produced showed increasing repression whereas the Judge appeared to
         think that the situation was improving.

     16. In response, Mr Tarlow indicated that he accepted an error  of  law
         on ground three.  The Judge had failed to  take  into  account  the
         country guidance decision.  He conceded that this was an  error  of
         law and that the Decision should be set aside.

     17. Following discussions, both parties agreed  that,  if  I  found  an
         error of  law  on  a  basis  which  might  impact  on  the  adverse
         credibility findings, it would be appropriate to remit  the  appeal
         so that credibility could be reconsidered on all the evidence.   Ms
         Radford fairly accepted though that if I found an error on the more
         limited basis that BM and  others  had  not  been  applied  to  the
         Judge's alternative findings if the Appellant's case was  true  but
         did not  consider  that  the  error  impacted  on  the  credibility
         findings then it might be appropriate to resume the hearing in this
         Tribunal.

    Discussion and conclusions

     18. The Decision contains an error of law on ground  three.   Based  on
         the country guidance  decision  and  the  background  evidence  and
         taking into account what is said at [23] to [28] of the Appellant's
         grounds, I am satisfied that the error is material, particularly in
         relation to whether the Appellant would be at risk now on return to
         DRC if his account were true. Although BM and others  is  primarily
         concerned with the risk to foreign national  offenders  and  failed
         asylum seekers per se, some of the evidence which was  accepted  is
         relevant to the Appellant's case and needed to be  considered  when
         rejecting the Appellant's case on the  alternative  basis  that  he
         would no longer be of interest or no longer be at risk  on  account
         of his past detention.

     19. If the only criticism of the credibility  findings  had  been  that
         based on the report of Mr Mason concerning the Appellant's scarring
         injuries I would not have found an error.  Whilst, as a counsel  of
         perfection, the Judge might have directed himself to the definition
         of "typical" in this context and that this is  higher  than  simply
         "consistent", I do not consider that  was  necessary.   An  opinion
         that an injury is "typical" still permits  of  alternative  causes.
         Similarly, the fact that Mr Mason himself could not conceive of  an
         accidental basis for the injury does not mean that  the  Judge  did
         not accept his evidence by providing his own opinion of how such an
         injury might be caused accidentally.  His view was based on what Mr
         Mason said about the type of injury coupled  with  descriptions  of
         similar injuries in other documents. Similarly, although  Mr  Mason
         does say at [7.1] of his report that his  overall  opinion  of  the
         scarring is that  it  is  "typical",  it  is  clear  that  this  is
         predominantly based on the finger injury.

     20. However, I am persuaded by the Appellant's ground two.  Although Dr
         Kodi could only give an opinion  as  to  the  plausibility  of  the
         Appellant's account, his views were relevant  to  the  question  of
         whether that account was consistent with  the  background  evidence
         and the evidence contained in the country guidance  decision.   The
         Judge therefore needed to take into account his views  and  if  the
         Judge intended to depart from them, he needed to give reasons based
         on the other evidence.  Furthermore, whilst the Judge may have been
         entitled to point to the timing  of  the  detention  viz-a-viz  the
         seminar when making the points he did at [32(d)], it is  inaccurate
         to say that there was nothing in the leaflet to  suggest  that  the
         Appellant was intending to criticise the  Government.   It  is  the
         Appellant's case that it was precisely the biblical reference which
         is used in the advertisement  which  the  authorities  read  as  an
         implied  criticism  of  the  Government.   Similarly,  the  Judge's
         finding  that  none  of  those  attending   would   have   provided
         information to the authorities about the seminar because they would
         be members of the existing congregation and loyal to the  Appellant
         misunderstands the evidence that this was a public seminar.  Taking
         this ground together with ground three, the Judge has  also  failed
         to take into  account  Dr  Kodi's  evidence  that  the  authorities
         continue to be interested in Mr MB and his supporters. I  therefore
         find that ground two also is made out.

     21. Although the Judge has given a number of reasons  for  the  adverse
         credibility findings which, on further assessment,  might  lead  to
         the same conclusion, the Appellant is entitled to an assessment  of
         his credibility based on a proper review of all the evidence.   For
         that reason, I consider it appropriate that this appeal be remitted
         to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.




    DECISION

    I am satisfied that the Decision contains material errors of  law.  The
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge C H  Bennett  promulgated  on  25
    July 2016 is set aside.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for re-hearing before a different Judge.


    Signed   [pic]    Dated: 30 September 2016


    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
