
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10994/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 25th August 2016                  |On 2nd September 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Y K ABATE
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate instructed by Katani & Co.,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as stated above, but the rest of this  decision  refers
    to them as they were in the FtT.

 2. The appellant identifies herself as a citizen of Eritrea, born on  24th
    July 1990.  She sought asylum in the UK on 9th April 2015.

 3. The respondent refused the appellant's claim for reasons explained in a
    letter dated 22nd July 2015.  The respondent declined  to  accept  that
    the appellant is of Eritrean origin or  of  Tigrinyan  ethnicity.   The
    respondent further held that even if that origin and ethnicity had been
    accepted, the appellant provided no evidence that she had been deprived
    of or was no longer entitled to Ethiopian nationality.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.   In  his  decision,
    promulgated on 22nd June 2016, Judge Bradshaw found that the  appellant
    was a credible witness and a national of Eritrea of Tigrinyan ethnicity
    (paragraphs 84 to 87).  He allowed her appeal on asylum grounds.

 5. The SSHD's first ground of appeal is that the judge failed to refer  to
    the correct standard of proof.   The  respondent  had  relied  upon  ST
    (Ethnic Eritrean - nationality - return) Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT 00252:
    it was for the appellant to show that she could not return to Ethiopia,
    on the balance of probability.

 6. Ground 2 further alleges failure to properly apply ST, under three sub-
    headings: (a) no resolution of submissions on the inadequate  terms  of
    letters sent by the  appellant  to  the  Ethiopian  Embassy  about  her
    nationality; (b) difficulty in funding travel to the Ethiopian  Embassy
    (from Glasgow to London) and the appellant's pregnancy were not matters
    capable of showing that the appellant was not an Ethiopian national  or
    of meeting the requirements of ST; and (c) confusion at  paragraphs  81
    and  87  over  whether  the  appellant  was  trying  to  show  Eritrean
    nationality, and whether it was for the respondent to show that she had
    been deprived of or was no longer entitled to Ethiopian nationality; if
    the judge intended to say that she could return to Ethiopia, her appeal
    should have been dismissed.

 7. Ground 3 alleges inadequacy of reasoning for the judge's  finding  that
    the appellant  had  a  valid  rationale  for  her  inability  to  speak
    Tigrinyan.

 8. In a written response under rule 24 the appellant contends that from ST
    at paragraph 73  it  is  unclear  what  the  correct  standard  is  for
    assessing nationality, but the respondent took the position in the  FtT
    that the lower standard applied, and made no submission that it was the
    balance of probabilities.  In any event the  point  was  immaterial,  a
    complaint of form over substance, because the FtT was plainly  entitled
    to find as it did, having accepted the evidence of the appellant.

 9. In response to ground 2 the appellant  argues  that  the  three  points
    disclose no error, or are immaterial, on (a) because no  response  from
    the Ethiopian authorities has ever been received; on  (b)  this  is  no
    more than a disagreement, and the weight to be placed on  the  evidence
    was a matter for the judge; and on (c), taking the decision as a  whole
    the judge well understood the issues in the appeal,  and  even  if  the
    burden of proof is misplaced at paragraph 87 the case did not  turn  on
    where the onus lay, and the judge was plainly clearly in favour of  the
    appellant.

10. In response to ground 3 the appellant refers to various  paragraphs  to
    show why the judge came down in favour of the appellant on inability to
    speak Tigrinyan, which was tied up with the  other  credibility  points
    made against her and to which she was found to have made a satisfactory
    answer.

11. Mr Matthews referred on ground 1 to MA (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA  Civ  289
    at paragraph 78: "Inability to return can and should be proved  in  the
    ordinary way, on the balance of probabilities".  He accepted  that  the
    judge had not been assisted by submissions, but he  said  the  tribunal
    was obliged to get the law right, and  had  plainly  assumed  that  the
    lower standard of proof ran through all parts of the case.

12. Mr Matthews did not wish to add to ground 2(a).  On (b), he  said  that
    the judge made two bad points.  Difficulty in  funding  travel  to  the
    embassy did not contribute to proof of the issue of nationality one way
    or the other.   The  appellant's  pregnancy  could  not  have  been  an
    obstacle to her travel throughout the period, as she had several months
    in which to do so, including a period  before  she  could  have  become
    pregnant.  As to (c), the judge plainly inverted the burden of proof.

13. Mr Matthews also did not wish to add to ground 3.

14. Summing up, he submitted that the incorrect statement of  the  standard
    of proof brought out by ground 1, and the inversion of  the  burden  of
    proof brought out by ground 2  (c),  were  errors  such  that  a  fresh
    hearing was required.

15. Mr Winter said further on ground 1 by reference to ST at  paragraph  73
    that the law did not appear to be settled, but that in  any  event  the
    position of the appellant had been accepted and by whatever standard of
    proof it was plain that the judge would have been  on  the  appellant's
    side.  On ground 2(a), the judge dealt with the issue  and  the  ground
    stretched ST further than it actually went.   ST  did  not  require  an
    appellant to attend personally  at  the  embassy.   References  to  the
    letters showed that the appellant supplied all  such  details  as  were
    available to her.  The respondent might disagree on that, but the judge
    had found the appellant credible.  Issues at (b) regarding  her  travel
    were immaterial.  Ground (c) did disclose some confusion in the wording
    of the determination, but it  was  clear  that  the  judge  intended  a
    finding in favour of the appellant, and any muddling of expression  was
    irrelevant.

16. Mr Matthews in response pointed out that MA had been considered in  ST,
    which made it rather odd that paragraph 78 of MA was not mentioned when
    ST dealt with the standard of proof at paragraph  56.   Mr  Winter  had
    suggested but had not shown that there was any  conflict  of  Court  of
    Appeal authority on the point.  The tribunal in Scotland should  follow
    clear authority of the Court of Appeal.

17. I reserved my decision.

18. The case was  plainly  approached  by  both  sides  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as turning on the credibility of  the  appellant.   The  judge
    explains  from  paragraph  62  onwards  that  he  has   taken   careful
    consideration of all points made.   He  finds  that  according  to  the
    circumstances there may be Eritrean nationals who do not speak Tigrinya
    and whose main language is Amharic.  He notes that  the  appellant  was
    subjected to a robust but  fair  cross-examination  and  he  forms  the
    impression that she was doing her best to  provide  full  and  accurate
    answers.  His points about her not travelling to the Ethiopian  Embassy
    arise in considering her general  credibility,  not  as  having  direct
    bearing on her nationality.

19. The respondent is I think  correct  about  the  standard  of  proof  of
    nationality, but nothing was made of this in the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    It is plain that the judge would have come to the same conclusion.   It
    is a point of law of no bearing on the outcome.

20. Grounds 2 and 3 are based on no more than disagreement on the facts and
    on infelicities of expression.

21. The case was fought on credibility.  The judge  was  entitled  to  come
    down in the appellant's favour.  Reading his decision fairly and  as  a
    whole, it provides the respondent with the reasons why he did so.   The
    grounds seek to comb through the decision for errors on other  matters,
    with the benefit of hindsight.

22. It is implicit in the decision that the judge also  accepted  that  the
    appellant had been expelled from Ethiopia  with  others  of  "Eritrean"
    origin (although born before the countries separated) and that even  if
    she had any formal claim to Ethiopian  nationality,  it  would  not  be
    recognised by the Ethiopian authorities.

23. The grounds disclose  no  error  of  such  materiality  as  to  require
    credibility to be considered afresh by a way of a rehearing.

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

25. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




                           [pic]


                           1 September 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
