

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10018/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination sent           |
|on 11 July 2013                               |on 17 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              NHLANHLA NDEBELE

                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs F Farrell, of P G Farrell, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This determination refers to parties as they were in the  First-tier
       Tribunal.


    2. The SSHD appeals against  a  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Doyle, dated 14 December 2012, allowing the appellant's appeal
       against refusal of recognition as a refugee from Zimbabwe.

    3. The issues raised in the application for and grant of permission are
       whether the judge erred in finding that the appellant, although  not
       a  credible  witness,  was  entitled  as  a  political  neutral   to
       protection on the authorities of RN [2008] UKAIT 00083 and RT [2012]
       UKSC 38, and  whether  the  judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
       respondent's case on change of circumstances and on absence of  risk
       in the appellant's home area, Bulawayo.

    4. Mr Mullen submitted that although  the  judge  referred  briefly  at
       paragraph 15 (o) to the more recent background evidence cited in the
       refusal letter, he did not in fact engage with  it.   That  evidence
       showed that irrespective of time spent in the UK, an appellant  from
       Matabeleland with no political profile was at no risk of a  "loyalty
       challenge" or of persecution.  The appeal should have been dismissed
       on the evidence which was before the judge.   The  matter  would  be
       even clearer on remaking the decision as at  today's  date,  because
       applying CM (EM Country Guidance;  Disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]
       UKUT 00059 (IAC) the appeal would have no prospects of success.


    5. Mrs Farrell submitted  that  at  paragraph  15  (o)  the  judge  did
       consider current evidence, and that  he  was  entitled  to  find  it
       insufficient to depart from  findings  based  on  RN  and  RT.   She
       acknowledged that if  the  decision  did  fall  to  be  remade,  the
       appellant would be in difficulty in bringing himself within any risk
       category, in light of CM.

    6. I reserved my determination.

    7. The judge at paragraph 15(n) said:

           I therefore find placing reliance on RT and RN that because  the
           appellant has been in the UK for almost 11 years and is a failed
           asylum seeker and because it is most likely he would  be  viewed
           as politically neutral, he cannot demonstrate support  for  Zanu
           PF.  He therefore faces a real risk of persecution.

    8. The judge there relies upon RT and RN  as  if  that  could  be  done
       without regard to changes in the background evidence.

    9. The judge does go on  at paragraph 15(o) to  refer  to  more  recent
       information:

           The respondent relies heavily  on  the  most  recent  background
           information ... the background information  does  not  say  that
           physical violence is at an  end  in  Zimbabwe.   The  background
           evidence says there has been  a  diminution  in  the  number  of
           politically  motivated  attacks,  but  says  those   politically
           motivated attacks, and the generalised  violence  against  those
           not openly aligned with Zanu-PF, continue.   The  situation  may
           not be as violent as ... in 2008 but the background  information
           confirms that politically  motivate[d]  violence  continues  and
           that Zimbabwe is in the grips of a repressive  regime  ...  Were
           the background information to indicate the physical violence was
           at an end (& it does not) and that the methods of  the  existing
           regime had been eradicated then there might be some force in the
           respondent's argument.  The flaw in the respondent's argument is
           to say that the reduction of instances of violence and abuse  of
           power amounts  to  safety,  when  the  threat  of  violence  and
           persecution actually persists.

   10. Paragraph 15 (o) reads as if the judge had already reached his final
       conclusion, and as if the burden was on the  SSHD  rather  than  the
       appellant.  In assessing the background evidence it did  not  matter
       much where the burden lay, but the paragraph also reads  as  if  the
       judge was incorrectly applying too high a test to the argument  that
       there was no real risk to the appellant on return to  Bulawayo.   It
       was open to the judge to decide otherwise, but only on the basis  of
       evidence reasonably leading to the contrary conclusion.  The judge's
       references to the evidence are scanty, and are subject to  erroneous
       views of where the burden lay and of  the  standard  required.   The
       overlooked analysis in the respondent's refusal letter, on the other
       hand, was quite detailed and thorough.

   11. Those are errors fundamental to the decision, so it cannot stand.

   12. On the evidence before the FtT, the decision should have been to the
       contrary.  Any shade of doubt is removed by CM, to the  effect  that
       the guidance given in EM as at the  end  of  January  2011  was  not
       vitiated by any error, and did not require to be revisited except in
       the light of the RT principles.  Such amendment as was made does not
       assist the appellant, particularly as he is from Bulawayo.  EM  held
       (headnote 1) that there was significantly less politically motivated
       violence in Zimbabwe compared with the situation considered  in  RN,
       and that in general the return of a failed asylum seeker from the UK
       with no significant MDC profile would  not  result  in  that  person
       facing a real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to  Zanu-PF.  CM
       also refers to later country information (not country guidance)  but
       none of it assists the appellant.

   13. The determination of the FtT is set aside.  The  following  decision
       is substituted: the appeal, as originally brought by  the  appellant
       to the FtT, is dismissed.

   14. No order for anonymity has been requested or made.



                               [pic]
                                16 July 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


