
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10460/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 9th June 2014                              |On 14th July 2014            |
|Judgment given orally on 9th June 2014        |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                mehrab abrham

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Naz, Solicitor of Morden Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This appellant says that she is a citizen of Eritrea.  She was born  on
    1st January 1988.  She arrived illegally in the United Kingdom on  31st
    July 2013, on which date she  was  arrested.   She  made  a  claim  for
    asylum, again on the same date.  That claim was rejected and a decision
    was made on 8th November 2013 to remove her as an illegal entrant.  Her
    appeal against that decision  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lucas on 20th March 2014.  In the determination Judge  Lucas  dismissed
    the appeal on asylum, human rights and humanitarian protection grounds.
     The grounds of appeal before the Upper Tribunal, in  summary,  contend
    that the First-tier Judge's credibility findings are flawed for want of
    reasons.

 2. At the outset Mr Bramble accepted that there were deficiencies  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in terms of the reasons  given  for
    rejecting the  appellant's  claim.   He  accepted  that  there  was  an
    inadequate assessment of the appellant's  credibility,  including  with
    reference to relevant case law and background material.

 3. In the grounds of appeal before the Upper Tribunal it suggested that in
    many  respects  the  judge  simply  has  not  given  reasons  for   the
    conclusions that he came to.  Ground 1 concerns the judge's credibility
    findings. Whilst I am not satisfied that everything that is advanced in
    that respect has substance, in the light of the acceptance on behalf of
    the  Secretary  of  State  that  there   are   deficiencies   in   this
    determination  and  my  own  assessment  of  the  determination,  I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier Judge erred in law.

 4. It is not necessary in the circumstances for me to  explain  in  detail
    what the deficiencies in the determination are, suffice to say  that  a
    statement, for example, that something is simply  not  believed  or  is
    implausible is not in my view satisfactory.  Part  of  the  appellant's
    claim is that she suffered ill-treatment in various respects while  she
    was in Ethiopia, as a person of Eritrean nationality.   An  example  of
    what I regard as a lack of  reasons  occurs  at  paragraph  53  of  the
    determination where the judge stated that  the  account  the  appellant
    gave of having been  repeatedly  sexually  assaulted  in  Ethiopia,  is
    implausible, but no reasons are given for that conclusion.  Mr  Bramble
    pointed out that  at  paragraph  55  of  the  determination  the  judge
    concluded that because the appellant speaks  Amharic  and  Oromo,  both
    being Ethiopian languages,  she  is  Ethiopian.  Mr  Bramble  suggested
    however, that that was not a sufficient basis from  which  to  conclude
    that she is in fact Ethiopian.

 5. A further example of a lack of reasoned findings occurs at paragraph 51
    of the determination. There  it  was  concluded  that  the  appellant's
    explanation that she effectively remained in hiding in  Ethiopia  after
    the death of her mother in 2007 and was  able  to  work  and  save  but
    without having any status in that country,  was  not  credible.   Again
    however, no reasons are given for that conclusion. The judge  may  have
    been entitled to find that that part of her account was  not  credible,
    but at least some reasons ought to have been given for coming  to  that
    view.

 6. Lastly by way of example, at paragraph 53 Judge  Lucas  considered  the
    appellant's account that she was raped by her employer's son,  Mustafa.
    He concluded that the fact that the appellant  is  said  to  have  been
    recognised (and I think he means that her son Mustafa is said  to  have
    been recognised) as his father's son, is "totally unconvincing".  Again
    however, no reasons are given for that conclusion.

 7. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that there is an error of  law  in
    the judge's assessment of credibility.  That error of law is such as to
    acquire the decision to be set aside. Having regard to paragraph 7.2 of
    the practice statement, it is appropriate for the appeal to be remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for further hearing de novo with no findings
    of fact preserved.


                                        DIRECTIONS

1.   The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  hearing  de
    novo before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas.

2.   No findings  of  fact  are  preserved  except  as  agreed  between  the
    parties.

3.   An Amharic interpreter is required.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 7/07/14
