
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/10858/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Promulgated                          |
|On August 25, 2016                   |On August 31, 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                     S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel, instructed by Broudie, Jackson &
                    Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Libya. The  appellant  first  entered
         the United Kingdom illegally in or around  November  2014.  He  was
         encountered by the police  on  February  2,  2015  and  he  claimed
         asylum. He was interviewed on July 1, 2015 and on July 23, 2015 the
         respondent refused his protection claim  under  paragraph  336  and
         339C HC 395.

      2. The appellant appealed under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on August 5, 2015 arguing  that  if
         returned he was at risk  or  persecution  and  relocation  was  not
         possible. He also sought to remain under articles 2 and 3 ECHR.

      3. The matter came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ennals
         (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on February 19, 2016 and in
         a decision promulgated on February 24, 2016 he refused  the  asylum
         claim but allowed the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

      4. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on March  1,  2016  and  on
         March 11, 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Nightingdale  gave
         permission to appeal finding there were arguable grounds  that  the
         FtTJ had erred by failing to give adequate  reasons  for  departing
         from the country guidance case of AT  and  others  (Article  15(c):
         Risk Categories Libya) CG [2014] UKUT 318 (IAC).

      5.  The  appeal  came  before  me  on  June  13,  2016  and  following
         representations I agreed there  was  an  error  in  law.  Whilst  I
         accepted the Judge had noted new material had been submitted he had
         failed to examine that evidence and explain why  the  circumstances
         had worsened and why he should depart from AT. I adjourned the case
         directing that additional country evidence be lodged.

      6. The matter came back before me on the above  date  and  I  admitted
         into  evidence  an  updated  bundle  provided  by  the  appellant's
         solicitors.

      7. Unless and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their
         family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
         Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings.

         PREMLIMINARY ISSUES

      8. Mr McVeety agreed that the appellant  came  from  Benghazi  and  he
         indicated that the respondent would be  arguing  that  it  was  not
         unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect the appellant to relocate to
         another area such as Tripoli.

         SUBMISSIONS

      9. Mr McVeety continued to rely on the country evidence cited  in  the
         refusal letter. Whilst he  accepted  there  were  some  areas  that
         Libyans could not be returned to, including Benghazi, he  submitted
         there were areas that the appellant could safely be returned to.

     10. The  Judge  had  made  a  number  of  adverse  findings  about  the
         appellant' account and these had not been challenged.  Nothing  had
         happened to him in Libya and he remained a healthy male who was not
         in fear of any particular  group.  In  considering  a  claim  under
         article 15(c) it was necessary to  consider  the  position  on  the
         ground and consider whether what could happen to the appellant  and
         whether he would be caught up in fighting and face serious harm  or
         death.

     11. Mr McVeety referred me to the  latest  evidence  contained  in  the
         appellant's updated bundle. In the first quarter of 2016 he pointed
         to the fact there were only 17  recorded  deaths  in  Tripoli.  The
         analogy he made was that more people died in one night in Paris  or
         Nice than had actually been killed in Tripoli  and  France  is  not
         classed as an Article 15(c) country. Section 9.1.11 refers  to  the
         relative calm of Tripoli and section 2.3.17 indicates  other  areas
         have not deteriorated.

     12. Mr Brown submitted that as the respondent  accepted  he  could  not
         return to Benghazi then the Tribunal should approach the  issue  of
         relocation in light of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544
         (IAC). At paragraphs [148] and [149] the Tribunal stated-

             "148.     The correct approach to the issue of  relocation  is
             that set out by Lord Bingham in Januzi v Secretary  of  State
             for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5 [2006] 2  AC  426  i.e.
             whether a person can reasonably be  expected  to  relocate  or
             whether it would be unduly harsh to expect them to do  so.  In
             AH (Sudan) & others (FC) [2007] UKHL 49 at [22], Baroness Hale
             described the reasonableness test as being  "stringent".   The
             burden of  proof,  as  with  all  aspects  of  the  subsidiary
             protection determination process that we are  concerned  with,
             falls on the appellant.

             149.      If an ordinary civilian can establish a real risk of
             serious harm exceeding the Article 15(c)  threshold  in  their
             home area, then in order to found eligibility for a  grant  of
             humanitarian  (subsidiary)  protection,  it  also  has  to  be
             demonstrated that such a person  cannot  relocate  to  another
             region either because there is a real risk of serious harm in,
             or en route to, such a region or because  circumstances  exist
             there that would otherwise  make  it  unreasonable  or  unduly
             harsh for such a person to relocate. The presence of Article 3
             etc. serious harm is  not  a  prerequisite  for  finding  that
             relocation would be unduly harsh or unreasonable."

     13. Mr Brown submitted that as the appellant  has  established  a  real
         risk of serious harm exceeding article 15(c) in his home area  then
         he merely has to show either there is a real risk of  serious  harm
         in, or en route to, such a region or  because  circumstances  exist
         there that would otherwise make it unreasonable or unduly harsh for
         such a person to relocate.

     14. The appellant has no ties to Tripoli and he would be  returning  to
         an area where he had no accommodation or support.  The  appellant's
         family remained in Benghazi and it was wrong to say there  were  no
         problems in Tripoli. Country evidence in the  appellant's  original
         bundle confirmed the  ongoing  problems.  The  Human  Rights  Watch
         Report January 2016 considered the general situation in  Libya  and
         noted there continued to  be  clashes  in  Tripoli  between  forces
         allied to the self-declared government and opposition  groups  with
         the forces of ISIS/ISIL/Daesh being present in the west of Tripoli.
         A report  provided  by  the  Office  of  the  United  Nations  High
         Commissioner for Human  Rights  November  2015  referred  to  armed
         confrontations in parts of Tripoli in April 2015  and  the  general
         conclusion  was  that  the  situation  in  Libya  remained   highly
         volatile. A later report from November 2015 repeated  that  ongoing
         violence  in  Libya  continued.  The  appellant's  updated   bundle
         contained more recent reports including the UK Home Office Country,
         Information and Guidance July 2016 report. The healthcare situation
         in parts of Libya including Tripoli has deteriorated with the  city
         being controlled by a multitude of armed groups.

     15. Mr Brown submitted that the conditions crossed  the  article  15(c)
         threshold and he should be granted protection.

         DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

     16. I am solely concerned with an appeal under  article  15(c)  of  the
         Qualification Directive (2004/83/EC). The appellant's other appeals
         have  been  previously  dealt  with  by  the  First-tier   Tribunal
         including his applications for asylum and ECHR.

     17. I  have  been  assisted  by  the  appellant's  representatives  who
         submitted an updated bundle of country evidence and in reaching  my
         decision I have had full regard to that evidence  as  well  as  the
         earlier bundle that had been submitted for the earlier hearing.

     18. The current situation in Libya is described by both representatives
         as "fluid' because the situation  on  the  ground  changes  as  one
         faction gains or regains  control  of  areas.  However,  before  an
         assessment of this appeal can be  undertaken  it  is  necessary  to
         understand what the Tribunal has to consider and  the  approach  it
         must take when looking at this issue.

     19. Article 15(c) of Council Directive 2004/83/EC  ("the  Qualification
         Directive") defines serious harm within the Directive as:

             "... serious and individual threat to  a  civilian's  life  or
             person by reason of indiscriminate violence in  situations  of
             international or internal armed conflict."

     20. The Court of Justice of the European Union ("CJEU")  gave  judgment
         in Diakit� (Case C-285/12) in which it was held that:

             "... on a proper construction of Article  15(c)  of  Directive
             2004/83, it  must  be  acknowledged  that  an  internal  armed
             conflict exists, for the purposes of applying that  provision,
             if a State's armed forces confront one or more armed groups or
             if two or more armed groups confront each  other.  It  is  not
             necessary for  that  conflict  to  be  categorised  as  'armed
             conflict   not   of   an   international   character'    under
             international humanitarian law; nor is it necessary  to  carry
             out, in addition to an appraisal  of  the  level  of  violence
             present in the territory concerned, a separate  assessment  of
             the intensity  of  the  armed  confrontations,  the  level  of
             organisation of the armed forces involved or the  duration  of
             the conflict."

     21. The CJEU has highlighted the  'exceptional  situation'  needed  for
         Article 15(c) to apply  to  civilians  generally.  In  Elgafaji  v.
         Staatssecretaris van Justitie, C-465/07 at paragraph 37, the Court
         made clear that, for this to be the case-

             "[...] the degree of  indiscriminate  violence  characterising
             the armed conflict taking place ... [must reach] such  a  high
             level that substantial grounds are shown for believing that  a
             civilian, returned to the relevant country or, as the case may
             be, to the relevant region, would, solely on  account  of  his
             presence on the territory of that country or  region,  face  a
             real risk of being subject to the serious threat  referred  in
             Article 15(c) of the Directive."

     22. The level of violence has to be assessed by its quantity as well as
         by its quality. There can be no doubt that a  substantial  quantity
         of violence is a  necessity  without  which  subsidiary  protection
         shall not be granted. However, defining the  threshold  of  Article
         15(c) is not a simple matter of analysing quantitative data.  Three
         principles govern this assessment:

          a. First, the approach must be holistic and inclusive. Courts and
             Tribunals must take into account  a  wide  range  of  relevant
             variables.

          b. Second, Courts and Tribunals should not limit themselves to  a
             purely quantitative analysis of figures of civilian death  and
             injuries etc. The approach must  be  qualitative  as  well  as
             quantitative. When assessing quantity and quality, courts  and
             tribunals should bear in mind  the  likelihood  of  unreported
             incidents and other uncertainties.

          c. Third, building on the case law, Courts and  Tribunals  should
             look in particular to see what the evidence tells us about the
             indicators  of  situations  of  violence  and  conflict   (the
             following is intended as a non-exhaustive list):

               i. The parties to the conflict and  their  relative  military
                  strengths and regard should be had to methods and  tactics
                  of warfare applied (risk of civilian casualties); type  of
                  weapons used;  the  geographical  scope  of  the  fighting
                  (localised or widespread)  and  the  number  of  civilians
                  killed, injured and displaced as a result of the fighting.

              ii. The ability or lack of it by  the  State  to  protect  its
                  citizens against  violence  (where  practicable,  it  will
                  assist  to  set  out  the  various  potential  actors   of
                  protection and to address their actual role)/the degree of
                  State failure).

             iii. Socio-economic conditions (which should include assessment
                  of economic and other forms of assistance by international
                  organisations and NGOs).

              iv. Cumulative effects of long lasting armed conflicts.

     23. AT and Others was promulgated in July 2014 but is based on  country
         evidence up to and including November 2013. The Tribunal stated-

          a. There were limited enforced  returns  at  the  time  but  what
             returns took place  went  via  Tripoli  International  airport
             using scheduled airlines.

          b. Checkpoints had more than one purpose with the  militia  using
             them to  charge  protection  money,  searching  for  drugs  or
             alcohol as well as checking who was actually passing  through.
             Not everyone was stopped as evidenced by the personal evidence
             of one of the experts. Road  travel  had  improved  throughout
             2013 and it was now possible to travel by car throughout  most
             of  the  country  despite  there  being  the  possibility   of
             harassment from militias.

          c. The airports of Tripoli and Benghazi were for  the  most  part
             safe  with  little  immediate  danger  flying  into  them   or
             transiting them. At the time numerous international  carriers,
             including British Airways, Alitalia, Air France and Lufthansa,
             operated with a reasonable regularity.

     24. Mr McVeety has submitted, and his submissions were not contradicted
         by Mr Brown, flights are  available  to  Tripoli  from  the  United
         Kingdom albeit these are not direct flights.

     25. In order to succeed in his appeal, the appellant  must  demonstrate
         that Libya has changed  since  the  Tribunal,  in  AT  and  Others,
         considered the risks and even if the  appellant  could  safely  fly
         back to Libya or travel overland to Libya  he  would  then  face  a
         tangible risk from travelling within the country.

     26. Whilst control of Libya may have altered since AT  and  Others  the
         actual position remains the same in the sense that no single  group
         has overall control of the country. When  the  Tribunal  considered
         the position in 2013/2014 it concluded that central government  had
         struggled to maintain authority and had to rely, to  a  greater  or
         lesser extent, on various militias to  undertake  certain  security
         functions that traditionally fell within a government's sole remit.
         Today, the country is run by various militias.

     27. Mr Brown pointed to the ongoing armed struggle in Tripoli and  that
         the separation of power in Tripoli was something that placed people
         at risk. However, this very same argument  was  argued  in  AT  and
         Others. The Tribunal at that  time  concluded  that  the  fractured
         state of the country did not give rise to a breach of article 15(c)
         and stated at paragraph [72]-

             "... The situation currently in Libya  is  that  of  a  highly
             decentralised state in which the primary sources of protection
             are  localised,   through   family   and   tribe.   In   these
             circumstances, and given the need to take a factual  approach,
             we are satisfied  that  there  is  a  general  sufficiency  of
             protection for the ordinary citizen."

     28. The Tribunal in AT and Others  from  paragraph  [86]  onwards  made
         clear that although different factions/groups ran various parts  of
         the country this did  not  mean  a  person  would  be  at  risk  of
         indiscriminate violence simply by travelling from one part  of  the
         country-

             "86. ... Depending on the  facts,  for  the  reasons  we  have
             given, we consider that it is in the main viable for a  person
             to be able to travel to another area to seek safety.

             89. ... Dr George's written evidence was that in recent  years
             tribalism, whilst still important, has become less significant
             than it had been in the past. He goes on to state  that  while
             particular tribes have traditional territories where they  are
             the dominant element in the population, most if not all Libyan
             communities have a populace that is at least  to  some  extent
             mixed. In the largest cities a significant proportion  of  the
             population never belonged to any tribe."

     29. The Tribunal concluded at paragraph [211]-

             "... we are able to conclude on the evidence before us that  a
             claim to  international  protection  is  unlikely  to  succeed
             simply on the basis of the risk of travel  to  any  particular
             area of Libya, again quite apart from the question of internal
             relocation. Area specific evidence would have  to  be  adduced
             which establishes such a risk."

     30. Mr Brown drew my attention to material that clearly post-dated  the
         decision in AT and others. He argues the position on the ground has
         changed and that the guidance in AT and Others is  no  longer  good
         law.

     31. There is  no  doubt  there  has  been  an  ongoing  hostility  with
         different groups continuing  to  try  to  exert  a  larger  control
         although a lot of the groups' activities is targeting people  based
         on  their  tribal  affiliation  or  presumed  allegiances  but   in
         considering this risk to the  appellant  I  have  to  consider  his
         situation based on the findings of  fact  made  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal about his claim. The appellant's asylum claim was rejected
         by the First-tier Tribunal and  no  challenge  was  made  to  those
         findings. The First-tier Tribunal found the appellant did not  have
         a profile that would place him at risk.

     32. The Tribunal made clear in AT and Others that it was  possible,  in
         practical terms, for a male to relocate to another area  of  Libya,
         for example Tripoli,  particularly  if  he  had  tribal  or  family
         connections  there.  The  appellant's  account   was   resoundingly
         rejected by the First-tier Tribunal and whilst  I  accept  he  came
         from Benghazi it appears that  he  does  have  contacts/friends  in
         Tripoli because his passport was sent to a family friend  there  to
         be renewed. The appellant has no health concerns and  there  is  no
         evidence before me that suggests he would be unable to obtain  work
         in Tripoli, if he were returned.

     33. The material that was originally submitted and the  updated  bundle
         do not tell me the situation is worse than that considered  by  the
         First-tier Tribunal. Conditions in Tripoli  are  not  the  same  as
         Benghazi. Whilst reported fatalities are not the only barometer  Mr
         McVeety pointed out that the  amount  of  reported  fatalities  has
         reduced in the first quarter of 2016 compared to 2015. There remain
         ongoing healthcare issues but there  is  insufficient  evidence  to
         suggest that the conditions are such that article 15(c) is engaged.



     34. Accordingly, whilst I accept Libya is not a country  the  appellant
         desires to return to I am satisfied  that  the  material  submitted
         does not, after careful  consideration,  alter  what  the  Tribunal
         previously found (in AT and Others) in relation  to  conditions  on
         the ground.

     35.  In  considering  whether  the  appellant  would  face  a  risk  of
         indiscriminate violence I  have  considered  all  of  the  evidence
         served in this appeal. I  have  taken  as  my  starting  point  the
         findings of  the  Tribunal  in  AT  and  Others  and  I  have  then
         considered the additional evidence that post  dates  that  decision
         and that includes not only the reports on  fighting  but  also  the
         fact the numbers of displaced persons has increased.  However,  his
         account of what he claimed happened was rejected by the  First-tier
         Tribunal and no appeal was brought against that decision.

     36. The issue ultimately is the  safeness  of  his  return  and  having
         considered all of the above I  am  satisfied  that  the  additional
         evidence, post AT and Others, would not lead to a breach of article
         15(c) and consequently the decision of AT and Others  remains  good
         law.

         DECISION

     37. I have remade the original decision and I dismiss  the  appellant's
         appeal on Article 15(c) grounds. In all other respects  the  First-
         tier Tribunal decision is upheld.


Signed:     Dated:

    [pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




    TO THE RESPONDENT
    FEE AWARD

    No fee has been paid.


Signed:     Dated:

    [pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
