
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/10477/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 28th September 2015                 |                On 4th February 2016 |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                          Idriss Youssouf Abderaman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     M Bradshaw, instructed by Duncan Lewis (Birmingham)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Idriss Youssouf Abderaman, was born on  1  January  1983
    and is a citizen of Sudan.  He  appealed  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 22 October 2014 to remove him as  an  illegal  entrant
    following the refusal of his asylum  claim.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Anthony),  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  13  February  2015,
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  The appellant now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  should  be
    set aside.  Mr Diwnycz the HOPO, for the respondent, and  Mr  Bradshaw,
    for the appellant, told me they were agreed that the respective Records
    of  Proceedings  of  the  representatives  indicated  that  no  mention
    whatever has been made as to the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal
    to the matters discussed by the judge in his decision at [15]:

         In considering the interview transcript at question 161, I note the
         appellant states  that  the  language  of  the  Zaghawa  people  is
         "Rotana".  The respondent does not raise this  specifically  as  an
         issue in the refusal letter.  I find that  the  appellant's  answer
         seems to be inconsistent with the  background  and  material  which
         states that the Zaghawa's language is Beri or Beri-Aa.   Mr  Verney
         [the appellant's expert] also states at paragraph 5 of  his  report
         that the mother tongue of the Zaghawa is Beri.  I heard no evidence
         on why the  appellant's  answer  is  different  to  the  background
         information and the report of Mr Verney.  I can only  conclude  the
         appellant does not know the  language  of  the  Zaghawa  people  is
         called Beri.

 3. Although this aspect of the appellant's case was never  raised  in  the
    refusal letter (as the judge acknowledges) it  was  also  never  raised
    with the appellant at any stage of his  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The judge has taken  a  point  on  what  appears  to  be  an
    inconsistency between the appellant's evidence and that of  the  expert
    without giving the appellant any or any proper opportunity  to  comment
    on the apparent inconsistency; notwithstanding that  error,  the  judge
    concluded that the appellant was not from the Zaghawa  tribe  "for  the
    reasons I have already indicated above"  [31].   I  find  that  it  was
    unfair of the judge to find credibility points against  this  appellant
    without giving him any opportunity to comment on matters which  clearly
    appear only to have concerned the judge following the conclusion of the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing.  I  therefore  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision.  None of the findings  of  fact  shall  stand.   The
    matter will be returned to the First-tier Tribunal for a further  fact-
    finding exercise de novo.  Following the next hearing in the First-tier
    Tribunal, that Tribunal shall remake the decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 13 February  2015  is
set aside.  The appeal is returned  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  that
Tribunal to remake the decision.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 20 December 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


