
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10958/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date Sent                    |
|On 22nd April 2014                            |On 19th May 2014             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                   mr s r

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, Counsel instructed by Rahman & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant was born on  1st  January  1993  and  is  a  national  of
    Afghanistan.

2.   The appellant claimed to  have  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  from
    Pakistan on 17th July 2009, the day when he was arrested in the UK.  He
    claimed asylum on 17th July 2009.  On 19th July 2009 absconded from the
    care of Kent County Council.

3.   The appellant resurfaced as far as the UK  authorities  were  concerned
    in September 2011 by making a claim for asylum support.

4.   The appellant's claim was refused on 27th  November  2013  and  on  2nd
    December 2013 a decision was made to  remove  the  appellant  from  the
    United Kingdom.

5.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Prior on 13th January  2014.  The
    appeal was dismissed in all respects.

6.   Grounds of appeal were submitted to  the  effect  that  the  Judge  had
    failed to make material findings of fact or  provide  adequate  reasons
    why removal was not disproportionate and an interference with Article 8
    rights.  Leave to appeal was granted on the basis that  the  Judge  had
    not made adequate findings as to private life and  therefore  that  the
    proportionality exercise was flawed.  Thus the matter comes  before  me
    in pursuance of that permission.

7.   The centrepiece, which was  before  Judge  Prior  was  essentially  the
    claim for asylum.  It is the claim of the appellant  that  in  December
    2007 he had been accused of the murder of an individual  and  convicted
    without due process.  He managed to escape from his  sentence  of  life
    imprisonment by payment of a bribe and eventually came  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

8.   Although it was his claim that he came to the United  Kingdom  directly
    evidence was presented that he had been fingerprinted in a Greek island
    in July 2008 and again in Greece in August 2008 and February  2009  and
    again in Hungary in June 2009.

9.    The  determination  was  a  careful  one  which  looked  at  all   the
    ingredients of the claim there was a finding  in  particular  that  the
    chronology of the movement  of  the  appellant,  as  evidenced  by  the
    fingerprints, was inconsistent with his  claim  as  to  the  events  in
    Afghanistan.

10.  The conclusion of the Judge was that it was a fabricated claim with  no
    substance whatsoever.  Accordingly the claim of asylum was dismissed as
    was that for humanitarian protection.  Significantly there has been  no
    appeal lodged against such findings.

11.  The grounds of appeal relate to the approach  taken  by  the  Judge  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR contending that it was wholly inadequate  in  the
    circumstances.

12.  Mr Gilbert, who  represents  the  appellant,  submits  that  it  was  a
    material factor that the appellant had come to the United Kingdom as  a
    juvenile  and  was  a  matter  to  weigh  heavily  in  the  scales   of
    proportionality against removal.

13.  Although he had absconded from  UK  authority  care  he  had  reassumed
    contact with the authorities in 2011 and  that  had  permitted  him  to
    undergo study at the Harrow College.  Two letters were submitted to the
    Tribunal from that college both dated 9th January 2014.

14.  One of the letters confirms that the appellant had been  a  student  at
    the college for three years having joined it in September 2011. He  has
    progressed from this initial ESOL course and was now studying the first
    year of a two year BTEC level diploma in science.  He is said to  be  a
    valued member of the student community and  a  member  of  the  student
    union.  In October 2013 he had been elected by fellow students to  take
    up the role of enrichment and entertainments officer.  He was a  valued
    student member, worthy student officer.   The  other  letter  confirmed
    that the appellant made excellent progress in his studies.  Apart  from
    his studies he lived with friends and had a course of friendship.

15.  It is argued that the Judge was wrong to place such little weight  upon
    such evidence in the establishment of a  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

16.  It is to be noted that the  Judge  paid  regard  to  those  letters  as
    specific reference is made in paragraph 8 of the determination to those
    letters.      The Judge noted what the appellant had to say  about  his
    family in Pakistan.  He had indicated to the  Immigration  Officers  on
    17th July 2009 that his parents were in Pakistan and that he  had  five
    sisters.  The appellant had maintained at the hearing that his  parents
    were no longer in Pakistan because his father had long since  died  and
    that what he had said in the interview was incorrect.  The Judge looked
    at that matter and preferred that which was  said  to  the  Immigration
    Officers.

17.  It was noted in paragraph 20, that in the context  of  Article  8,  the
    appellant's evidence had been that he had a mother and five siblings in
    Pakistan and that he had been at least until three months previously in
    contact with his mother.  The appellant's  evidence  in  interview  was
    that he had no partner in the United Kingdom and no  contact  with  two
    uncles that he believed he had in the country.

18.  The position facing the Immigration Judge upon the  conclusion  of  the
    asylum appeal was that the appellant sought to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on a false basis namely upon a fabricated asylum claim.  He had
    not fully cooperated with the authorities in that matter in that he had
    absconded for several years.  There was no evidence of any family life.



19.  Such evidence of private life was essentially his various  friends  and
    his college studies.   It  was  the  finding  of  the  Judge  that  the
    appellant had family to return to in Pakistan if not in Afghanistan.

20.  It was noted by the Judge at paragraph 26 of the determination that  at
    no time in the four and a half years that the appellant had been in the
    United Kingdom could he have had any expectation of being permitted  to
    remain in the country.  Indeed according to the appellant  it  was  his
    fear of being returned to Afghanistan which had caused him  to  abscond
    in the first place.

21.  The Judge, therefore, noted all relevant  matters  that  are  currently
    relied upon by the appellant in support of his Article  8  claim.   The
    Judge having noted such matters did not find that his removal would  be
    disproportionate.

22.  It is argued by Mr Gilbert that for the Judge to find  that  there  was
    no private life was an error because clearly  there  was  some  private
    life particularly in college  and  among  his  friends.   It  was  very
    important for a young adult to have a sense of security and purpose.

23.  I find that the Judge had taken proper account of all matters that  had
    been raised as to the appellant's private life in the  United  Kingdom.
    He had taken account of the letters that were produced  and  has  noted
    clearly that the appellant had been in the United Kingdom for four  and
    a half years.  Whilst it was clear the appellant had  shown  initiative
    not only in coming to the United Kingdom initially but also  in  taking
    matters into his own hands by absconding and living of his own  devices
    for two years in the United Kingdom.  He was, however, somebody who had
    deceived the authorities as to the true purpose for his coming  to  the
    United Kingdom and had been found to be someone who had fabricated  his
    claim to remain in the United Kingdom on  the  basis  of  asylum.   The
    Judge clearly concluded that the appellant had family to return to  and
    was in any event a young adult as at the time of the hearing.

24.  Although the remarks of  the  Judge  could  perhaps  have  been  better
    structured it is difficult to understand without more  why  it  can  be
    said that the circumstances of the appellant are so compelling or as to
    prevent removal; alternatively, why it would be unreasonable or  unjust
    or unduly harsh for him to be expected to return to Afghanistan in  all
    the circumstances.

25.  This was not a case where the Judge had overlooked  a  material  factor
    might have made a material difference to the outcome.  I do  not  find,
    therefore, that the Judge was in error in the approach which was taken.
     Alternatively, if in error, I do not find that that error was  in  the
    circumstances a material one.

26.  The appeal before the  Upper  Tribunal  is  therefore  dismissed.   The
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  shall  stand  namely  that  the
    appellant's appeals in respect of asylum, humanitarian  protection  and
    human rights stand dismissed.

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

