

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: AA/10583/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Sent        |
|On 8 August 2014                       |On 12 August 2014         |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


                         Mr CHRISTY ROSHAN FERNANDO
                        (NO ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield, Counsel
      (instructed by Pride Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Levin on 19 May  2014  against  the  decision  of
           First-tier Tribunal Judge Petherbridge made in  a  determination
           promulgated on 29 April 2014 dismissing the Appellant's  asylum,
           humanitarian protection and human rights appeals.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 21  May  1986.
           He had appealed against his removal from the United  Kingdom,  a
           decision taken by the  Respondent  on  12  November  2013.   The
           Appellant had entered the United Kingdom  as  a  student  on  24
           September 2007, which visa was extended on 7 December 2010 until
           28 October 2013.  He claimed asylum on 17 October 2013,  stating
           that he feared for his life because of his links to the LTTE.


      3.    When granting permission to appeal, Judge Levin considered  that
           it was arguable that Judge Petherbridge had erred by failing  to
           treat the Appellant as a vulnerable witness, and in  other  ways
               alleged in the onwards grounds of appeal.


      4.    The Respondent filed notice under rule 24  indicating  that  the
           appeal was  opposed.   Standard  directions  were  made  by  the
           tribunal and the appeal was listed for adjudication  of  whether
           or not there was a material error of law.




      Submissions


      5.    Ms Benfield for the Appellant relied  on  the  five  grounds  of
           onwards appeal  earlier  submitted.   There  was  no  additional
           skeleton argument.  Counsel submitted that the judge had  failed
           to apply  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  as  to  vulnerable
           witnesses.  There was unchallenged evidence that  the  Appellant
           had Post-traumatic Stress Disorder. Mbanga [2005] EWCA  Civ  367
           had not been followed.  There had not been  an  "in  the  round"
           assessment taking  proper  account  of  the  Appellant's  mental
           condition.


      6.    Counsel further submitted that the judge had failed to apply  GJ
           and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT
           00319 (IAC) when considering the availability of  mental  health
           treatment in Sri Lanka.  The judge had erred in his  credibility
           assessment by taking  into  account  discrepancies  between  the
           Appellant's responses at his screening interview and his  asylum
           interview,  which  was  contrary  to  the   instructions   about
           screening interviews.  That was a breach of common law  fairness
           as identified by the Court of Appeal in JA (Afghanistan)  [2014]
           EWCA Civ  450.   The  judge  had  not  taken  into  account  the
           Appellant's Post-traumatic Stress Disorder  when  assessing  the
           discrepancies.


      7.    Grounds four and five of the grounds of onwards appeal were also
           urged in argument.  The judge was said  to  have  erred  in  his
           credibility assessment as to the Appellant's documents (some  of
           which  were  from  the  IRC)  and  in  his  assessment  of   the
           Appellant's involvement in purchasing medical supplies  for  the
           LTTE.  The judge's finding with regard  to  that  was  perverse.
           The determination was unsafe  and  should  be  set  aside.   The
           appeal should be reheard de novo. An anonymity order  should  be
           made to protect the Appellant.


      8.    Mr Avery for the Respondent  submitted  that  the  determination
           disclosed no error of law.  The judge had  seen  and  heard  the
           Appellant and had found that the  Appellant  was  able  to  give
           evidence.  That was open to the judge.   GJ  and  Others  (post-
           civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG (above) was  referred  to  by
           the judge but the mental health issue in  that  case  was  at  a
           different level  entirely  from  the  Appellant,  with  suicidal
           ideation. It was plain that the judge had  covered  all  of  the
           evidence in the  round.   There  was  no  failure  in  the  risk
           assessment as the appeal had  been  determined  on  credibility.
           The judge had been entitled to compare the answers given at  the
           two interviews.  There were big differences which the judge  had
           been entitled to find were unexplained.


      9.     In  reply  Ms  Benfield  reiterated  that  the  judge  had  not
           considered the medical evidence properly and the impact  of  the
           Appellant's Post-traumatic Stress Disorder.  The judge had cited
           an inaccurate Country of Origin  Information  Report  reference.
           The determination should be set aside.




      No material error of law


      10.   The  tribunal  accepts  Mr  Avery's  submissions.   Indeed,  the
           tribunal  considers  that  the  grounds  of  onwards  appeal  as
           submitted and urged in argument  were  wholly  meretricious  and
           that the grant of permission to appeal was excessively generous.
            At most the onwards grounds were simply a disagreement with the
           judge's sustainable findings of fact.  The tribunal declines  to
           make an anonymity order because the Appellant was found to  have
           no real fear of return to Sri Lanka and, indeed,  was  found  to
           have fabricated his protection  claim.   The  tribunal  sees  no
           reason  to  interfere  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal   judge's
           findings.


      11.   The determination was careful and structured, prepared by a very
           experienced judge who demonstrated that he had  assimilated  the
           large volume of evidence put  forward.   The  judge  placed  the
           Appellant's claim  into  its  proper  context,  i.e.,  that  the
           Appellant had based his asylum  claim  on  pre-departure  events
           [16], had admitted that he had not complied with  the  terms  of
           his student entry visa  conditions  [29]  and  had  not  claimed
           asylum until fully 6 years after his arrival: [11] to [14].  The
           Appellant had claimed that he had Post-traumatic Stress Disorder
           but the first  relevant  medical  record  was  for  "bereavement
           reaction", which coincided with the  death  in  Sri  Lanka  from
           natural causes of the Appellant's father in 2011 [54]  (although
           the Appellant had claimed that his father had been intimidated).
            The judge  recorded  that  he  had  been  asked  to  treat  the
           Appellant as a vulnerable witness.   In  fact  Dr  Lawrence  had
           stated in his report that  the  Appellant  was  "fit  to  plead"
           although care  would  be  needed  to  ensure  that  he  was  not
           retraumatised. The Appellant chose to give evidence, largely  in
           English [27ff], which Dr Lawrence had described as  "excellent".
           It was  evident  from  the  determination  that  there  were  no
           difficulties at all in that process and the grounds  of  onwards
           appeal do not  suggest  otherwise.  The  judge  gave  sufficient
           reasons for finding that the  Appellant  was  not  a  vulnerable
           adult.


      12.   There are numerous references throughout  the  determination  to
           the report of Dr Lawrence: see, e.g., [52], [53] and [93].   The
           judge plainly took full account of Dr Lawrence's  Post-traumatic
           Stress Disorder diagnosis (made after one two hour meeting) when
           conducting the credibility assessment.  It was open to the judge
           to  find  that  the  recently  diagnosed  Post-traumatic  Stress
           Disorder was insufficient to explain the multiple  discrepancies
           and implausibilities in the Appellant's  story,  not  least  the
           enormous delay in making the asylum claim [55].


      13.   The differences between the answers given by  the  Appellant  at
           his screening interview and then at his  asylum  interview  were
           substantial.  This was not an Appellant who had just arrived  in
           the United Kingdom  and  sought  immediate  help,  battered  and
           bruised after an  arduous  journey,  but  rather  a  young  man,
           English speaking, who had had six years to  prepare  himself  to
           submit an asylum claim, and had access to advice.   That  was  a
           circumstance so obvious that it was  hardly  necessary  for  the
           judge to mention it.  The judge was required to  consider  those
           interview  discrepancies  as  part  of  the  evaluation  of  the
           evidence and the judge did so in a fair way, taking into account
           the submissions made on the Appellant's behalf.


      14.   Indeed, the discrepancies and implausibilities which  the  judge
           found in the Appellant's story were multi-layered, and were  far
           from confined to the differences between interview answers:  see
           [58] onwards.  These were not capable of being  attributable  to
           memory problems caused by Post-traumatic Stress  Disorder.   The
           judge's findings were firmly  based  on  the  current  objective
           evidence, not on  assumptions  of  behaviour  or  conduct  in  a
           foreign country.   The judge was entitled to place no weight  on
           the Appellant's documents, for the reasons he  gave  at  [86ff].
           There had been selective disclosure and that judge rightly  took
           that into account in his holistic  assessment  of  the  evidence
           produced.


      15.   As Mr Avery pointed out, the facts of  GJ  (Sri  Lanka)  (above)
           were markedly different from those of the present  appeal.   The
           judge was entitled to find that the  Appellant's  mental  health
           condition, such as it was, could be adequately  treated  in  Sri
           Lanka.  The fact that the judge referred at  one  point  in  his
           determination to a Country of Origin Information Report by  what
           was said to be and may well be an inaccurate date reference  was
           immaterial, as the essential local conditions were unchanged.


      16.   The determination was not simply a recitation  of  the  evidence
           (which was itemised) but was rather a  comprehensive  reflection
           on the  issues  raised  in  the  appeal,  demonstrating  anxious
           scrutiny.  The judge's approach  was  measured  and  restrained.
           There is no irrationality or perversity  in  the  determination,
           but rather a careful and logical analysis which fully  justified
           the  judge's  conclusion  that  the  Appellant's  claim  was   a
           fabrication.   There was no material error of law and  no  basis
           for  interfering  with  the  judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the
           Appellant's appeal, which must stand.















      DECISION


      The tribunal finds that there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
original    decision, which stands unchanged


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




