
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10648/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 September 2015                 |On 18 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     SB
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Pipe of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Given the age of the Appellant, I make an anonymity order  pursuant  to
    rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
    Disclosure or publication of documents or information  likely  to  lead
    members of the public to identify the Appellant is prohibited.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Steer dated 17 March 2015 who dismissed  his  appeal  on
    asylum grounds, humanitarian protection grounds, and  under  Article  8
    ECHR.   Permission  was  granted  on  the  following  ground:  "As  the
    Appellant was 15 when he came to the UK in  2011  and  he  was  granted
    leave to remain until 3rd March 2013 when he attained the age  of  17.5
    years, and as the issue was raised in his Grounds  of  Appeal  and  the
    Appellant was not represented at the hearing, it is arguable  that  the
    Judge's failure to consider the Appellant's  case  on  the  grounds  of
    private life outside of the Immigration Rules amounts to  an  error  of
    law."

 3. Paragraph [37] of the decision states:

         "In relation to private life, I find that the  Appellant  does  not
         satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276BE of Appendix FM.  He has
         social and cultural ties with Morocco.  He has spent  all  but  the
         last 3-4 years in Morocco.  He speaks Arabic.  He had made  friends
         in Morocco.  He supported himself prior to coming to  the  UK.   He
         was educated in Morocco and has gained qualifications whilst living
         in the UK.  I have found that the Appellant remains in contact with
         his mother, as he failed to provide any documentary  evidence  that
         he had failed in his attempts to trace  her.   He  has  also  other
         relatives in Morocco with whom he could establish ties and, on  the
         country evidence, he is able to receive support from  organizations
         in Morocco."

 4. Paragraph [37] contains the full extent of the judge's consideration of
    the Appellant's right to a private life under Article 8.  The judge has
    referred to paragraph 276BE, being the paragraph under which  leave  to
    remain is granted, rather than paragraph  276ADE  which  sets  out  the
    requirements to be met in order to be  granted  leave  under  paragraph
    276BE.  The judge has not set out the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.
     It appears, although it is not clear, that the judge has  not  applied
    the correct version of paragraph 276ADE(vi), there being  no  reference
    to the "very significant obstacles" to the Appellant's integration into
    Morocco, but rather a reference to "ties" in Morocco.  It was submitted
    by the Appellant's representative that  this  failure  to  address  the
    issue of obstacles was particularly  relevant  given  the  Respondent's
    acceptance of the fact that the Appellant had suffered domestic  abuse,
    had been expelled from the family home, and  had  been  living  on  the
    streets in Morocco.

 5. Paragraph [37] does not contain any reference to the  Appellant's  age,
    or his circumstances in Morocco, including the  domestic  violence  and
    expulsion from the family home.  I found that paragraph  [37]  did  not
    contain a full assessment and analysis of  the  Appellant's  Article  8
    rights such that it could be said  that  the  Appellant's  right  to  a
    private life had been fully considered under the immigration rules.

 6. Article 8 had been raised in the grounds of appeal  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (see IAFT-1, D5).

 7. The Appellant was not represented at  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  He was only aged 19 at the  time.   Paragraph  [22]  of  the
    decision states:

         "The Appellant had not asked any of his friends in the UK to attend
         the appeal hearing.  He had no prior  experience  of  attending  an
         appeal hearing and had not known that  he  should  ask  friends  to
         attend."

    It is clear from this paragraph that the Appellant was not aware of the
    need to provide evidence of his private life for the appeal hearing.

 8. The Appellant had been an unrepresented 19 year old  whose  grounds  of
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal had raised Article 8.  Given that
    there was only a brief consideration of  the  Appellant's  right  to  a
    private life under Article 8 which was undertaken without reference  to
    the correct immigration rule, without analysis of the  requirements  of
    the  rule,  and  without  a  full   assessment   of   the   Appellant's
    circumstances, I found that the failure to consider Article  8  outside
    the immigration rules was an error of  law  capable  of  affecting  the
    outcome of the decision.

 9.  The  Appellant's  representative  submitted  that  further   evidence,
    together with a skeleton argument, had been submitted to this  Tribunal
    on 19 May 2015 and 8 June 2015 but there was  no  copy  on  file.   The
    Respondent  had  received  a  copy.   It  was  not  submitted  by   the
    Appellant's representative that this was relevant to the issue  of  the
    error of law, although it went to the question  of  materiality.   This
    evidence consisted of letters from friends, and correspondence from the
    Red Cross, both matters which were raised at the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    It was accepted that this evidence had not been put before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  I directed that a full bundle of evidence be served  on
    the Respondent 14 days before the next hearing.

10. The issues of asylum and humanitarian protection were not  before  this
    Tribunal, and the decision was  not  challenged  in  respect  of  these
    issues.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is  set
aside insofar as it relates to  consideration  of  the  Appellant's  private
life under Article 8.  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for the decision on the Appellant's right to a private life under Article  8
to be re-made afresh.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 17 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
