
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/10888/2014
                                                               AA/10891/2014
                                                               AA/10894/2014
                                                               AA/10898/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th February 2016                |On 1st March 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

        nipul sharmila thewarapperuma arachchige don - 1st Appellant
                 shanika S waththage perera - 2nd appellant
                          a S T A D- 3rd appellant
                            a s t - 4th appellant
                         (ANONYMITY orderS not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms J. Hassan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



The Appellants

1.   The first Appellant who I shall refer to as the Appellant was  born  on
    17th March 1977.  He is married to the second Appellant  born  on  29th
    November 1988 and the third and fourth Appellants born 26th  June  2011
    and 26th July  2013  are  their  children.   All  four  Appellants  are
    citizens of Sri Lanka. The Appellants appeal against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Anstis sitting at Hatton Cross on 24th
    July  2015  who  dismissed  their  appeal  against  decisions  of   the
    Respondent dated 24th November 2014.  Those decisions  were  to  refuse
    the Appellant's application for asylum and the second, third and fourth
    Appellants' applications as dependents of the  Appellant  and  to  make
    consequent directions for the removal of the Appellants from the United
    Kingdom.

2.   The Appellant's case was that he feared to return to Sri Lanka since  a
    man called Buddika who was the boyfriend of the Appellant's sister  was
    killed by the government whilst in prison.   The  Appellant  feared  he
    would be arrested and  killed  by  the  authorities  acting  under  the
    influence of two Sri Lankan MPs Felix Perera  and  Sarana  Gunawardena.
    The Appellant stated he was a prominent member of the  United  National
    Party (the UNP) and was the youth  development  officer  of  its  young
    person's organisation the National Youth Front in London.  At the  time
    of the application for asylum the UNP was one of the opposition parties
    in Sri Lanka although following elections in January 2015 it is now one
    of the governing parties in Sri Lanka.  The leader of the  UNP  is  the
    current Prime Minister of Sri Lanka.

The Decision at First Instance

3.   At paragraphs 11 to 17 of the determination the  Judge  summarised  the
    Appellant's case.  Buddika had beaten a man called Merrill who had been
    attacking the Appellant's aunt.  A group of men led  by  the  two  MPs,
    Felix Perera and Sarana Gunawardena, came to the Appellant's house  and
    set fire to it  shooting  at  the  Appellant.   Other  members  of  the
    Appellant's family were also attacked.  In 2004 Felix Perera  tried  to
    hold the Appellant and Buddika responsible for the death of Merrill and
    filed a case against them.  Buddika was arrested when  he  returned  to
    Sri Lanka in 2014 and was later found dead in prison.  It was  part  of
    the Appellant's case that he was a famous actor and model in Sri  Lanka
    and that he used connections gained through his modelling and  artistic
    work  to  act  as  an  undercover  reporter  feeding   information   to
    newspapers.  He had kept this work secret  to  avoid  it  damaging  his
    career as an actor and model.

4.   The Judge concluded at paragraph 22  that  it  was  apparent  that  the
    Appellant had a modelling career of some kind in Sri Lanka prior to his
    arrival in the United Kingdom in 2004.  The Appellant had also appeared
    in films since arriving in the  United  Kingdom.   The  Judge  did  not
    accept that the Appellant was a prominent actor when in Sri  Lanka  nor
    that his modelling had made the  Appellant  a  household  name  in  Sri
    Lanka.  The Judge wrote at paragraph 22:
         "If [the Appellant] had been such a prominent actor or model  there
         would be much more material in support of his career as an actor or
         model in Sri Lanka."

5.   At paragraph 23 the Judge did not  accept  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    journalist or journalistic source for anti-government newspapers during
    the Appellant's time in Sri Lanka.  It was in the nature of work  as  a
    secret informer that there was unlikely to be evidence  in  the  public
    domain of the role but if the Appellant had any substantial role as  an
    informant or journalist  the  Judge  would  expect  there  to  be  some
    documentary evidence of  this  or  testimonials  produced  from  fellow
    journalists.  There was nothing of that nature.  The Appellant had been
    active and achieved a profile within  the  UNP  whilst  in  the  United
    Kingdom but the Judge did not accept the Appellant's evidence as to any
    ongoing risk from  Felix  Perera  or  Sarana  Gunawardena.   There  was
    nothing to say what were the circumstances of the death of Buddika only
    that there was an obituary notice that he had passed  away.   There  is
    nothing beyond the Appellant's own testimony to  suggest  that  Buddika
    had died in prison.  The Appellant's attribution of Buddika's death  to
    Felix Perera and Sarana Gunawardena must contain a  substantial  degree
    of speculation.  The Appellant could have had no first  hand  knowledge
    of this.

6.   Despite the fact that there was said to  be  twenty  witnesses  of  the
    Appellant's dispute with Merrill there was no evidence beyond  that  of
    the Appellant about the incident.  There was nothing to suggest why the
    Appellant was apparently in hiding for six years  after  that  incident
    before then feeling safe enough to appear on magazine covers and public
    publicity material in 2002/2003.  Although Counsel's skeleton  argument
    had referred  to  an  arrest  warrant  being  outstanding  against  the
    Appellant, the Appellant himself had not said that there  was  one  and
    there was no documentary evidence of such an arrest warrant.  The Judge
    did not accept the Appellant's account of a fear  of  Felix  Perera  or
    Sarana Gunawardena and dismissed the appeal.  The Judge  dismissed  the
    Article 8 appeal finding that whilst the Appellant's children would  be
    upset by a  move  away  from  their  familiar  surroundings  to  a  new
    environment in Sri Lanka it had not been suggested that their long term
    interests would be best served by remaining in the United Kingdom.  The
    best interests of the children did not so substantially require them to
    remain in the United Kingdom as to override  the  public  interests  in
    effective immigration control.

The Onward Appeal

7.   The Appellant appealed against the  decision  arguing  that  he  feared
    persecution from Felix Perera who was part of the national  government.
    The Judge's findings on credibility were  vague,  unclear  and  without
    reasons. The present government would be unwilling to  give  protection
    to all of its citizens because Felix Perera was part of the government.
     The Judge had  applied  a  higher  threshold  when  carrying  out  the
    appropriate proportionality test under Article 8.   He  had  failed  to
    consider the welfare and safety of the children.

8.   The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley on 7th September 2015.   In  refusing
    permission to appeal he wrote that the Judge had given adequate reasons
    for rejecting the Appellant's claimed fear of  persecution  from  Felix
    Perera.  Even if that claimed fear were to be  accepted  it  would  not
    give rise to a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
    reason.  The grounds of application amounted to no more than a  quarrel
    with the findings of the Judge which were open  to  the  Judge  on  the
    evidence.

9.    The  Appellant  renewed  his  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    instructing different Counsel (who had not represented the Appellant at
    first instance) and who formulated very different  grounds  of  appeal.
    The new grounds indicated that the Appellant  had  "engaged"  with  the
    refusal of permission by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ransley  and  now
    submitted alternative grounds of appeal for consideration.   The  Judge
    had materially erred in law by requiring  corroborative  evidence  from
    fellow journalists in order to accept the Appellant's claim of being  a
    journalist/journalistic source  for  anti-government  newspapers.   The
    Judge  had  misapplied  the  burden  of   proof   by   requiring   such
    corroboration at paragraph 23.

10.  At paragraph 25 the misapplication of the burden  of  proof  continued.
    The Judge had required documentary evidence corroborating the manner in
    which the Appellant had stated that Buddika died in  the  form  of  the
    obituary notice.  The Appellant  had  provided  specific  detailed  and
    consistent oral evidence. The Judge had  further  materially  erred  by
    rejecting the Appellant's evidence about Felix Perera when finding that
    there was no evidence from the twenty witnesses to the dispute  in  Sri
    Lanka. At paragraph 32 the Judge had erred in his findings  as  to  the
    Appellant's risk on return because they were adversely affected by  the
    misapplication of  the  burden  of  proof  and  the  rejection  of  the
    Appellant's core claim.  The evidence of the Appellant should have been
    accepted even in the absence of corroborative evidence.

11.  The renewed application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers
    before Upper Tribunal Judge Blum on 15th  October  2015.   In  granting
    permission to appeal he wrote:
         "Following the Judge's adverse credibility  finding  based  on  the
         Appellant's delay in claiming asylum  (which  he  was  entitled  to
         make) it appears from paragraph 21 of his  determination  that  the
         Judge then specifically  looked  for  corroborating  evidence.   In
         these circumstances it is arguable that the Judge may have erred in
         law  by  requiring  corroborative  evidence  before  he  considered
         himself entitled to accept the  first  Appellant's  account.   When
         assessing whether there has been a material error of law the  Upper
         Tribunal will however bear  in  mind  that  although  there  is  no
         requirement for corroborative evidence in the context of an  asylum
         appeal a Judge may  take  account  of  an  unexplained  failure  to
         produce supporting evidence that could have been  available  to  an
         Appellant see C [2006] EWCA Civ 151 and TK [2009] EWCA Civ 40."

12.  Replying to the  grant  of  permission  the  Respondent  wrote  to  the
    Tribunal on 4th November 2015 stating that the assertion that the Judge
    had  required  corroborative  evidence  was   a   misreading   of   the
    determination.   The  Judge  had  merely  stated  he  was  looking  for
    corroborative evidence.  At paragraph  25  he  was  commenting  on  the
    apparent lack of documentary evidence.  Nowhere  in  the  determination
    did the Judge say that documentary evidence was required to  support  a
    claim for asylum or that in the  absence  of  documentary  evidence  an
    asylum claim failed.  At paragraphs 7 and 8 the  Judge  carefully  laid
    out the burden and standard of proof.  It was frankly  unarguable  that
    the Immigration Judge was unaware of the burden and standard of proof.

The Hearing before Me

13.  At the outset Counsel clarified  that  the  basis  of  the  Appellant's
    onward appeal was relying on the amended grounds that had  argued  that
    the Judge had required corroboration (see paragraphs 9 and  10  above).
    The Appellant in this case was not  a  journalist  as  such  who  could
    reasonably be expected to have produced pieces that  they  wrote.   The
    Judge had misunderstood the Appellant's case.  Nor  was  the  Appellant
    saying that he was at risk because of his membership of  the  UNP.   He
    was at risk because of what had happened to  Buddika  and  the  adverse
    interest in the Appellant shown by the two MPs.

14.  At this stage there was some discussion in  court  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant was seeking to  re-open  the  grounds  of  appeal  for  which
    permission had been refused by Judge Ransley and which  were  abandoned
    by Counsel on the renewed application to the Upper  Tribunal.   Counsel
    before  me  acknowledged  that  what  the  Appellant  had  been   given
    permission to appeal was the issue of whether the Judge  was  requiring
    corroboration.

15.  What the Judge had said at paragraph 21 was as follows:
         "[The Appellant must have had long term plans in the United Kingdom
         as indicated by the fact of the application] this and  particularly
         the failure  to  claim  asylum  before  receiving  his  immigration
         decision must be taken into account  as  damaging  the  Appellant's
         credibility and to make  me  particularly  look  for  corroborating
         evidence in respect of the Appellant's claims."

    It was argued by Counsel  that  what  the  Judge  was  saying  in  this
    paragraph was that he would look at corroborative  evidence  before  he
    had even considered anything else and  that  was  clearly  wrong.   The
    Judgement on  in  the  same  vein  at  paragraphs  22  and  23  of  the
    determination (which I have summarised at paragraphs 4 and 5 above).

16.  For the Respondent reliance was placed on the Rule  24  response.   The
    grounds amounted to a mere argument with the result.  If there was  any
    corroboration required it  only  applied  to  the  Appellant's  alleged
    journalist activities and not to the remaining conclusions  as  to  the
    Appellant's lack of credibility. In response Counsel for the  Appellant
    stated that Section 8 was not determinative but the  Judge  should  not
    have required corroborative evidence that was an  error  of  law.   The
    permission to appeal application and  the  grant  identified  instances
    where the Judge required corroborative evidence.

Findings

17.  It is clear from reading the determination as a whole  that  the  Judge
    did not accept the Appellant's credibility and gave cogent reasons  why
    he arrived at that conclusion.  Even taking  the  Appellant's  case  at
    face value as the Judge did at paragraph 32 it could still  not  amount
    to a fear of persecution for a Convention reason.   The  basis  of  the
    attack on the determination is founded in paragraph  21  in  which  the
    Judge indicated that the difficulties with the Appellant's  application
    for asylum made him particularly look  for  corroborating  evidence  in
    respect of the Appellant's claims.

18.  As the Respondent pointed out in the Rule 24  response,  this  did  not
    mean that the Judge was indicating that the Appellant  had  to  produce
    corroborative evidence. That would have been an error of  law  but  the
    Judge was careful not to say that.  What the Judge was  indicating  was
    that when it was reasonable to expect there to be  supporting  evidence
    he would look to see if such supporting evidence existed.  On a  number
    of occasions where it  was  reasonable  to  expect  such  evidence  the
    Appellant had not provided it.  The Judge made it clear at paragraph 23
    that if the Appellant had a substantial  role  as  an  informant  or  a
    journalist he would expect there to be  some  documentary  evidence  of
    this.  That was not saying that the Appellant had to show corroborative
    evidence before he could make out the claim to be afraid of persecution
    for such activities.  What the Judge was saying there was that  it  was
    reasonable to expect such evidence in all the circumstances.  That  was
    an approach which as Upper Tribunal Judge Blum pointed out in  granting
    permission was acceptable.

19.  The Appellant claimed that there were at least twenty  witnesses  to  a
    dispute with Merrill but there was nothing from any of those persons to
    support the claim.  Nor was the Appellant able to give  any  reasonable
    explanation why if he had been in hiding for six  years  he  then  felt
    safe enough to appear on magazine covers and  publicity  material  from
    2002/2003.  Those  were  important  discrepancies  and  the  Judge  was
    entitled to draw adverse conclusions from them.

20.  I do not accept that the Judge required corroborative  evidence.   What
    the Judge required was a reasonable explanation from the Appellant  for
    apparent inconsistencies in the case. These included that the Appellant
    was in hiding but then went on  to  appear  on  magazine  covers  after
    coming out of hiding.   The  Judge's  concerns  were  not  to  do  with
    corroborative evidence or the lack of it but to the  implausibility  of
    the Appellant's case.

21.  It was not helpful for the skeleton argument  prepared  by  Counsel  at
    first instance (who did not appear before me) to refer to the existence
    of an arrest warrant when that was not part of  the  Appellant's  case.
    Whilst I  appreciate  that  the  Appellant  cannot  be  criticised  for
    mistakes made by his representatives, it was reasonable for  the  Judge
    to highlight that there was  no  documentary  evidence  to  support  an
    arrest warrant.  Where a claim is made in a skeleton argument  a  Judge
    would be expected to deal with that claim as he did in this case.

22.  The first set of grounds of onward appeal amounted to no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the findings as Judge Ransley correctly observed. The
    second set of  grounds  of  onward  appeal  raised  a  different  issue
    altogether.  They were based on a characterisation of the determination
    as requiring corroboration.  For the reasons which I have  given  I  do
    not find that the Judge  did  require  corroboration.   The  Judge  was
    looking for evidence before arriving at his  final  conclusions.   That
    evidence which could reasonably have been expected if  the  Appellant's
    account had been a true one was not available.  The Judge was  entitled
    in those circumstances to draw an adverse inference from  the  lack  of
    evidence and to find as he did.  I do not consider there was any  error
    of law in the Judge's dismissal of the asylum appeal.

23.  There was no argument made before me in relation  to  Article  8  which
    was thoroughly dealt with by the Judge at first instance  and  which  I
    have summarised above (see paragraph 6). There was no error of  law  in
    the rejection of the Article 8 claim. I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal
against it.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order in relation to the first and second Appellants  as
there is no public policy reason for so doing.   The  two  child  Appellants
will continue to be referred to by initials only.


Signed this 29th day of February 2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal was dismissed there can be no fee award.


Signed this 29th day of February 2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

