
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/10555/2014
                                                               AA/10556/2014
                                                               AA/10558/2014
                                                               AA/10561/2014
                                                               AA/10562/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 January 2016                   |On 25 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     WH
                                     AJW
                                     WH
                                     ZA
                                     HQ
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellants:    Mr Karim, Counsel instructed by Law Lane Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. A. Broklesby Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellants. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings.

 2. The first appellant (hereinafter  "the  appellant")  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan born on 3rd September  1977.  This  appeal  arises  out  of  a
    decision of the respondent, made on  18th  November  2014,  whereby  it
    refused to grant the appellant asylum or  humanitarian  protection  and
    determined that his removal, and that of the other appellants, from the
    UK would not be in breach of Article 8 ECHR. The  second  appellant  is
    the appellant's wife and the third, fourth and fifth appellants are his
    children.

 3. The appellant entered the UK in November 2011 as  a  dependent  of  his
    wife, a Tier 4 student  with  leave  ending  on  27  October  2014.  He
    returned to Pakistan on two occasions for brief periods in 2013. On  28
    May 2014 he claimed asylum.

 4. The appellant's asylum and humanitarian claim, in sum, is that:
      a. He is a longstanding member of the political party  MQM  (Muttahida
         Quami Movement)
      b. He was previously known by a different name but changed his name to
         protect his life.
      c. He has been subject to harassment in Pakistan since 2000 because of
         his MQM involvement. In 2000 his home was raided  and  his  parents
         beaten.
      d. He moved in 2002 to Dubai to protect his life,  returning  in  2008
         because he felt it would be safe.
      e. In 2009 his children and family members were subject to threats and
         later that year he was arrested and tortured based on suspicion  of
         being an Indian Agent.  He  was  released  after  a  policeman  was
         bribed.
      f. He was arrested in 2010 and questioned  for  working  for  MQM  and
         Indian Intelligence. He escaped and was thereafter hospitalised for
         his injuries.
      g. After he came to  the  UK  there  were  raids  on  his  mother  and
         brother's house.
      h. Since coming to the UK he has been  working for the MQM

 5.  The  respondent  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  account  of   his
    experiences in  Pakistan  or  of  his  involvement  with  the  MQM  and
    concluded that there was not a reasonable degree of likelihood he would
    be persecuted on return to Pakistan.

 6. The appellants appealed  and  their  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Lucas. In a decision promulgated on 7th  October
    2015, the FtT dismissed the appellants' appeal on the basis that it did
    not consider the appellant's account credible or plausible and found it
    to have "clearly been manufactured".  The appellants' Article 8  claims
    were also dismissed.

Grounds of appeal and submissions

 7. The grounds of appeal submit:
      a. The FtT materially erred in taking factors under section 8  of  the
         Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004  as  a
         starting point, when they should be considered in the round.
      b. The FtT's credibility findings are unsustainable as  they  are  not
         based on the totality of the evidence and fail to give reasons.  In
         respect of  credibility,  the  grounds  refer  to  a  failure  make
         findings in respect of the oral  evidence  which  was  said  to  be
         consistent with what was stated at interview, and a failure to give
         due care and consideration to the circumstances of the  appellant's
         name change.
      c. The FtT erred in respect of documents by questioning  whether  they
         were genuine contrary to Tanveer Ahmed.
      d. The FtT erred in finding that the appellant  had  manufactured  his
         alias because inadequate reasons were given for  this  finding  and
         improperly described evidence from the appellant's brother  in  law
         as self serving.
      e. The FtT failed to properly assess the  sur  place  claim  and  make
         sustainable findings regarding the same.
      f. The FtT erred in respect of Article 8 ECHR by failing to  consider,
         inter alia, the best interests of the children.

 8. Before me, Mr Karim argued that the FtT failed to give reasons for  its
    credibility findings both in respect of the appellant and the documents
    in support of his claim. With regard to the documents, he  argued  that
    the FtT did not have a basis for concluding they were manufactured  and
    it had failed to apply Tanveer Ahmed. Mr Karim also submitted that  the
    FtT had  failed  to  take  into  account  clear  photographic  evidence
    substantiating the appellant's  sur  place  activities,  in  particular
    photographs of him with the MQM leader.

 9. In respect of Article 8, Mr Karim commented that  the  FtT  appears  to
    have  ignored  that  there  were  multiple  appellants.  There  is   no
    assessment  of  the  other  four  appellants,  including  three   minor
    children, and the assessment is wholly inadequate.

10. Ms Broklesby Weller's response was that the FtT gave  adequate  reasons
    for its findings on credibility. It set out  the  evidence  extensively
    before reaching its conclusion. She drew attention to several  findings
    about credibility including the appellant's failure to apply for asylum
    upon arrival, his trips to Pakistan after coming to  the  UK,  and  the
    absence of independent verification of his  MQM  membership.  Regarding
    the FtT's approach to documents, Ms Broklesby Weller  argued  that  the
    FtT found them to be of little value to the appellant's  case  even  if
    they were genuine. The credibility assessment should be  looked  at  in
    the round.

11. I advised the parties that my decision was reserved but that  I  wished
    to hear any further submissions the parties may have in respect of  the
    Article 8 claim. Mr Karim submitted that if I were to find an error  of
    law in respect of Article 8 the case should be remitted to  the  first-
    tier and that it is difficult to isolate the Article 8 claim  from  the
    asylum case. However, he highlighted that the appellant's children, the
    eldest of whom is now ten, attend school in the UK and have established
    ties. The eldest is now transitioning to secondary school and is  at  a
    critical stage where her  best  interests  are  to  continue  with  her
    education in the UK. Ms Broklesby Weller responded  that  the  children
    have been in the UK for less than seven years and their best  interests
    are to remain with their parents in a family unit.

Consideration

12. The claimant's first ground of appeal is that the FtT erred  by  taking
    section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants  etc)
    Act 2004 as a  starting  point  rather  than  considering  the  factors
    specified therein in the round. The grounds refer  to,  in  support  of
    this contention, paragraph [78] of the decision where  the  FtT  stated
    that the appellant's "immigration history and the  general  background"
    undermine the credibility of the claim.

13. There is no merit to this ground. Paragraph [78] is  referring  to  the
    multiple findings  the  FtT  made  about  the  appellant's  immigration
    history and general background including, for  example,  his  trips  to
    Pakistan whilst living in the UK even though he claimed to fear for his
    life in Pakistan, the absence  of  difficulties  he  faced  in  leaving
    Pakistan to travel to Dubai and the UK despite his alleged profile  and
    experiences in Pakistan, his claim to  have  a  second  identity  as  a
    citizen of India, and the manner in  which  he  entered  the  UK  as  a
    dependent of his wife on a student  visa.  Based  on  these  and  other
    factors the FtT reached the view that the appellant's claim was neither
    credible nor truthful.  That conclusion did not depend on undue  weight
    being given to the factors specified in Section 8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc)  Act  2004  or  these  factors
    being considered as a starting point rather than in round.

14. The second ground of appeal is a direct challenge  to  the  credibility
    findings. Mr Karim argues, inter alia, that  the  FtT  failed  to  give
    proper reasons for not believing the appellant and didn't deal properly
    with crucial parts of the evidence that showed the appellant  had  been
    consistent in his evidence.

15. It is apparent from the decision that the FtT has given several reasons
    for its findings in respect of credibility. These include:
      a. The FtT did not consider it credible  that  if,  as  the  appellant
         claimed, he originally had an  Indian  passport  and  was  born  in
         Calcutta and had obtained  a  Pakistani  passport  in  his  present
         identity in 2001, he would not have tried to  reacquire  an  Indian
         passport given the danger he claims to have faced in Pakistan.
      b. The FtT also did not accept that the appellant and a person by  the
         name of GHN  were  the  same  person.  This  is  important  to  the
         appellant's  case  as  the  documentary   evidence   he   submitted
         concerning the mistreatment he claimed to have suffered appears  to
         have in fact been perpetrated against a person by the name of  GHN.
         Having considered  the  various  permutations  to  the  appellant's
         account of his two names (including his purported attempt to change
         the names on his educational certificates to that  of  his  assumed
         identity, despite in  his  screening  interview  stating  that  the
         assumed identity was used only to save his life) the  FtT  did  not
         accept that the appellant and GHN were the same person.
      c. Despite claiming to have an important role in MQM  he  produced  no
         documentation or witness statement confirming  his  involvement  in
         the organisation. No ID card or official confirmation was provided.
         The photographs purporting to show the  appellant  engaged  in  MQM
         activity can be given little weight without any corroboration,  for
         example from someone from MQM attending the hearing.
      d. He returned voluntarily on two occasions to visit Pakistan in  2013
         which would be surprising given the degree of risk to his  life  he
         claims  to  face  in  Pakistan  including  because  of  sur   place
         activities
      e. Despite the difficulties with the authorities he claimed to face in
         2000 he obtained a visa to travel to Dubai and returned from  Dubai
         without difficulty.
      f. The FtT considered that the appellant's  account  of  changing  his
         name in educational documents after returning from Dubai undermined
         his credibility on the basis that if the authorities  already  knew
         who he was, as he claimed, why would he be seeking  to  change  the
         name on certain certificates.
      g. The appellant entered the UK as  a  dependent  of  his  wife  on  a
         student visa but did not make an asylum claim until he had been  in
         the UK for two and a half years about 6 months before his leave  to
         remain would expire.
      h. The appellant faced no difficulty applying for a visa to  join  his
         wife in the UK in 2011, which is not consistent with him having  an
         adverse profile with the authorities or  his  account  of  escaping
         from the authorities not long before then.
      i. The FtT did not accept the appellant's claim  to  be  suspected  of
         involvement with the Secret Service as the only  support  for  this
         was an alleged raid over fifteen  years  earlier  when  his  Indian
         identity documents were said to be stolen.

16. I am satisfied that the FtT was entitled, based on the evidence  before
    it and for the reasons it gave, as set out above, to conclude that  the
    appellant was not credible.  This ground of appeal amounts to  no  more
    than a disagreement with the FtT's conclusions  about  the  appellant's
    credibility and as such it does not identify an error of law.

17. The third ground is that the FtT erred in respect of its assessment  of
    the documents before it by finding them  to  be  false  without  giving
    sufficient reasons for that conclusion. Mr Karim argued that the  FtT's
    approach was inconsistent with Tanveer Ahmed. I do not  agree.  Tanveer
    Ahmed requires that decisions as to the reliance that should be  placed
    on documents should be made after looking at all the  evidence  in  the
    round.  That, however, is what the FtT has done.  It is clear that  the
    FtT has looked at the documentary and oral evidence in  the  round  and
    having done so it has made very clear findings  about  the  appellant's
    credibility, much of which does not depend on the documentary evidence.
    For example, at paragraph [81], the FtT, having expressed doubts as  to
    whether certain documents are genuine, went on to explain why  even  if
    they were genuine they would not assist the appellant.

18. The fourth argument made by Mr Karim is that the FtT erred by  treating
    emails from the appellant's  brother  in  law  as  "self  serving"  and
    failing to give them weight. If this were the FtT's only reason for not
    giving weight to the emails there might be some merit to this argument.
    However, the FtT's approach must be considered in the  context  of  its
    overall findings whereby the veracity of the  appellant's  account  has
    not been accepted for multiple reasons.

19. The fifth ground concerns the appellant's sur place  activities  -  the
    argument being that proper consideration was not given to this part  of
    the claim and that weight should have been  given  to  the  appellant's
    photographs showing him engaged in MQM activity including meetings with
    its leader. This ground is not accepted. At paragraph  [95]  and  [100]
    the FtT found that there was no official or  independent  verification,
    in the form of an ID card or otherwise, of the appellant's claimed role
    in MQM. In the absence of  such  confirmatory  evidence,  the  FtT  was
    entitled to not place weight on the appellant's photographs.

20. The final ground concerns Article  8  ECHR.  The  FtT  gave  this  only
    cursory consideration.  However,  having  heard  submissions  from  the
    parties in respect of Article 8 ECHR, I am satisfied that this is not a
    case where there the appellants can succeed under Article 8.

21. The appellant and his wife,  along  with  their  two  eldest  children,
    entered the UK in 2011 on a student visa. Whilst in the UK they  had  a
    child. The children are being educated and raised in the UK.  Mr  Karim
    highlighted that the eldest child is at a key stage in her education  -
    transitioning  to  secondary  school  -  and  that  she  has  developed
    connections and friendships in the UK.

22. None of the appellants satisfy requirements under the Immigration Rules
    that would permit them to remain in the UK and Mr Karim did  not  argue
    before me that they did. His argument was that, having  regard  to  the
    best interests of the children, removal of the appellants from  the  UK
    would not be proportionate and therefore would be in breach of  Article
    8 ECHR.

23. In considering the proportionality of this family's  removal  from  the
    UK, the best interests of the children must be a primary consideration.
     I accept that the FtT has failed to articulate  this  or  analyse  the
    interests of the children. However, had it done so it  would  not  have
    come to a different conclusion and therefore I find  that  it  has  not
    made a material error of law.

24. In considering Article 8 the starting  point  is  that  it  is  in  the
    appellant's children's best interests to  remain  with  their  parents,
    whether in the UK or elsewhere, as part of the family  unit.  It  would
    also be in their best interests to remain in the UK (so long  as  their
    parents also do so) as this will most likely result in  them  having  a
    higher standard of living and better education, as well  as  a  greater
    continuity in their education, than if they are removed from the UK. It
    would also enable them to live in the country in  which  their  parents
    desire to live. Important though these  factors  are  given  that  they
    pertain to the best  interests  of  children,  they  must  be  balanced
    against  the  public  interest  (in  particular  that  of   maintaining
    immigration control) and considered in light of  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

25. The appellant's family have been in the UK a relatively short time on a
    student visa which would not have given them any reason to believe they
    would be entitled to make a permanent home in the UK. Their family  and
    private life in the UK was established whilst in the UK  on  that  visa
    and therefore when their immigration status was precarious. The  family
    would be removed to Pakistan as a family unit.  Although  the  children
    have spent much (or  in  one  case  all)  of  their  lives  outside  of
    Pakistan, and have benefited from an education in the UK,  no  evidence
    was put before me which would lead me to the conclusion that they would
    have particular difficulty integrating into life in Pakistan.

26. This is a case where the balancing  exercise  under  Article  8  weighs
    firmly in favour of the family, as a unit, being removed  to  Pakistan.
    Although the best interests of the children  would  be  served  by  the
    family remaining in the UK, it would not be unreasonable  for  them  to
    leave the UK with their parents. Their interest in remaining in the  UK
    is  significantly  outweighed  by  the  public  interest  in  effective
    immigration control.

Decision
      a. The appeal is dismissed.
      b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of a material error of law and shall stand.
      c. No anonymity order is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 22 January 2016               |

