
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10962/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 August 2016                    |On 29 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Clark, instructed by Broudie Jackson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Egypt  who  appealed,  with  permission,
    against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,   which   in   a
    determination promulgated  on  13  March  2015,  dismissed  the  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision  of  21st  November  2014  to
    refuse his claim for asylum, humanitarian protection and protection  of
    his  human  rights  and  giving  removal  directions.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal decision was challenged and came before Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Reeds who found a material error of law  and  set  aside  the  decision
    without preserving any findings of fact.

 2. The matter came before me following a  transfer  order  for  a  resumed
    hearing.

 3. The appellant claimed to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 28 March
    2013 and claimed asylum on 30 April 2013.  The core of the  appellant's
    claim is that he is a Coptic Christian who had experienced  persecution
    because of his religion in his home area and upon relocation claimed to
    have been pursued by  non-state  agents  owing  to  his  religion.  The
    threats he had claimed had occurred were threats received by  telephone
    and this resulted in him having  to  relocate  on  numerous  occasions.
    Prior to  his  entry  to  the  United  Kingdom  he  made  a  series  of
    applications to enter the UK.   Three  applications  being  made  as  a
    student visitor in 2011 and a further application in 2012 as a  student
    and as a visitor in 2013. It was as a result of the last visa issued on
    26 February 2013 for a visit, that he entered the United Kingdom.

Documentation

 4. In accordance with the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
    Rules 2014 the following documents were annexed:

         Screening interview dated 10th May 2013

         Asylum Interview record dated 28th May 2013

         CRS record and web visa applications (15th June 2011, 21  September
         2011, 28th December 2011, 2nd August 2012, 21st February 2013)

         Bundle of documents and background evidence  submitted  during  the
         asylum interview

         Appeal bundle of documents submitted by appellant's representatives
         including witness statement  dated  3rd  July  2013,  statement  of
         Michael S dated 5th July 2013, email from Father J S dated 29th May
         2013,  copies  of  photographs,  prescriptions  from  Egypt,  phone
         contracts and translations, ID card for J E, S A,  letter  from  St
         Michaels Church, bundle of  objective  evidence  regarding  general
         country information

         Second appeal bundle submitted 1-31 including medical  letter  from
         GP dated 4th April 2013,

         Letter from representatives dated 18th March 2014  with  bundle  of
         objective evidence

 5. The appellant's representatives submitted documentation in the form  of
    indexed bundles 1 - 3.  These included two witness statements from  the
    appellant dated 19th January  2015  and  20th  July  2016.   A  witness
    statement from Dr M S, his uncle dated 19th January 2015, a psychiatric
    report from a Dr Tobani consultant  psychiatrist  dated  10th  February
    2015, a psychiatric report from Dr Chandra Ghosh dated 25 July 2016 and
    extensive country background information.

The appellant's claim

 6. The appellant is an Egyptian national  born  on  4th  August  1990  and
    claims he was a former resident  of  Abokorkas.   He  states  that  the
    majority of his immediate family are Coptic Christians and remained  in
    Egypt but he now lived in the United Kingdom with his uncle Dr  Michael
    S, an orthodpaedic specialist doctor.

 7. The appellant asserts that as he and his parents are Coptic  Christians
    who were now living in a church to which he could  not  go,  he  feared
    returning to Egypt.  On 17th April 2011 the Salafists, under the belief
    that the people of his village had killed two of their people, began to
    raid and loot the houses in the village. They took over houses  in  the
    village as well as his village land and houses were burnt.   The  names
    on land deeds were changed and thus their opponents sequestrated  their
    land.  The appellant was threatened, being told that he must convert to
    Islam or he would be killed.  (AIR question 54-55, 96-97  and  99-101).
    On 18 April 2011 he left his village to live with people in  Cairo  who
    were aware of his situation.  At a later stage he briefly  returned  to
    is village to see if his passport had been delivered.

 8. Whilst in Cairo he received threats on his mobile phone and  the  first
    of these threats occurred in the beginning of May  2011  and  the  last
    being on 27 February 2013.  During that time he  changed  location  and
    mobile number eleven times but each time the salafists managed to  find
    his number and locate him.  He secured a job with a computer company on
    1st September 2012 and he was sent text messages such as  "M,  we  know
    that you are living in Der Al Moharra and this is the last  chance  for
    you.  Are you converting to Islam or ...?"  He stated that each time it
    would take people about ten days to find his new number.  Each time  he
    changed his number he believed he was traced because he had to  provide
    his name and ID every time he got a new mobile.

 9. His father was forced to retire early by the  Salafists  through  their
    various accusations. In the end his father decided to retire  in  order
    to keep his honour. (AIR Question  131-132).   The  appellant  believed
    that he would not be able to relocate as the salafists would still find
    him.

The respondent's case

10. The Secretary of State accepted, after detailed questioning,  that  the
    appellant was a Coptic Christian.  Further, Dr M S, as  well  as  being
    his uncle, was a deacon in the Coptic church where he worshipped in  L,
    Wales. The email from Father J S of the same church confirmed that  the
    family were known to be very religious.

11. The respondent noted the appellant's claim that he  had  to  leave  his
    village on 18th April 2011 because  of  the  events  described  in  his
    interview and in the background information namely the targeted attacks
    against Coptic Christians and also  accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    submitted a CD which contained footage of  the  attacks  in  El   Minya
    Governorate  and  it  ws  accepted  the  attacks  took  place.  It  was
    concluded, however, that his claim that he had to leave and his  family
    had to leave Abokorkas remained unsubstantiated.

12. The appellant had, in Cairo, secured a job with the Sotir Company as  a
    computer  programmer.   He  was  employed.   He  claimed   to   receive
    threatening telephone messages and he was asked  why  he  continued  to
    purchase new mobile phones, his response was that he needed to  have  a
    mobile phone to stay in contact with his family. He was  questioned  as
    to why he bought a mobile phone  in  his  own  name,  exposing  him  to
    further danger and although he had submitted copies of phone  contracts
    and translations that related to his claim for changing his number they
    were considered in line with Tanveer  Ahmed IAT 2002 UKIAT  00439.   It
    was not accepted that the documents regarding his phone had  a  bearing
    on  his claims to receive threats. It was suggested that he should  use
    a mobile phone belonging to a friend or obtain a Sim card on the  black
    market.

13. His claim in his witness statement that his job was not  a  proper  job
    but created to allow him to gain experience and help bolster  his  visa
    claim was not accepted. He would still have had the knowledge of  being
    able to use other methods of communication such as skype.   He  was  an
    educated and technically able individual.  His explanation that he kept
    a phone to keep in contact with his family was not accepted in view  of
    the risk taking versus the threats from the  Salafists.   It  was  also
    considered to be a  discrepancy  between  his  asylum  interview,  when
    claiming that he dared not get another mobile phone after a UK visa was
    issued, compared with his witness statement where he  stated  that  the
    reason he did not get another phone was because he knew he was  leaving
    the country.

14. Further, he returned to the village of  Aborkorkas  on  five  different
    occasions, albeit that he took precautions such as arriving early (3am)
    in the morning (AIR 61-63).

15. He  claimed  to  be  suffering  from  mental  health  problems  (severe
    depression) but the documentation supplied was a letter from a GP not a
    medico-legal report.  These documents were not  relied  on  further  to
    Tanver Ahmed.

16. It was concluded that the Section 8 Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment
    of Claimants etc) Act 2004 was engaged.  The appellant did not make  an
    asylum claim before being granted leave to enter on the  basis  of  his
    visit visa and failed to make an asylum claim before being notified  of
    the immigration decision.

17. It was also submitted that there would be adequacy of  protection  from
    the Egyptian authorities and failing that he could internally  relocate
    as he had  not  identified  any  factors  that  led  to  him  being  an
    individual at risk. It was  considered  neither  he  nor  his  extended
    family had a sufficiently high  profile  within  the  Coptic  Christian
    community which would result in him  being  an  individual  of  adverse
    interest to the Salafist Muslims. His claim ws considered in line  with
    the country guidance case law of MS (Coptic Christians) Egypt CG [2013]
    UKUT 611 (IAC).

18. It was concluded he was an adult male who was able to relocate and  had
    experience of work and there were no barriers to him relocating. Coptic
    Christians were generally able to practice their religion and  although
    there had been many reports of violent incidents these  were  monitored
    and fell short of establishing that millions of  Coptic  Christians  in
    Egypt faced a real risk of violent  attack  amounting  to  persecution.
    There is a general freedom of movement within Egypt.  He was  generally
    fit and healthy and he would be able to live a relatively  normal  life
    should he relocate to any major urban centre.

The hearing

19. At  the  hearing  before  me  the  appellant  attended  and  gave  oral
    testimony. His uncle did not give oral testimony and that  Miss  Clarke
    submitted was because he had previously given such  testimony  and  any
    information he would give would be challenged by the Secretary of State
    as merely hearsay. The uncle had tendered a statement.

20. The appellant was asked under cross-examination as to the  size  of  El
    Minya but he did not know how large it was or how  many  mosques  there
    were.   He thought there were possibly ten churches. He confirmed  that
    there was a hospital but he did not know the  number  of  schools.   He
    confirmed that he was a  graduate  and  studied  computer  studies  but
    stated that he did not work but the job was created for him. He did not
    have any work since he graduated. He lived in Cairo after the  incident
    between 2011 and 2013 and the church located at places for him to  live
    and he moved from time to time. the church  supported  him  financially
    and he ws living in secret. his parents were not living  with  him.  At
    first when he went to Cairo he lived with his brother  and  sister  but
    subsequently his parents and sister went to the church but he could not
    go to the church because he was told that it would not  be  appropriate
    and he would attract attention.   He was a young man and had to  leave.
    He had no fixed address in Cairo. He was asked why he could not live in
    a monastery and he stated it was not possible because  he  would  cause
    problems. The exact problem was because of the large incident.  He  had
    to been physically harmed but he was afraid it was going to happen.

21. He confirmed he made visit visa applications because he was  trying  to
    leave in any possible way.  His parents would like to escape  but  they
    could not. His brother had been in the army for three  and  a  half  to
    four and a half years and  the  appellant  came  to  the  UK  with  the
    assistance of his uncle and he still lived with him in Wales.

22. He confirmed that when he was living at home  he  made  trips  to  home
    approximately five times to obtain his posts.  This  was  approximately
    300 Km away and someone at the church who had a  car  had  helped  him.
    The house was locked up when he ws going round.

23. The appellant under re-examination confirmed he did  not  know  whether
    there were young men in the monastery but then stated he did visit  the
    monastery.   At this point Miss Clarke was  stopped  from  reading  out
    sections of his statement to him.

24. I asked him why the appellant was targeted rather than his brother  and
    he stated because his brother had gone to the army and inside the  army
    he was safe.

Conclusions

25. The respondent has accepted in this matter  that  the  appellant  is  a
    Coptic Christian and also  accepted  the  background  information  that
    there were attacks on the Coptic Christian in  the  area  of  El  Minya
    which is the location of the appellant's home village of Abokorkas.  It
    would also appear that the respondent has accepted that the appellant's
    uncle is a  deacon  in  the  Coptic  Church  and  the  claim  that  the
    appellant's father, who is the brother of Dr S, was the head deacon  of
    St Mary's and St George's Church in  Abokorkas  village  in  El  Minya,
    Egypt. This is because although Dr Michael S did not attend court there
    was no specific challenge to the witness statement tendered by him  and
    thus I place some weight on the assertion that both he and his brother,
    the appellant's father, were  deacons  and  prominent  figures  in  the
    Coptic church and specifically the  appellant's  father  was  the  head
    deacon of the church in Abokorkas in El Minia. The email from Father JS
    of the same church  as  the  uncle  confirmed  that  this  was  a  very
    religious family and that the appellant had attended church services at
    the church in Wales.

26. At the outset it is also clear that the  Secretary  of  State  accepted
    that  there  were  attacks  against  Coptic  Christians  in  El   Minya
    Governorate  in  April  2011  and  that  the  appellant  has   provided
    background evidence of these incidents and had supplied a CD  which  he
    claimed contained video footage of the attacks. The background material
    specifically refers to a curfew having been placed on Abokorkas after a
    dispute between Coptic Christians and Muslims and following the dispute
    'Christians lived in terror' as recorded  inter  alia  in  the  article
    'Collective Punishment of Egyptian Christians for Death of Two Muslims'
    April 2011. All the visa applications made  by  the  appellant  confirm
    that he came from Abokorkas.

27. I have also taken into account the medical evidence submitted on behalf
    of the appellant.  At  this  stage  I  make  clear  that  I  apply  the
    Presidential Guidelines on Vulnerable  Witnesses  because  the  medical
    reports, which I accept, all identify that the appellant  is  suffering
    from mental health problems.  The GP states that he is  suffering  with
    severe depression.  Despite this not being a  medico  legal  report  as
    noted by the Secretary of State I do place weight on this  report.  The
    report of Dr Tabani which I address below and the report  of  Dr  Ghosh
    identified post  traumatic  stress  disorder.  Both  reports  are  from
    qualified  professional  medical  practitioners.  That  the   appellant
    suffers from depression, anxiety and anorexia was also confirmed by the
    uncle who is a medical practitioner. These reports must also  be  taken
    in the round when assessing evidence both with regards  the  indication
    of difficult events and with regards  his  evidence  and  discrepancies
    therein.   I assess the evidence in the light of  these  reports.  That
    said, I  find  the  appellant's  account  to  be  detailed,  internally
    consistent and consistent with the background and documentary evidence.



28. The report of Dr Tabani who was  a  consultant  psychiatrist  in  adult
    psychiatry in Merseycare NHS Trust  from  2002  to  date  assessed  the
    appellant as  having  post  traumatic  stress  disorder  and  secondary
    depressive illness following a severely traumatic incident in Egypt  in
    April 2011.  Dr Tabani described the appellant  had  himself  described
    times in Egypt prior to coming to the UK when he had thought of suicide
    and wanted to end it all.  Specifically when describing his psychiatric
    history, albeit that the doctor was informed by the  appellant  himself
    as to his account, the doctor describes  that  the  appellant  "started
    crying to be with his family". I do note that Dr Tabani  did  not  have
    access or appear to have access to the background information  but  the
    report dated 25th July 2016,  from  Dr  Ghosh,  a  Consultant  Forensic
    Psychiatrist,  confirmed that she had sight of the Reasons for  Refusal
    Letter, asylum interview  and  screening  interview  record.   She  too
    identified that the appellant had been exposed to a considerable amount
    of trauma whilst he was in Egypt particularly when he was on  the  run.
    She considered that he remains at risk in  terms  of  his  suicide  and
    confirmed  "I  am  aware  that  he  is  receiving  medication  for  his
    depression.  He needs to address the symptoms  of  his  post  traumatic
    stress disorder as well as the symptoms of loss. He is suffering from a
    quite severe sense of loss and bereavement because  of  the  separation
    from his parents and his siblings.  I place weight on the fact that the
    appellant suffers with a mental health difficulties,  but  also  it  is
    noted that he wished to be with his parents as recorded by  Dr  Tabani.
    This lends credence to his claim of  fear  of  the  Salafists  and  his
    inability to return to Egypt.

29. I am guided by MS (Coptic Christians) Egypt CG [2013]  UKUT  611  (IAC)
    and I set out the head note in full

          1. 'Notwithstanding that there is inadequate state protection  of
             Coptic Christians in Egypt, they are not at a general risk  of
             persecution or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3, ECHR.

          2. However, on current evidence there are some areas where Coptic
             Christians will face  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  ill-
             treatment contrary to Article 3. In general these will be  (a)
             areas outside the large cities; (b)  where  radical  Islamists
             have a strong foothold; and (c) there have been recent attacks
             on  Coptic  Christians  or  their  churches,   businesses   or
             properties.

          3. On the evidence before the Upper Tribunal, the  following  are
             particular risk categories in the  sense  that  those  falling
             within them will generally be able to  show  a  real  risk  of
             persecution or treatment contrary to Article 3,  at  least  in
             their home area:

               i) converts to Coptic Christianity;

              ii)   persons   who   are   involved   in   construction    or
                  reconstruction/repair  of  churches  that  have  been  the
                  target for an attack or attacks;

             iii) those accused of proselytising  where  the  accusation  is
                  serious and not casual;

              iv) those accused of being physically or emotionally  involved
                  with  a  Muslim  woman,  where  the  accusation  is   made
                  seriously and not casually.

          4. Coptic Christian women in Egypt are not  in  general  at  real
             risk of  persecution  or  ill-treatment,  although  they  face
             difficulties  additional  to  other  women,  in  the  form  of
             sometimes being the target of disappearances, forced abduction
             and forced conversion.

          5. However, depending on  the  particular  circumstances  of  the
             case, Coptic Christian women in Egypt aged between 14-25 years
             who lack a male protector, may be at such risk.

          6. If a claimant is able to establish that  in  their  home  area
             they fall within one or more of the risk categories identified
             in 3 (i)-(iv) above or that they come from an area  where  the
             local Coptic population faces a real risk of  persecution,  it
             will not necessarily follow that they qualify as  refugees  or
             as beneficiaries of subsidiary protection or  Article  3  ECHR
             protection. That will depend on whether  they  can  show  they
             would not have a viable internal  relocation  alternative.  In
             such cases there will be need for a  fact-specific  assessment
             but, in general terms, resettlement in an area where Islamists
             are not strong would appear to be a viable option.

          7. None of the above necessarily precludes a Coptic Christian  in
             Egypt from being able to establish a real risk of  persecution
             or ill-treatment in  the  particular  circumstances  of  their
             case, e.g. if such  an  individual  has  been  the  target  of
             attacks because he or she is a Coptic Christian'.

30. I take heed of the fact that Coptic Christians are  not  at  a  general
    risk of persecution although  the  last  point  within  the  head  note
    identifies that each case must be assessed as being fact  specific.   I
    accept that the appellant comes from a very religious  family.   Father
    JS confirms that in his email and the uncle of the appellant who is the
    brother of the appellant's father, himself holds a role  as  deacon  in
    the Coptic Christian Church and similarly identifies the religious role
    undertaken by the appellant's father.  This to my mind would raise  the
    profile of the appellant.

31. The appellant was criticised by the Secretary of State for  failing  to
    claim asylum before being granted leave to enter of the  basis  of  his
    visa and  before  being  notified  of  an  immigration  decision.   The
    appellant however explained that he was desperate to  leave  Egypt  and
    made applications on that basis.  In the  particular  circumstances  of
    this case that is an explanation.  In view of his mental  health  I  do
    not find that surprising and do not take this  point  against  him.  JT
    Cameroon v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 878 confirms that it is the duty of the
    judicial decision maker in every instance to reach his  own  conclusion
    upon the credibility of the claimant.  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004 should be  taken  only  as
    part of a global assessment of credibility and  this  is  what  I  have
    done.   He  asserts  that  his  uncle  assisted  him  with   his   visa
    applications and although this  may  not  reflect  well  on  the  uncle
    clearly the uncle  had  particular  concerns  for  this  appellant  his
    nephew.

32. He entered the UK on 28th March 2013  and  claimed  asylum,  relatively
    shortly afterwards, on 30th April 2013 and described in  his  screening
    interview and at a first  opportunity  that  there  had  been  fighting
    between his family and the Salafists on 16th April 2011  and  that  his
    cousin's home had been  fired.  He  also  described  in  his  screening
    interview that he was threatened either  to  convert  to  Islam  or  be
    killed'. S/I 4.2.  The appellant has been consistent  with  this  claim
    since his arrival. I find it credible that he would have been  attacked
    and threatened in his local area.

33. He explained in his oral evidence that he had moved to Cairo to be away
    from the attackers in his local area.  He explained  that  his  father,
    who would appear to be a deacon, and his mother and sister were offered
    the protection of the church but as a young man he could  not  stay  in
    the church.  His brother  had  gone  into  the  army  and  had  secured
    protection in that manner. I questioned how it  was  that  his  brother
    would be safe and not the appellant but note there was  no  information
    on the brother's circumstances or particular religious  leanings.   The
    appellant did explain that service in the army  was  compulsory.  There
    was evidence that the appellant was a practising Coptic  Christian.   I
    accept therefore that the  appellant  may  be  distinguished  from  his
    brother.

34. In support of his claim to have been targeted  the  appellant  produced
    video evidence of the attacks in the  governorate  of  El  Minya  which
    demonstrated the violent attacks on Coptic Christians in that area. His
    uncle whose evidence was not challenged confirmed the  attacks  on  the
    family's village.  I accept that  the  appellant  would  be  unable  to
    return there and explained his return  as  being  possible  because  it
    occurred on a handful occasions at the dead of night.

35. The appellant claims to  have  relocated  on  numerous  occasions.   He
    produced numerous telephone contracts to show that he had been targeted
    by the Salafists.  He explained in his oral hearing  that  it  was  the
    church which set him up with 'safe houses' and yet he  was  continually
    tracked by Salafists.  The Secretary of State  resisted  his  telephone
    contract documentation as supporting his claim and argued  it  was  not
    believable that he would give his own real name,  that as  an  educated
    person he should have had the technical 'know how'  to  use  skype  and
    further he could have obtained a sim card  on  the  black  market.  The
    latter is a somewhat surprising suggestion from the Secretary of  State
    but the appellant explained that in order  to  obtain  a  mobile  phone
    anyone needed to provide identity documents for  security  purposes  as
    the phone company was state owned  and  a  black  market  sim  card  is
    prevented by the insertion of security questions and measures.  This  I
    find credible.   The appellant also explained that he needed to have  a
    phone because he wanted to contact his parents. That is also  credible.
    It is clear that the appellant is indeed,  as  can  be  seen  from  the
    doctor's report that he is very attached to his  family  and  that  his
    motivation would appear to be genuine.  I am not persuaded  that  there
    is a discrepancy between his explanation in his asylum interview, being
    that he did not dare get another phone and also that he knew  after  he
    obtained his visa that shortly he  would  leave.   The  appellant  also
    explained that his was given a type  of  part-time  (witness  statement
    [17]) internship at the computer company to enhance his employment  and
    visa prospects rather than a proper job. Indeed the  visa  applications
    save for the last referred  to  the  appellant  being  unemployed.  The
    appellant was moving about and even to use skype would  still  need  to
    have some form of contract to operate the connection.

36. I accept that the telephone call approaches would be a frightening  for
    the appellant and although the calls in  themselves  may  not  indicate
    real risk of harm the appellant noted that the callers, who insisted on
    his conversion, identified his whereabouts. This is  an  appellant  who
    has always been a Coptic Christian, comes from a very religious  family
    whose father has a prominent role in his home church and whose  family,
    against the background material and the specific material of  Dr  S  is
    likely to have been attacked. I accept the  appellant's  evidence.  The
    appellant could give consistent and detailed  accounts  of  his  faith,
    general attacks on Coptic Christians in Egypt (AIR 53) and the  attacks
    the village had experienced (AIR 55- 59).   The  appellant  was  candid
    about his return as alluded to above.  He explained both in his  asylum
    interview q67 and in his oral evidence  that  'whenever  they  know  my
    place we used to just move somewhere else.  So  I  was  obliged  to  go
    somewhere else, live somewhere else'.  He confirmed that this  occurred
    until just before his departure.  The appellant specifically  explained
    that those threatening him knew specifically where he lived  (AIR  80).
    He stated that he moved eleven times. (AIR  80).   The  appellant  also
    explained that it was relatively  easy  for  the  Salafists  to  obtain
    mobile phone addresses.

37.  The  appellant  was  consistent  in  his  asylum  interview  that  his
    depression occurred after his village had been attacked and his move to
    Cairo.  His description is consistent with the medical reports.  I  did
    not find any major inconsistencies in the appellant's  account  between
    his interviews, his statements, his oral evidence or indeed that of his
    uncle. He was consistent with his account that his  father  and  mother
    were staying in the monastery at Moharra and were old and would not  be
    attacked. This chimed with his earlier statement that the  young  males
    were more likely to be attacked.  The appellant was also  adamant  that
    his father had been unable to return to work as a  head  teacher  after
    April 2011. The degree of likelihood of persecution needed to establish
    an entitlement to asylum is decided on a basis  lower  than  the  civil
    standard of the balance of probabilities.  This has been expressed as a
    "reasonable chance", "a serious possibility"  or  "substantial  grounds
    for thinking" in the various authorities.  That  basis  of  probability
    not only applies to the history of the matter and to the  situation  at
    the date of decision, but also to the question of  persecution  in  the
    future if the appellant were to be returned.  I accept that his  family
    had left their place of residence owing to the events that occurred  in
    their vicinity and accept that  on  the  standard  of  proof  which  is
    applicable, the  appellant,  as  a  Coptic  Christian,  may  have  been
    targeted by Salafists in his home village and  following  that  outside
    it.

38. In the light of the medical evidence which all points to the  appellant
    having experienced previous trauma, and even if that were not accepted,
    that he had severe mental  health  difficulties  which  would  severely
    hinder his ability to relocate. I accept,  from  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant and the uncle's statement, that the appellant has been unable
    to remain with his family and would have to establish home alone  as  a
    vulnerable person when he  had  according  to  his  evidence,  which  I
    accept, been forced to relocate for two years prior to his  arrival  in
    the United Kingdom. It was asserted by the Secretary of State that  the
    anxiety stemmed from a clear desire to be in the United  Kingdom.   The
    medical evidence points to the reverse and to the appellant's closeness
    to his immediate family.

39. This claim must be  set  against  the  wealth  of  background  material
    provided by the appellant of the recurrent attacks on Coptic Christians
    in Egypt.  The reports are numerous as to  the  violence  inflicted  on
    Coptic Christians.  The Secretary of State in her reasons  for  refusal
    letter advances that the appellant had failed to demonstrate  that  the
    authorities in Egypt would be unable or unwilling to  offer  protection
    but the country guidance, which is still good law, itself confirms that
    there is an inadequacy of protection.   At paragraph 87 of the  Refusal
    letter it is recorded that 'in view of the evidence  that  there  is  a
    climate of impunity with regard to crimes against Christians in  Egypt'
    ...'it is accepted that Coptic Christians may reasonably  be  unwilling
    or unable to seek protection from the Egyptian authorities'.

40.  It  was  noted  in  the  Refusal  letter,  however,  that  the  Muslim
    Brotherhood were no longer in power. As the appellant stated throughout
    his life he had faced discrimination  and  abuse  in  Egypt.  That  the
    Muslim brotherhood is no longer in power does not alter  the  fact,  as
    the appellant explained, that Muslim extremists are  active  throughout
    Egypt.  The background material contained  articles  such  as  'Egypt's
    Christians  target  of  Islamist  anger  in  wake  of  Morsi's  ouster'
    highlighting that 'Egypt's Muslim extremists angry over the  ouster  of
    Mohammed Morsi from the presidency  have  zeroed  in  on  the  nation's
    Christian minority, scapegoating them even though the  Islamist  leaser
    was widely unpopular', Fox News 2013.  The background material contains
    articles dated from 2011 almost on a monthly basis showing the violence
    against Christians in Egypt.  The Human Rights Watch Report dated  2015
    identified that  attacks  on  churches  and  properties  of  Christians
    continued in 2014 and in many cases authorities  failed  to  intervene.
    Paragraph 115 of MS identified that in the period when President  Morsi
    was in power from June 2012  to  July  2013  there  were  virtually  no
    incidents of active state persecution' but  the  'pattern  during  this
    period was one of state complicity in (or state inaction  in  the  face
    of) non-state actor attacks or actions.  The same is true of the period
    since the ousting of Morsi to the present'.

41. The suggestion was that the appellant relocate to an area outside Egypt
    but once again the Secretary of State accepted at paragraph 101 of  her
    refusal letter that Coptic Christians face a situation  of  generalised
    societal discrimination. I appreciate that this  does  not  necessarily
    equate with persecution.  However, it was advanced that  although  they
    are generally able to practice their religion, it was 'noted that there
    have been many reports of violent incidents against Coptic Christians'.
     Owing to the background of the appellant, as described above  and  his
    fragile mental health and his faith which he would no doubt practise on
    return I am not persuaded that he is a generally fit and health or that
    he had worked (outside of the army - though he states he has not worked
    since his graduation in 2011) and that he  would  be  able  to  live  a
    relatively normal life, should he relocate without family support to an
    area suggested outside his home and to which he cannot return.  I  find
    that it would be  unduly  harsh  when  considering  his  mental  health
    difficulties  and  that  his  family  are  themselves  protected  in  a
    monastery to expect him to relocate elsewhere, Januzi  [2006]  UKHL  5.
    The appellant was clear, detailed and consistent in his claim that  his
    family has sought protection in a monastery and I accept that he  would
    be unable to join them.

42. I also accept that the appellant's profile may well be raised owing  to
    his father being previously head deacon of the St Mary  and  St  George
    church in Abokorkas as confirmed by his uncle a specialist  NHS  doctor
    in the United Kingdom.  MS identified  at  paragraph  137  that  Coptic
    Christians did not face risk in the large  cities  but  potentially  in
    areas outside them. Although specific risk categories were not  defined
    the panel referred to the evidence of Mr Marshall who identified  those
    working visibly in  the  community  as  being  at  risk.   I  find  the
    appellant may well have a raised profile by virtue of his father's role
    both as teacher and as head deacon in the  Coptic  Church  in  Abokokas
    with which the appellant may be associated.

43. Finally, the appellant has explained and I accept that  he  has  tried,
    within the large city of Cairo, to relocate but unsuccessfully.

44. I therefore allow the appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds  and
    under the Immigration Rules.


Signed                                  Date 1st September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because of the late submission of medical reports by the appellant.


Signed                                  Date 1st September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
