
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10790/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 27 May 2015                                |On 18 June 2015              |
|Prepared 27 May 2015                          |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     VP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Pinder, Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon
                    Solicitors (Merton Road)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Sri Lanka, date of birth 23 November  19876
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision  dated  24  November
    2014 to make removal directions pursuant to the provision of section 10
    of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, a form 1A15A having been served
    on the same date and an asylum/human rights based claim refused.

3.   The basis of the claim as shortly set out in the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter dated 20 November 2014 was that further circumstances had arisen
    such that there was a new risk posed to the Claimant by reason of  past
    matters arising in relation to his presence in Sri Lanka and  since  he
    had left.

4.   The Claimant had originally made a claim based upon risks posed to  him
    because his identity had been used by one of his younger  brothers  and
    who had been involved with the LTTE and thus he was perceived  to  have
    been involved with the LTTE and it followed at risk from the Sri Lankan
    security forces.  That claim came before First-tier Tribunal Judge N  K
    Lawrence who, in March 2005, concluded that first  the  judge  did  not
    accept the Claimant's credibility or claim to have joined the LTTE, his
    brother having joined the  LTTE  using  the  Claimant's  details,  and,
    secondly, he did not find the Appellant had established that he was  of
    any interest to them and thus there was no real risk of a breach either
    under the Refugee Convention  of  persecution  or  of  proscribed  ill-
    treatment contrary to Article 3 of  the European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

5.   Following that failed claim, the Claimant  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  in
    2007 but ultimately returned to the United Kingdom claiming that he had
    been the object of adverse attention associated with  the  authorities'
    belief in his having active involvement or connection with securing the
    release of two, arguably LTTE, cousins leading to his detention and ill-
    treatment.  The Claimant claimed that the torture and ill-treatment  he
    had received was evidenced by medical evidence and a psychiatric report
    and what was essentially argued was that this was  a  wholly  different
    claim and therefore in the light of the case of Devaseelan [2004] UKIAT
    282 the previous decision should not be held against him and  that  his
    evidence was credible and to  be  accepted  in  relation  to  the  more
    latterly arising events.

6.   That claim came before First-tier Tribunal Judge J Bartlett who, on  16
    March 2015, allowed the appeal  on  Refugee  Convention  grounds.   The
    Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision which  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on 13 April 2015.

7.   Before me Mr  Avery  has  argued  that  the  judge  essentially  failed
    properly to deal with and reason in  his  decision  with  the  previous
    adverse decision by Judge Lawrence. For Judge Bartlett  had  failed  to
    make reference to the earlier hearing and  the  relevance,  whether  he
    discounted it or  not,  of  the  adverse  findings  on  the  Claimant's
    credibility.  Mr Avery argued that the judge did not  have  to  resolve
    differences  between  the  two  accounts  but  at  least  explain   the
    differences that had arisen. Rather what the judge needed to do was  to
    take them into account and disclose at  least  some  reasoning  why  he
    considered the later arising events put the earlier adverse credibility
    findings to one side in the assessment he made of the claim to  sustain
    the conclusion that the Appellant was at risk of  persecution  contrary
    to the Refugee Convention.

8.   Mr Avery's second point was that the judge's analysis  of  the  medical
    evidence was essentially confused or unreasoned. In  the  circumstances
    the judge had not properly weighed the evidence in the round to  assess
    the relevance  of  the  medical  evidence  provided  in  assessing  the
    credibility of the Claimant or the likelihood that he was  at  risk  of
    proscribed ill-treatment on return to Sri Lanka.

9.   Similarly, it followed, the Secretary  of  State  did  not  accept  the
    judge's conclusions in relation to Article 3 of the ECHR.

10.  In response Miss Pinder provided me with a Rule 24 response, which  had
    been settled by Miss A Walker of Counsel in April  2015.   Miss  Pinder
    helpfully advanced with brevity nonetheless similar arguments as to why
    the judge's decision should stand.

11.  It is trite law that the parties to such  litigation  are  entitled  to
    reasons which are adequate in  law  and  sufficient  on  the  facts  to
    justify the decision made.  In this case I am persuaded that the  judge
    did not properly reason the conclusion he reached on the outcome of the
    case  with  reference  to  the  earlier  adverse  decision;  where  the
    Claimant's credibility was significantly challenged. It seemed  to  me,
    whilst it was  not determinative, the judge needed to  address why  the
    Claimant who had previously pursued an unmeritorious claim to an appeal
    should be treated as credible in respect of a later account.   This  is
    not to say with sufficient reasons a judge would  not  be  entitled  to
    reach that view. Absent of analysis of any kind, it was  very  hard  to
    infer that the decision would nonetheless have been the  same,  if  the
    judge had taken those matters into account, on the reasoning  that  was
    given.

12.  It follows that the decision with its reasons set out at paragraphs  18
    to 24 does not adequately explain why the judge found the  Claimant  to
    be credible in respect of his current account of  events  arising  from
    2007 and onwards gave rise to a real risk on  return.   The  judge  may
    well have been right but  I  cannot  second  guess  why  he  found  the
    Claimant  credible.  Absent  of  proper  reasoning   to   explain   the
    differences in terms of the assessment as between  the  earlier  events
    and the later events, was I find a material error of law.  The original
    Tribunal decision cannot stand.

13.  In relation to the medical evidence, that of itself must of  course  in
    the light of Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367 be an assessment that is  made
    on the evidence in the round as a whole. The  criticisms  are  made  of
    that evidence, the weight to those criticisms and the extent  to  which
    it undermined the credibility of the claimed cause of the injuries,  it
    is said by the Sri Lankan authorities, was primarily a matter  for  the
    judge.  It seemed to me that the judge having accepted  the  Claimant's
    account of the later events inevitably accepted medical evidence  which
    could be properly explained to different causes or   as  to  when  they
    arose, which are not related to the Sri Lankan  forces  or  the  events
    claimed.  It seems to me therefore that by itself the appeal could  not
    be sustained simply on the medical evidence and that  the  matter  will
    have to be looked at its totality again.

14.  Accordingly the Original Tribunal's  decision  is  set  aside  and  the
    matter will have to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

    (1)  Relist in the First-tier Tribunal before a judge other than Judges
         J Bartlett and N M K Lawrence, and T B Davey.

    (2)  Time estimate 3 hours

    (3)  Tamil interpreter

    (4)  Any further documentation in support of the hearing to remake  the
         decision to be served not later than 10  working  days  before  the
         date of further hearing.

    (5)  If the Claimant intends to call  witnesses  then  notice  of  them
         should be given to the  Secretary  of  State's  together  with  any
         information concerning their immigration status, nationality and so
         forth.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the extent it is  remitted  to  be  remade  in  the
First-tier Tribunal (IAC).

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

The anonymity order made on 16 March 2015 should be continued.



Signed   Date 10 June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

