
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/10526/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th February 2016                         |On 15th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                     RSH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Reynolds, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  born  on  [  ]  1978.   The
    Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  21st  November  2014  as  a
    dependent partner of a Tier 4 Student Migrant.  On 7th January 2015 the
    Appellant issued divorce  proceedings  and  on  21st  January  2015  he
    claimed asylum.  His claim for asylum is based upon his  fear  that  if
    returned to Sri Lanka he would face mistreatment due to his  sexuality.
    The Appellant's claim is consequently based  on  his  membership  of  a
    particular social group as a gay man.  That application was refused  by
    the Secretary of State in a Notice of Refusal dated 10th July 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal O'Garro sitting at Hatton Cross on  24th  November  2015.
    In a decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  26th  November  2015  the
    Appellant's appeal was allowed on both asylum and human rights  grounds
    and the  Appellant  was  consequently  found  not  to  be  in  need  of
    humanitarian protection.

 3. On 2nd December 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  On 4th  January  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lambert granted permission to appeal.  Judge  Lambert  noted  that  the
    grounds argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  failed  properly
    to consider internal relocation in the light of the decision in LH  and
    IP (gay men: risk) [2015] UKUT 00073 and to resolve a material conflict
    of fact relating to the Appellant's ex in-laws' sphere of influence  in
    Sri Lanka.  Judge Lambert noted that the latter ground was supported by
    an apparent absence of evidence-based reasoning at paragraph 42 of  the
    decision and is of prime relevance to the question of  the  Appellant's
    ability safely to relocate to Colombo.  No Rule 24  response  has  been
    lodged by the Appellant's legal representatives.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I note  that  this  is  an  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State.  For  the  purpose  of  continuity  throughout  the
    appeal process Mr RSH is referred to herein as the  Appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent.  Mr  Reynolds  is  familiar  with
    this matter  having  appeared  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Clarke.

Case Law

 5. The authoritative country guidance to be considered in this  appeal  is
    that in LH and IP (gay men: risk) Sri Lanka CG [2015] UKUT 00073 (IAC).
     That case is authority for the following propositions: -


    (1)  Having regard to the provisions of articles 365 and  365A  of  the
          Sri Lankan  Penal  Code,  gay  men  in  Sri  Lanka  constitute  a
          particular social group.


    (2)  Gay men in civil partnerships in Sri Lanka  do  not  constitute  a
          particular  social  group  for  the  purposes  of   the   Refugee
          Convention.  The Sri Lankan  authorities'  failure  to  recognise
          alternative marital and  quasi-marital  statuses  such  as  civil
          partnership or homosexual marriage which are available  in  other
          countries of the world  does  not,  without  more,  amount  to  a
          flagrant breach of core human rights.

    (3)  Applying the test set out by Lord  Rodger  in  the  Supreme  Court
          judgment in HJ (Iran) & HT (Cameroon) v Secretary  of  State  for
          the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31, in general the  treatment  of
          gay men in Sri Lanka does not reach the standard  of  persecution
          or serious harm.

    (4)  There is a significant population of homosexuals  and  other  LGBT
          individuals in Sri Lanka, in particular in Colombo.  While  there
          is more risk for lesbian  and  bisexual  women  in  rural  areas,
          because of the control exercised by families on unmarried  women,
          and for transgender individuals and sex workers in the cities, it
          will be a question of fact whether for  a  particular  individual
          the risk reaches the international protection  standard,  and  in
          particular, whether it extends beyond their home area.


    (5)  Where  a  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  exists  in  an
          appellant's home  area,  there  may  be  an  internal  relocation
          option, particularly for individuals returning via  Colombo  from
          the United Kingdom.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Mr Clarke starts by pointing out that the country guidance of LH and IP
    indicates that internal relocation is available and that  at  paragraph
    38 of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision  the  judge  has  only
    looked at the position of living in  Colombo  and  has  not  given  due
    consideration to other parts of the country.  He takes me to  paragraph
    36 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and the finding made  by
    the judge that LH and IP can be distinguished because  the  Appellant's
    partner is not Sri Lankan and that the Appellant's  wife's  family  who
    live in Colombo are now aware of his sexuality and that they  may  seek
    revenge against him for shaming their daughter.  He points out that  it
    is clear from the analysis of this paragraph that the judge has  failed
    to consider relocation to another part of Sri Lanka.  He refers  me  to
    paragraphs 118 and 119 of LH and IP pointing out that there is evidence
    therein that relocation can be considered and whilst he notes that  the
    judge at paragraph 30 has stated that he has considered  everything  in
    the round it would be possible for the Appellant he  contends  to  live
    away from Colombo and it is incumbent upon the judge  to  resolve  that
    issue and the judge has failed to do so.  He invites me  to  remit  the
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

 7. Mr Reynolds submits that the original decision should  stand  and  that
    there is no material error of law disclosed  therein.   He  points  out
    that the Secretary of State has in his submissions  cherry-picked  from
    the decision.  He takes me initially to paragraph 30 pointing out  that
    the judge has looked at the evidence in the round.  He then  refers  me
    to paragraphs 35 and 36.  He emphasises that there is direct  reference
    therein to the head note of LH and IP and that at paragraph 36  he  has
    gone  on  to  set  out  why  the  judge  considers  this  case  can  be
    distinguished from that  authority.   The  judge  he  contends  has  at
    paragraph 37 gone on to quote extensively from the  Country  of  Origin
    Report.  He notes that the Appellant has been found to  be  a  credible
    witness and that he was coerced into marriage and thereafter  divorced.
    He points out that paragraph 42 of  the  decision  cannot  be  read  in
    isolation and that it is incumbent upon the Appeal Tribunal to look  at
    paragraph 41 alongside it.  He submits that  the  Appellant's  case  is
    unique.  He emphasises that  the  Appellant  is  now  divorced;  decree
    absolute having now come through in December 2015.  He asked me to find
    that there are no material errors of law and to dismiss the  appeal  of
    the Secretary of State.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

10. I start by reminding myself that the issue before me  is  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.   I  am  not  rehearing  this  matter.   The
    submissions set out by the Secretary of State both within  the  Grounds
    of Appeal which I have fully considered and Mr Clarke's oral submission
    centre on an alleged failure by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  to  give
    due and proper consideration as to whether or not it was  open  to  the
    Appellant to relocate outside Colombo.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    found the Appellant to be credible.  He  has  a  Polish  partner.   The
    objective evidence indicates that there is  a  substantial  lesbian/gay
    community within Colombo but there is little mention of it in objective
    evidence elsewhere within Sri Lanka.  It is further accepted  that  the
    position is now materially different than it was in 2012 in  that  this
    Appellant is now divorced from his spouse, his former  spouse's  family
    who live in Colombo are aware  of  his  sexuality  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge gave due  and  proper  consideration  to  the  Appellant
    returning to Sri Lanka and whether his wife's family would seek revenge
    against him for shaming their daughter.  The judge gave full and proper
    consideration to the objective evidence and to the authority of LH  and
    IP and noted that the Appellant considered that his  ex-wife's  parents
    could inform the police about his  sexuality  exposing  him  to  likely
    arrest and prosecution.

11. The judge has, I am satisfied, carried out a thorough analysis  of  the
    risks that the Appellant would face upon return to Sri Lanka.   He  has
    looked at all documentary evidence in the round.  He has given full and
    proper consideration at paragraph 35 to the authority of LH and IP.  He
    has made a finding of fact at paragraph 36 as to why, and how,  he  can
    distinguish this case from LH and IP.  Importantly  thereafter  he  has
    then gone on to give due consideration to the Country of Origin Report.
     He has noted paragraph 2.5.1 which makes reference  to  discrimination
    based  on  sexual  orientation  or   gender   identity   taking   place
    particularly in Colombo but also within other areas.

12. Further the analysis carried out is given  due  and  proper  additional
    consideration by the First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraphs 38  to  47
    thereafter.  He has noted at paragraph 39 that  each  case  has  to  be
    considered on its own facts to see if the particular  circumstances  of
    an individual returning  to  Colombo  (but  not  exclusively)  will  be
    exposed to serious harm.

13. In such circumstances I am satisfied reading  the  determination  as  a
    whole that the judge has given due  and  proper  consideration  to  the
    position that the Appellant would face in his individual  circumstances
    in returning to Sri Lanka and not just exclusively to Colombo.  He  has
    considered the facts  of  this  case,  the  position  in  Colombo,  the
    position generally, country guidance and the Country of Origin  Report.
    It is a very thorough analysis and a detailed determination.   As  such
    it discloses no material error of law and for all the above reasons the
    appeal of the Secretary of State  is  consequently  dismissed  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  dismissed  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an anonymity direction.   No  application
is made to vary it and it therefore remains.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

