
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10514/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination promulgated  |
|on 3rd June 2013                                |On 5th  June 2013          |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               Ndey Njie Nyang
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr A Bradley, of Peter G Farrell, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Gambia, born on 13th  August  1989.   The
    Respondent refused her asylum claim for reasons explained in  a  letter
    dated 14th November 2012.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Morrison dismissed the Appellant's appeal for
    reasons explained in his determination dated 9th July 2013.

 3. The Appellant sought permission from the First-tier Tribunal to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, on grounds which may be summarised thus:

      1) The judge accepted  that  the  Appellant  became  pregnant  to  her
         boyfriend and was refused family permission to marry him, and  that
         this caused her difficulties.  The judge failed to make findings on
         what the difficulties would be.

      2) The judge said at paragraph 19 that  the  Appellant  gave  detailed
         responses to the Respondent's credibility criticisms, and that  her
         credibility was not materially damaged by cross-examination of more
         than an hour.  This contradicted his finding  at  paragraph  30(ii)
         that the Appellant did not give a satisfactory explanation of being
         found  by  her  mother.   The  judge  also  overlooked   that   the
         Appellant's evidence was that her mother did  not  know  where  she
         was.

      3) The judge gave no weight to the bank loan agreement, but a copy  of
         this was on headed bank notepaper and thereby authenticated.

      4) The judge did not  accept  that  the  Appellant's  boyfriend  would
         return to repay a loan, firstly because the  boyfriend  could  have
         claimed asylum, but that overlooked that there was no evidence that
         he was at risk, all the evidence being "in the opposite direction".
          Secondly, the residence of the Appellant's boyfriend  in  his  own
         property would not prevent him raising finance  over  his  parents'
         property.

      5) The judge erred at paragraph 28 by inferring  "from  the  Appellant
         stating at interview that she had not heard from her boyfriend  and
         that he did not tell her about problems, that  she  was  indicating
         that she had in fact heard from him..."; the inference drawn by the
         judge is wholly unreasonable.

      6) The judge erred at paragraph 30(i) by ignoring an explanation given
         by the Appellant of how she succeeded in escaping.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal refused permission to  appeal.   The  Appellant
    renewed her application to the Upper Tribunal, relying on the  original
    grounds and further submitting that at paragraph 29 the judge erred  by
    referring to lack of a supporting statement from overseas, a point  not
    raised in the refusal letter or at the hearing.  The  Appellant  offers
    to provide a statement  from  her  boyfriend.   (Such  a  statement  is
    attached to the grounds, although there was no reference to it  at  the
    hearing.)

 5. On 9th April 2013 a judge of the Upper Tribunal granted  permission  to
    appeal:

         In light of the finding of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  that  the
         Appellant, a Muslim woman, was pregnant by her boyfriend, whom  her
         mother refused permission for her to marry  when  she  left  Gambia
         (and she has since given birth while in the UK) it is arguable that
         the judge made an error of law in failing to make  a  finding  upon
         whether on these facts she would be at real risk of serious harm on
         return.  It is on this ground principally that I  grant  permission
         ... but, without wishing  to  raise  the  hopes  of  the  appellant
         unduly, I am prepared to allow all the grounds to be argued.

 6. Mr Bradley relied upon both sets of grounds.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge had found that the Appellant would face difficulties  on  return,
    but had not explained what these difficulties might be.  The reader was
    left  in  doubt  as  to  whether  such  difficulties  might  amount  to
    persecution, and it was the duty of the judge to spell  that  out.   If
    error were established, Mr Bradley then sought to rely upon  an  expert
    report  by  Dr  G  Knorr  of  the  Max  Planck  Institute  for   Social
    Anthropology.  This report concludes that as a Muslim and Serer  single
    woman who has engaged in sexual relationships outside marriage and  has
    a child born out of wedlock, the  Appellant  and  her  son  would  face
    manifold dangers upon return to Gambia, including  expulsion  from  her
    family or forcible marriage, most likely as a second or third  wife  of
    an older man.  Should she marry her boyfriend, who is Fula, there would
    be a severe danger of enforced FGM.

 7. Mr Bradley further argued that the judge had been  impressed  with  the
    oral evidence of the Appellant and found that it had not  been  damaged
    in cross-examination, and so  contracted  himself  by  making  findings
    against her.  He overlooked that the bank documentation was  on  headed
    notepaper, which then coloured his adverse credibility findings.  There
    was no reason why the Appellant's boyfriend  should  not  live  at  one
    address yet borrow against another property.   The  judge  should  have
    reached favourable credibility findings.  Once error was found and  the
    expert report admitted, the Appellant made out her case, and a decision
    should be substituted in her favour.

 8. Mr Matthews submitted that ground 1 (of the first set of grounds)  made
    too much of what the judge actually said.  The judge accepted that  the
    Appellant had difficulties with her mother, which was far from  finding
    that these amounted to persecution or that similar  difficulties  would
    follow on return to Gambia.   The  judge  found  that  the  Appellant's
    mother refused her permission to marry,  but  not  that  her  situation
    forced her to flee Gambia.  Paragraph 29 of the determination disclosed
    that the Appellant's evidence was that she  was  in  contact  with  her
    boyfriend, and that he was at home, encountering no  apparent  problems
    from the family of the Appellant.  The evidence did  not  suggest  that
    such circumstances as the Appellant succeeded in establishing made  out
    a risk of persecution.  Ground 2 also sought to magnify what the  judge
    said.  The judge recorded that the Appellant made detailed responses to
    the refusal letter and that her responses in cross-examination did  not
    materially damage her credibility.  It did  not  follow  that  all  her
    evidence had to be found entirely credible.  There was no contradiction
    between these observations and the final  conclusion  at  paragraph  32
    that the account was a fabrication.  The judge was  entitled  to  reach
    that conclusion, and gave good  reasons  for  it.   On  ground  3,  the
    observations the judge made  about  the  loan  documentation  were  all
    correct.  That he did not record that the agreement was on headed  bank
    notepaper was neither here nor there.  The judge's conclusion that  the
    loan agreement "neither adds  to  nor  detracts  from  the  Appellant's
    credibility" was justified.  On ground 4, it was plain that if  a  risk
    arose it was also likely to  affect  the  Appellant's  boyfriend.   The
    judge did not say that  the  Appellant's  boyfriend  could  not  borrow
    against a property where he did not live.  His material point was  that
    he did not find it credible that if the boyfriend went to  the  trouble
    of obtaining a loan for himself and the Appellant to come  to  the  UK,
    funded by his father's title deeds, he would have remained  in  the  UK
    for four days and then returned to Gambia.  On ground 5, the judge  was
    correct to find that the Appellant had been in telephone  contact  with
    her boyfriend, because that was what she said.  Ground 6  was  only  an
    insistence on the Appellant's account of her escape,  and  disagreement
    with another conclusion which the judge was entitled to reach.  The set
    of grounds  presented  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  raised  only  one  new
    substantial point.  As far as that was concerned, it had been  for  the
    Appellant to make her case, and the judge was entitled  to  comment  on
    obvious gaps in the evidence such as the  lack  of  evidence  from  her
    boyfriend.  If the decision were to be remade, there would have to be a
    fresh investigation of the facts, and the expert report  could  not  by
    itself enable the Appellant to succeed.  The report left out of account
    that the Appellant remains in touch with her partner who was not  shown
    to suffer from any problems, and who  could  live  with  her  where  he
    presently resides, or elsewhere in Gambia, if need be.  She  would  not
    then be in the position of a single parent but of one who has a partner
    who has the material ability both to send her to the UK, and to support
    her and the child in Gambia.

 9. Mr Bradley in response reiterated as to ground 1 that the judge  failed
    to ask the logical next question from a finding  that  there  had  been
    difficulties, which was whether these would  resume  and  whether  they
    would amount to persecution.  Once the point of establishing  an  error
    had been reached, the expert report became admissible and the claim was
    made out.  Although  the  Presenting  Officer  now  said  it  could  be
    defeated by the Appellant reuniting with her partner,  that  overlooked
    that the report stated that marriage to her  partner  would  involve  a
    risk of enforced FGM, a matter of which the Appellant might  very  well
    be unaware.

10. It became common ground that paragraph 32 of the report should have the
    word "not" added, so as to read:

         "She may well not know this as girls/women  who  belong  to  ethnic
         groups who do [not] practise FGM as commonly as most  other  groups
         ... are often not made aware of the fact that they will likely have
         to undergo  FGM  upon  marriage  to  a  man  belonging  to  an  FGM
         practising group ..."

11. I reserved my determination.

12. The Appellant put her case to the respondent and to First-tier Tribunal
    on alleged risk from her family, not on general risk  to  an  unmarried
    mother, and not on risk of coerced FGM.  These matters are  not  to  be
    found in her grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  the
    submissions recorded in the First-tier Tribunal, or even in the grounds
    of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The Appellant  has  been  represented
    throughout.  It was not for the judge to identify  and  consider  these
    matters on his own initiative.  Nor was it for the judge  to  elaborate
    further on such family difficulties as he accepted (ground 1).  Reading
    his determination fairly and as a whole, he plainly did not find  these
    to amount to past persecution or to disclose relevant risk  on  return.
    Having observed that the Appellant provided a detailed response to  the
    Respondent's points and was not shaken in cross-examination,  he  still
    had to evaluate her case (ground 2).  The heading on the loan documents
    did not have to be mentioned, and changes  nothing  (ground  3).    The
    Appellant's boyfriend was plainly likely to be affected by  a  risk  to
    her such as alleged (ground 4).   The Appellant said that  she  was  in
    touch with him (ground 5).  The  criticism  of  the  rejection  of  the
    appellant's account of escape focuses  on  a  weak  reason,  her  early
    pregnancy, but ignores the other reasons given  at  paragraph  30  (i),
    such as the unlikelihood of the situation and of her  explanation,  and
    the alleged proximity of likely pursuers (ground 6).   On  the  further
    point to be found in the second set of grounds, the appellant  did  not
    provide a statement from the obvious witness, her boyfriend.  The judge
    was entitled to  take  that  into  account  -  see,  for  example,  the
    Immigration Rules, paragraph 339L.  It was for the Appellant to put her
    case, and for the judge to evaluate it.  There was  no  requirement  of
    fairness that she be put on notice to improve  her  case,  particularly
    where she had legal representation.

13. The grounds are selective disagreement with conclusions which the judge
    was entitled  to  reach,  for  reasons  he  has  more  than  adequately
    explained.

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

15. No anonymity order has been requested or made.


[pic]

4 June 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
