
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aA/10079/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 October 2016                            |On 20 October 2016            |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR NEWMAN LEE RICHARD

                        aka KOTASANAI NEWMAN CHIPIKA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Javed of Thompson & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision promulgated on 21 July 2016 of First-tier Tribunal
    Malone.

 2. The appeal before Judge Malone was on asylum and human rights  grounds.
    The background to the matter  is  that  the  appellant  claimed  asylum
    whilst in the possession of a South African passport  in  the  name  of
    Newman Lee Richard.  On the basis of that passport  and  other  matters
    the respondent's conclusion was that the appellant was a South  African
    national  with  a  valid  South  African  passport  and  she  made  the
    assessment of his protection claim on the  basis  of  return  to  South
    Africa finding against him in all material regards.

 3. When the matter came before Judge Malone the evidence of the  appellant
    and his brother indicated that the  appellant  is,  in  fact,  Kotsanai
    Newman Chipika, a national of Zimbabwe.

 4. I should indicate at this point that the  respondent  objected  to  the
    findings of the judge that the appellant is of Zimbabwe nationality and
    not from South Africa.  This was her first ground of appeal but it  was
    rejected in the permission application of  10  September  2016  and  Mr
    Melvin confirmed that the respondent was not renewing  that  aspect  of
    the grounds. The finding of Judge Malone that the appellant is Kotsanai
    Newman Chipika and is a national of  Zimbabwe  stands,  therefore,  and
    will be taken as extant in any further consideration of this matter.

 5. However, having made those findings Judge  Malone  went  to  allow  the
    appeal not on asylum or human rights grounds but because he  found  the
    respondent's decision was "not in accordance with the law."

 6. The reasoning for this is set out at [62]-[66]:

         "62. It follows, therefore that there is no lawful basis  entitling
             the Respondent  to  remove  the  Appellant  to  South  Africa.
             Moreover, she has refused  his  protection  and  human  rights
             claim on a flawed basis, finding wrongly that he  is  a  South
             African national.

         63.  Further, the Respondent expressly omitted any consideration of
             whether the Appellant would be at risk on removal to Zimbabwe.
              The Refusal Letter included the following statement:

                  'No considerations are paid to any risks you may encounter
                  if returned to Zimbabwe.'

         64.  As a Zimbabwean national, the Appellant can, prima  facie,  be
             removed  there.   However,  the  Respondent  has  refused  his
             protection and human rights claims without considering, as she
             should have done, what might  happen  to  him  on  removal  to
             Zimbabwe.  She has not decided whether he would be  persecuted
             or at risk of ill-treatment contrary to Article 3.

         65.  Having read the papers in this matter, I consider it  unlikely
             that the Appellant would be at risk on  removal  to  Zimbabwe.
             In my judgment,  large  parts  of  his  account  do  not  bear
             scrutiny.  But, given the  fact  that  a  sizeable  amount  of
             evidence has been put in by the Appellant which the Respondent
             has not yet seen and the fact that the Respondent  has  failed
             to carry out the fact-finding exercise and analysis she should
             have done as to  what  might  happen  to  him  on  removal  to
             Zimbabwe, I have come to the  conclusion  that  I  should  not
             proceed to carry out my own analysis.

         66.  I find that the Respondent's decision  is  not  in  accordance
             with the law because she has failed to carry out the essential
             exercise of assessing whether,  on  removal  to  Zimbabwe,  he
             would be at real risk of persecution or ill-treatment contrary
             to Article 3 on a premise, in accordance with my finding, that
             he is a Zimbabwean national.

         67.  I therefore allow this appeal as the Respondent's decision  is
             not in accordance with the law.  That being so, the  Appellant
             awaits a lawful decision from the Respondent on his protection
             and  human  rights  claims  which  remain  outstanding.    Her
             decision will have to take in account the Appellant's  claimed
             sur place activities."

 7. The  respondent's  second  ground  of  appeal  is  that  there  was  no
    jurisdiction for the judge to allow this appeal as  not  in  accordance
    with the law.  The decision  here  was  dated  22  June  2015  and  was
    therefore made under the most recent version of the  appeal  provisions
    set out in the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.   These
    state as follows at s.84 t0 s.86:

         84 Grounds of appeal


         (1)  An appeal under section 82(1)(a) (refusal of protection claim)
             must be brought on one or more of the following grounds-


             (a)  that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom
                  would breach the United Kingdom's obligations under the
                  Refugee Convention;


             (b)  that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom
                  would breach the United Kingdom's obligations in relation
                  to persons eligible for a grant of humanitarian
                  protection;


             (c)  that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom
                  would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act
                  1998 (public authority not to act contrary to Human Rights
                  Convention).


         (2)  An appeal under section 82(1)(b) (refusal of human rights
             claim) must be brought on the ground that the decision is
             unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.


         (3)  An appeal under section 82(1)(c) (revocation of protection
             status) must be brought on one or more of the following
             grounds-


             (a)  that the decision to revoke the appellant's protection
                  status breaches the United Kingdom's obligations under the
                  Refugee Convention;


             (b)  that the decision to revoke the appellant's protection
                  status breaches the United Kingdom's obligations in
                  relation to persons eligible for a grant of humanitarian
                  protection.


         85 Matters to be considered


         (1)  An appeal under section 82(1) against a decision shall be
             treated by the Tribunal as including an appeal against any
             decision in respect of which the appellant has a right of
             appeal under section 82(1).


         (2)  If an appellant under section 82(1) makes a statement under
             section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any matter raised in
             the statement which constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind
             listed in section 84 against the decision appealed against.


         (3)  Subsection (2) applies to a statement made under section 120
             whether the statement was made before or after the appeal was
             commenced.


         (4)  On an appeal under section 82(1) against a decision the
             Tribunal may consider any matter which it thinks relevant to
             the substance of the decision, including a matter arising
             after the date of the decision.


         (5)  But the Tribunal must not consider a new matter unless the
             Secretary of State has given the Tribunal consent to do so.


         (6)  A matter is a "new matter" if-


             (a)  it constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in
                  section 84, and


             (b)  the Secretary of State has not previously considered the
                  matter in the context of-


                  (i)  the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or


                  (ii) a statement made by the appellant under section 120.


         86 Determination of appeal


         (1)  This section applies on an appeal under section 82(1) (2) The
             Tribunal must determine-


             (a)  any matter raised as a ground of appeal, and

             (b)  any matter which section 85 requires it to consider."

 8. It will be clear from the provisions of s.84-s.86  that  the  Appellant
    was not entitled to appeal on the ground that the respondent's decision
    was not in accordance with the law.  Nothing  gives  authority  to  the
    Tribunal to allow an appeal on any ground other than those set  out  at
    s.84.

 9. It is therefore my conclusion that there was no basis in  law  for  the
    appeal to be allowed as not in  accordance  with  the  law.  Albeit  an
    adjournment may have been required, it was incumbent on the  First-tier
    Tribunal to make a decision on the  grounds  argued,  namely  that  the
    appellant was in need of international  protection  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and the ECHR.  The failure to do so  was  a  material  error
    requiring the decision to be set aside and re-made.

10. The parties before me were in agreement that this had to  be  conducted
    by the First-tier Tribunal where there were no findings  at  all  other
    than the extant finding as to the appellant's correct identity.   There
    was some discussion as to the advisability of the  Secretary  of  State
    producing a further decision letter addressing the new factual basis of
    the appellant being a Zimbabwe national but I accepted that this  could
    not be something that the Tribunal had power to direct.  It will be for
    the Secretary of State to decide how she  wishes  to  put  forward  her
    objections to the appellant's asylum claim  either  before  or  at  the
    remaking of this appeal in the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law to the limited extent set out above and will be  remade  in  the  First-
tier Tribunal.


Signed: [pic]                                Dated: 20 October 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
