

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/10521/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 5 July 2016                            |On 6 July 2016                   |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                            BINIYAM GOYETOM BEHRE
                          (no anonymity direction)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Petersen a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. I lift the anonymity direction made on 7 March 2016 as there appears
       to be no purpose to it.


    2. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application  for  asylum  and
       ancillary protection on  22  July  2015.  His  appeal  against  that
       decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor following
       a hearing on 7 March 2016. This is an appeal against that decision.




The grant of permission


    3. Upper Tribunal Judge Deans granted  permission  to  appeal  (20  May
       2016) on the ground that it is arguable that it was unfair  for  the
       Judge to determine the appeal in the absence of the Appellant.


Respondent's position

    4. It was submitted in the rule  24  notice  (1  June  2016)  that  the
       Appellant had failed to produce any evidence to demonstrate  he  had
       not been at the the same address as the  Judge's  determination  was
       sent to.


Appellant's position

    5. The Appellant asserted in his statement (1 May 2016) in essence that
       the address the Tribunal sent the  notice  of  hearing  to  was  his
       correspondence  address  in  London.  He  had  asked  his   previous
       solicitors in September to notify the Tribunal of the  fact  he  had
       moved to Bradford. Those solicitors closed down and they  would  not
       therefore have received the new hearing date. The person  living  at
       his correspondence address did not receive  the  notice  of  hearing
       that brought forward the hearing date.

The Judges findings

    6. The Judge found that the Appellant had provided no documentation  or
       information or made any submissions as to why the appeal  should  be
       allowed and had chosen not  to  attend  the  hearing  all  of  which
       undermines his credibility.

Discussion

    7. The Judge did not summarise the  history  of  the  proceedings.  The
       Appellant was originally written to on 24 August 2015 at the address
       he had given in London where he  resided.  His  solicitor  was  also
       written to on that day. They were both notified that the pre hearing
       review would take place on 12 May 2016 and  that  the  full  hearing
       would take place on 26 May 2016.


    8. On 17 December 2015 the Appellant, but not his  representative,  was
       written to at the London address saying that the pre hearing  review
       was taking place on 22 February 2016 and the full hearing on 7 March
       2016. He was also sent a notice that the hearing fixed  for  26  May
       2016 had been adjourned. That letter was sent by 2nd class post.  On
       23 February 2016 he was sent a notice to the London address of  what
       had occurred at the pre hearing review which notes that his  address
       is correct.

    9. I am not satisfied that the Judge materially erred in not adjourning
       the proceedings. The Appellant had a duty to notify the Tribunal  of
       his correct address. He failed to do so. It is unclear to me why the
       Judge's decision following the hearing on  7  March  2016  would  be
       received by the Appellant it having been sent to the same address as
       that to which the notice following  the  pre-hearing  review  on  23
       November 2016 was sent as was the letter of 17 December 2015.  I  do
       not accept it is likely that both of those letters would simply have
       gone astray but not the actual determination.

   10. Separately to this however the Judge has a duty to exercise  anxious
       scrutiny and apply relevant guidance  case  law.  I  note  from  the
       within the determination that the Judge did not refer to  or  engage
       with MO (Illegal Exit - Risk on Return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 00190
       (IAC) or background information.


   11. MO noted, among other things, that a person  of  draft  age  who  is
       accepted as having left Eritrea illegally is reasonably likely to be
       regarded with serious hostility on return and face a  real  risk  of
       persecution or serious harm.

   12. The Judge failed to note  the  Respondent's  concession  within  the
       refusal letter that the Appellant had avoided military  service  and
       had illegally exited  Eritrea  [48].  I  pointed  this  out  to  the
       representatives at the commencement of the hearing. It was  conceded
       that Ms Petersen that this  was  a  material  error  of  law  and  a
       "Robinson" obvious point.


   13. It was noted in the  refusal  letter  that  The  Danish  Immigration
       Service  Fact-Finding  Mission  in  (December  2014)  ("the   Danish
       report") said that if a person who left illegally pays a fine of  2%
       of income tax and signs a letter  of  apology  they  will  not  face
       harassment or persecution on return. A second source said it was not
       clear if that included  deserters.  A  Western  Embassy  noted  that
       refugees have returned without adverse consequences.


   14. I pointed out to the  representative  that  I  have  heard  numerous
       appeals and repeatedly read evidence  that  noted  that  the  Danish
       report was criticised in its methodology and  conclusions  by  Human
       Rights Watch (2 July 15 -HRW). HRW  noted  the  Respondent's  report
       (January 2015) which concluded that "the Eritrean government made no
       visible progress on key human rights concerns...  including  in  the
       area  of  arbitrary  and  inhumane  detention,  indefinite  national
       service...".  HRW  also  noted  criticism  from  the  UNHCR  and   2
       researchers involved in the preparation of the Danish report who had
       the "... clear  impression  that  their  superiors  were  intent  on
       reaching  pre-determined  conclusions."  Criticism  from   Professor
       Kibreab (13 May 2015) was in similar terms.


   15. Both representatives were aware of this body of evidence and neither
       sought time to refresh their memory on it, or adjourn the hearing to
       consider it.


   16. The Judge was under a duty to anxiously scrutinise  the  Appellant's
       case and apply relevant guidance case law. He failed to do so.  This
       is a material error of law. I set the decision aside.


Remit or rehear

   17. Both representatives confirmed that the appropriate way disposing of
       the case was by re-hearing the matter as no additional evidence  was
       required given the concessions made by the Respondent in the refusal
       letter.


   18. I was satisfied I should rehear the matter in the Upper Tribunal, in
       accordance  with  the  President's  Practice  Direction,  given  the
       Respondent's concessions, the lack of complexity of the case or need
       to hear evidence, and to avoid unnecessary delay.


   19. The Appellant evaded military service and left Eritrea illegally. He
       will be returned as a failed asylum seeker without  a  passport  and
       therefore would require a travel document. It is clear from  MO  and
       the background evidence to which I have referred that  he  would  be
       reasonably likely to face questioning at the airport on  arrival  as
       to how and why he left  and  why  he  was  not  performing  military
       service. He should not be expected to lie. I place little weight  on
       the Danish report given  the  criticisms  of  it  to  which  I  have
       referred.  It is reasonably likely he will be severely  ill  treated
       as set out in the background evidence and case law. Accordingly,  he
       is entitled to be recognised as a refugee.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

         I re-make the decision and allow the Appellant's appeal.



Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
5 July 2016
