

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: aa 107292012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North shields                        |Determination Sent           |
|On 14 May 2013                                |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                           SEJALBEN MANIBHAI PATEL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The respondent, Sejalben Manibhai Patel, was born on 15 September  1980
    and  is  a  female  citizen  of  India.   For  the  remainder  of  this
    determination, I shall refer to the respondent as  the  "appellant"  as
    she was before the First-tier Tribunal and referred to the Secretary of
    State as the "respondent".

 2. The appellant arrived  as  a  visitor  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  18
    September 2005.  Her visa expired on 9 March 2006.  An  application  by
    the appellant and her daughter to remain outside  the  Rules  on  human
    rights grounds was refused on 23 September 2011 and on 15 October 2012,
    the appellant (with her daughter as a dependant) claimed asylum in  the
    United Kingdom.  Her claim was refused and a decision  made  to  remove
    her on 19 December 2012.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Caswell) which, in a determination  dated  14  February
    2013, allowed the appeal on humanitarian protection  and  human  rights
    grounds (Article 3  ECHR).   The  asylum  appeal  was  dismissed.   The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. Judge Caswell found that the appellant had a genuine fear of  returning
    to India where she believed that her husband/partner  (Anandkumar)  and
    his family would seize or kill her child (date of birth: 5 April 2011).
     She also fears that her own family would  kill  her  because  she  had
    "entered into a love marriage".  The judge found that  there  would  be
    insufficient protection available from  the  Indian  authorities.   The
    judge  found [25] that

         "All women in India [do not] face a real  risk  of  persecution  on
         grounds of their gender and there was insufficient evidence for  me
         to conclude that lone parents or failed love relationships consider
         themselves a distinct  group  which  shared  characteristics.   For
         these reasons, I do not conclude that the appellant  is  a  refugee
         but do conclude that her appeal succeeds on the  grounds  of  human
         rights and entitlement to humanitarian protection".

 4. The grounds of appeal also assert that the judge failed  to  resolve  a
    conflict:

    A crucial part of the Secretary of State's case is that  the  appellant
    was married in India prior to coming to the UK  and  that  she  is  not
    married in a Hindu ceremony in the  UK.   The  judge  at  paragraph  14
    appears to accept the appellant's evidence that an agent filled out the
    VAF and that she was unaware of its contents in relation to  her  being
    married but makes no specific findings.  It is  respectively  submitted
    the judge failed  to  factor  into  her  consideration  evidence  which
    demonstrated that the person who  applied  for  a  visit  visa  as  her
    husband in 2005 along with the appellant was  encountered  by  UKBA  in
    2009.  The appellant was such a trustworthy, educated person (paragraph
    16) why would false  representations  need  to  be  made  in  her  Visa
    Application Form regarding  her  marital  status.   The  judge  in  her
    analysis of the evidence has failed to take this into consideration and
    it is respectively submitted has failed to resolve this conflict.

    The judge accepts at paragraph 14 that she has photographs and  letters
    which support the appellant's claim of a Hindu marriage ceremony in the
    UK yet she fails to make a clear finding as to whether or not she finds
    the appellant would be considered as a married woman having undergone a
    Hindu ceremony.  Instead she finds at paragraph 17 that the appellant's
    daughter would be viewed  as  illegitimate  and  at  paragraph  21  the
    appellant would be a young woman with a child out of wedlock.   If  she
    is, in fact, married then how would she be viewed this  way  by  Indian
    society on return?  It is respectfully submitted the judge  has  failed
    to consider the evidence as a whole and has instead analysed  parts  of
    it which has resulted in a failure to resolve a conflict in respect  of
    a material fact in relation to the appellant's claim.

 5. At [14], Judge Caswell noted that the appellant had paid  an  agent  to
    complete her  Visa Application Form (VAF).  In that form it is  claimed
    that the appellant was married to a  man  called  Maheshkumar  Manubhai
    Patel.  The appellant said that she was not and had never been  married
    to this or any other man when she  entered  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    judge found [17] that the evidence as a whole and  the  consistency  of
    the appellant's central account of past events, led her to believe that
    the appellant was an "effective and reliable witness who  was  credible
    as to the basic aspects of her claim".  The judge went on to find that:

    I accept her account that she persuaded her parents to let her come  to
    the UK for a visit for one month, and took up with  Anandkumar,  living
    with him and having a child with him, despite the fact he  was  already
    married with a son.  I find that, after the application to stay outside
    the Rules failed, Anandkumar left the appellant to take up with another
    woman.  Given the background evidence from both parties  on  conditions
    in India and cultural issues I also accept that, if she were to  return
    to India with what would be  seen  as  an  illegitimate  daughter,  the
    appellant would face rejection and the risk  of  serious  ill-treatment
    from both her own family and that of Anandkumar. [my emphasis]

 6. By the appellant's own account, she has entered into a  Hindu  marriage
    with Anandkumar in the United Kingdom.  The  judge  has  not  explained
    why, if the appellant had contracted a Hindu marriage with  Anandkumar,
    the  child  of  their  relationship  would  be  regarded  in  India  as
    illegitimate.  However, as became apparent during  the  course  of  the
    Upper Tribunal hearing, the problems with the judge's findings at  [17]
    go further than that.  In the quotation of paragraph of  [17]  set  out
    above, I have first highlighted the judge's finding that the  appellant
    chose to live with Anandkumar and have a child with  him  "despite  the
    fact  he  was  already  married  with  a  son".   I  asked   both   the
    representatives to show me where, in the evidence before the First-tier
    Tribunal, there is any indication  at  all  that  Anandkumar  had  been
    married before he met the appellant.  Neither representative  was  able
    to show me where Judge Caswell had derived that information.  Mr Saleem
    said that he  believed  that  Anandkumar  had  been  married  and  then
    divorced but he was unable to refer to  any  evidence.   Obviously,  if
    Anandkumar had been married and then purported to marry  the  appellant
    the possibility arises  that  their  relationship  was  polygamous  (or
    bigamous).  It also seems possible that Judge Caswell  has  found  that
    the child of the relationship is illegitimate  because  Anandkumar  was
    married to another woman from whom he is not divorced but, once  again,
    that observation, in the absence of any  evidence  to  support  it,  is
    merely speculative.

 7. I find that Judge Caswell has based her assessment of the risk to  this
    appellant upon an incomplete and possibly  inaccurate  factual  matrix.
    The problems with the judge's assessment of the evidence which  I  have
    identified above go to the core of the  appellant's  account.   Without
    clear and accurate findings of fact, it is  not  possible  properly  to
    access the risk this appellant may or may not face if  she  returns  to
    India.  I also agree with  respondent  that  Judge  Caswell  has  dealt
    inadequately with the very serious doubts  cast  over  the  appellant's
    credibility by her untruthful VAF application form. The judge  was  not
    bound to find that the appellant was an unreliable  witness  simply  on
    account of the contents of her VAF but I do consider  that  she  should
    have tackled more thoroughly the doubts that had  been  cast  over  her
    credibility.

 8. Because I have found that  the  factual  matrix  established  by  Judge
    Caswell is seriously flawed, it is necessary to set  aside  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's findings of fact.  It will be necessary for the case to
    be heard again and for new findings to be made.   I  consider  that  it
    would be more appropriate, in the light of the  quantity  of  oral  and
    documentary evidence to be considered, for the decision to be remade in
    the First-tier Tribunal and direct that it is remitted to that Tribunal
    accordingly.

DECISION

 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which is dated 14 February
    2013 is set aside.  I direct that the appeal be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal to remake the decision (not Judge Caswell).






Signed:

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



2 June 2013
