

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
                                                               AA/10612/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 23rd February 2016                       |On 17th May 2016              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     NMA
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr Harrison,  Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Somalia born in 1988. She  appeals  with
    permission[1] the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Nicol)  to
    dismiss her appeal, on asylum and human  rights  grounds,  against  the
    Respondent's decision to remove from the United Kingdom pursuant to s10
    of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.


      Background

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on the 27 November 2013 and
    claimed asylum the next day. She claimed to have a well-founded fear of
    persecution in Somalia on the grounds that she  was  from  the  Shekhal
    minority clan. She was at risk from Al-Shabaab. Her  family,  including
    her husband, had all disappeared and she had  no-one.   She  was  seven
    months pregnant on arrival.

 3. The  Respondent  required  the  Appellant  be  subject  to  a  language
    analysis. The results indicated that she was not from  Kismayo  as  she
    claimed, but in  fact  from  the  north-west  of  Somalia,  Somaliland,
    Djibouti or Ethiopia. This,  and  the  Appellant's  poor  knowledge  of
    Kismayo,   led  the  Respondent  to  reject  the  credibility  of   the
    Appellant's account, including her claim to be Shekhal and consequently
    at risk from Al-Shabaab.

 4. By the time that the matter came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    Appellant's case had developed.  Although she maintained her  claim  to
    be from the south, she had commissioned a report  from  country  expert
    Marcus Hoehne, who was not satisfied as to her claimed clan or place of
    origin being Kismayo.  He thought it more likely that she was from  the
    north of the country.   Her representative relied upon that  report  to
    submit that if the Appellant was from the north then she would  face  a
    real risk of harm in the strange city of Mogadishu, which is where  she
    would be returned to.   She would have no family support and would face
    a risk of indiscriminate violence from militias preying on lone  women,
    including Al-Shabaab. A second limb of her  case  was  that  since  her
    arrival in the United Kingdom she had given birth to two children.  The
    first she was carrying on arrival. The second was born as a result of a
    relationship she had here  with  her  cousin,  who  is  now  a  British
    national. That child had been born out of wedlock and as a  result  the
    Appellant had incurred the hostility  of  her  (and  his)  family.  The
    presence in the United Kingdom of the child's  British  father  further
    gave rise to Article 8 issues.


 5. Although the First-tier Tribunal accepted that the Appellant is  Somali
    (in light of an apparent concession by the Respondent -  see  paragraph
    32) the determination rejected the Appellant's claim to be Shekhal,  to
    be from the south of Somalia, or to be  at  any  risk  there  from  Al-
    Shabaab. At paragraph 38 it says the following:

         "The expert evidence shows that Mogadishu is probably a safe  place
         to return to but that support may be required. I do  not  find  the
         Appellant's evidence concerning her family and background credible.
         In the absence of any credible evidence I do not  accept  that  she
         would be unable to find support in Mogadishu or, at the very least,
         make contact with those elsewhere who could  help  support  her.  I
         therefore do not find that she would be at risk if she were  to  be
         returned to Somalia generally or Mogadishu in particular".

 6. As to the second limb of the case, the Tribunal found that it would  be
    in the best interests of both children to  go  to  Somalia  with  their
    mother.




      Error of Law

 7. The grounds of appeal are as follows:

        i)  The  Tribunal   has   erred   in   its   characterisation,   or
           understanding, of the expert evidence. The report in  fact  read
           "NMA would most probably be lost in Mogadishu"; it is  submitted
           that the expert evidence about instability in Mogadishu was such
           that the Appellant's family would not be able to travel there to
           support or protect her


       ii) There was a failure to take relevant evidence into account  when
           assessing the Article 8 claim;

      iii) There was a failure to properly consider the best  interests  of
           the Appellant's children.


 8. At a hearing on  the  19th  November  2015  the  Respondent,  that  day
    represented by Senior Presenting Officer Mr A.  McVeety,  realistically
    conceded that there was nothing in the report of Dr Hoehne which  could
    properly have led the Tribunal to conclude the "expert  evidence  shows
    that Mogadishu is probably a safe place".  That  finding  was  in  fact
    entirely contrary to Dr Hoehne's evidence.   I  agreed.  In  a  written
    decision dated 27th November 2015 I found the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to contain a  material error of law in the approach taken
    to the expert report.   I also noted that the  determination  makes  no
    reference at all to the relatively recent country guidance of  MOJ  and
    Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG  [2014]  UKUT  00442  (IAC)  which
    might be thought pertinent in any assessment of  whether  it  would  be
    safe to return a lone female with two young children  to  Somalia  (see
    (ix) of headnote in particular).


 9. I was further satisfied that the determination has not dealt adequately
    with the matter of whether it would be in the  best  interests  of  the
    Appellant's children to 'return' to  Mogadishu.  The  failing  in  this
    respect in effect overlaps with the error identified above, in that the
    Tribunal has not conducted, as required by MOJ, a  "careful  assessment
    of all of the circumstances". There  are  however  two  other  discrete
    errors. First, the Tribunal appears to have  overlooked  or  failed  to
    give adequate weight to the evidence  of  the  second  child's  British
    father as to his intentions towards his son. Second, there has been  no
    consideration at all of the implications of the Secretary of  State  's
    concession in Sanade  and  Ors  (British  children  -  Zambrano-Derici)
    [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC).

10. For these reasons the decision was set aside in its entirety. Since  no
    interpreter  was  available  at  that  first  hearing  the  matter  was
    adjourned to be listed before me at a  later  date  when  the  decision
    could be remade.




    The Re-Making

11. At a hearing on the 23rd February 2016 I heard oral evidence  from  the
    Appellant and her partner Mr Y. I heard submissions was referred to the
    written material. I have had regard to all  the  evidence  that  I  was
    referred to, including that which is not specifically mentioned herein.
    At the close of the hearing I indicated that I would allow  the  appeal
    and I now explain my reasons why.

    Asylum and Article 3 ECHR


12. It has now been accepted that the Appellant is Somali.  Although  there
    was some suggestion in the language analysis prepared by 'Verified  AB'
    that she could  be  Ethiopian  or  Djiboutian  the  parties  have  both
    accepted the final conclusion of the analyst that the Appellant uses  a
    Northern Somali dialect consistent with her being a  "native  speaker",
    ie native to Somalia as opposed to any of its neighbours[2].


13. Having had regard to the Appellant's evidence,  the  language  analysis
    provided by 'Verified AB' and the expert report of Dr Hoehne I  am  not
    satisfied that it is reasonably likely that the Appellant is  from  the
    Kismayo area as she claims. In her interviews she displayed a  lack  of
    knowledge of Kismayo and the surrounding region and "astonished"[3]  Dr
    Hoehne with her inability to identify the key players in  the  province
    in recent years.   He too commented on  her  lack  of  southern  Somali
    dialect/accent.  Her knowledge of  her  claimed  clan  was,  Dr  Hoehne
    found, "distorted and confused"[4].  He found it to be improbable  that
    she is of the Sheekhal clan and this is a conclusion I  adopt,  in  the
    absence of any credible evidence to the contrary.

14. I find it to be reasonably likely that the Appellant is a  national  of
    Somalia who is from the north of that country.  That  finding  has  two
    consequences for the purpose of my decision.  First I reject her  claim
    as it was originally put. In the absence of any  alternative  narrative
    advanced by the Appellant that means that my risk  assessment  must  be
    made on a narrow set of facts.  Second, I take notice of the fact  that
    she has advanced an asylum claim on the basis of untruths and that this
    must have an adverse affect on her general credibility as a witness.

15. The parties agreed that the Appellant, if and when removed from the UK,
    would be returned to Mogadishu.   In considering whether that city, and
    any onward travel would be safe for the Appellant, I must  have  regard
    to two matters: the particular guidance given about  the  city  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in MOJ, and the Appellant's particular circumstances.

16. The narrow set of facts that I can be satisfied about are  as  follows.
    The Appellant is from northern Somalia. She arrived in  the  UK  alone.
    She claimed that her husband had gone missing prior to her flight  from
    Somalia but given that this claim was inextricably linked to  her  'Al-
    Shabaab' narrative little weight can be given to  that  evidence.  What
    can be said with certainty, since it is not in dispute, is that she was
    pregnant on arrival.   What can also be said  with  certainty  is  that
    since her arrival she has fallen pregnant twice more. Mr Y, the  father
    of the children conceived in  the  UK,  came  from  Somalia  under  the
    Refugee family reunion scheme and is now a British citizen.  He  claims
    that he met with the Appellant in the UK and  there  is  no  evidential
    basis for rejecting that claim. I find that he is  the  father  of  the
    Appellant's youngest child and the one on the way but not  the  eldest.
    In respect of that child it is evident that the  Appellant  had  sexual
    intercourse with someone else prior to her arrival. I  have  considered
    the possibility that this was non-consensual or a relationship  outside
    of marriage, but given that both  of  these  possibilities  would  have
    provided the Appellant with a credible claim  for  asylum  (that  would
    have obviated the need for her to try and  learn  the  lineage  of  the
    Sheekhal clan) I consider it  unlikely:  had  either  of  these  things
    happened it is likely that  she  would  have  disclosed  this.   It  is
    therefore not, I think, impermissible speculation to find that the most
    likely explanation for her pregnancy on arrival was that she was  in  a
    marital  relationship  within  the  social  norms  of  Somali  culture.
    Although Mr Harrison was obliged to remind me of the  Appellant's  poor
    credibility he agreed that on the  facts,  this  was  the  most  likely
    explanation.


17. Both parties proceeded on the basis that the children would be returned
    with their mother and that Mr Y would not follow.  He  denied  that  he
    would leave the UK and I accept it to be unlikely that he would do  so.




18. These findings about the Appellant's background lead me to embark  upon
    risk assessment with the following in mind:

        . She is a woman with young children under her care
        . She has no known connections to Mogadishu
        . Her child to Mr Y has been born outside of  wedlock  and  she  is
          pregnant with a second child in the same circumstances
        . She may have family members in the north of the country  but  her
          ability to contact them or ask for support is compromised by  the
          fact that she now has a child(ren) outside of wedlock
        . Her clan affiliation is unknown but she is not Sheekhal

19. The extant country guidance is MOJ.  Following an extensive  review  of
    the country background and expert evidence available at the  time  (the
    appeal hearing concluding in September 2014)  the  Tribunal  held  that
    there was no general risk of serious harm  to  civilians  returning  to
    Mogadishu. There had been a durable change in that Al-Shabaab had  been
    driven from the city and  stood  no  realistic  prospect  of  regaining
    territory there (I note that in his evidence to  the  MOJ  Tribunal  Dr
    Hoehne had expressed caution about this conclusion: in his evidence  in
    this  appeal  he  expressly  accepts  that  the  country  guidance  was
    correctly formulated on this point). The driving out of Al-Shabaab  led
    to a reduction in the number of civilian casualties.    In  respect  of
    the position of returnees the headnote states:


         vii) A person returning to Mogadishu after  a  period  of  absence
              will look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in  the
              city, for assistance in re-establishing himself and  securing
              a livelihood. Although a returnee may  also  seek  assistance
              from his clan members who are not close relatives, such  help
              is only likely to be forthcoming for majority  clan  members,
              as minority clans may have little to offer.


        viii) The significance of clan membership in Mogadishu has changed.
              Clans now provide, potentially, social support mechanisms and
              assist with access  to  livelihoods,  performing  less  of  a
              protection  function  than  previously.  There  are  no  clan
              militias in Mogadishu, no clan violence, and  no  clan  based
              discriminatory treatment, even for minority clan members.

          ix) If it is accepted that a person facing a return to  Mogadishu
              after a period of absence has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
              relatives in  the  city  to  assist  him  in  re-establishing
              himself on return, there will need to be a careful assessment
              of  all  of  the  circumstances.  These  considerations  will
              include, but are not limited to:


                    . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
                    . length of absence from Mogadishu;
                    .  family  or  clan  associations  to  call   upon   in
                      Mogadishu;
                    . access to financial resources;
                    . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether  that  be
                      employment or self employment;
                    . availability of remittances from abroad;
                    . means of support during the time spent in the  United
                      Kingdom;
                    . why his ability to fund the journey to  the  West  no
                      longer  enables  an  appellant  to  secure  financial
                      support on return.

           x)        Put another way, it will  be  for  the  person  facing
              return to explain why he would not  be  able  to  access  the
              economic  opportunities  that  have  been  produced  by   the
              economic boom, especially as there is evidence to the  effect
              that returnees are taking jobs at the expense  of  those  who
              have never been away.


          xi) It will, therefore, only be those  with  no  clan  or  family
              support who will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad
              and who have  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
              livelihood on return who will face the prospect of living  in
              circumstances falling  below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
              humanitarian protection terms.

         xii) The evidence indicates clearly that it is  not  simply  those
              who originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to
              live in the city without being subjected to an Article  15(c)
              risk or facing a real risk of destitution. On the other hand,
              relocation in Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan  with
              no former links to the city, no access to funds and no  other
              form of clan, family or social  support  is  unlikely  to  be
              realistic as, in the absence of means to establish a home and
              some form of ongoing financial support there will be  a  real
              risk of having  no  alternative  but  to  live  in  makeshift
              accommodation within an  IDP  camp  where  there  is  a  real
              possibility of having to live in conditions  that  will  fall
              below acceptable humanitarian standards.

20. At paragraph 406 the Tribunal expressly endorsed the view of the  UNHCR
    with respect to arrival of returnees in Mogadishu:

         "With  regard  to  Mogadishu,  the  personal  circumstances  of  an
         individual need  to  be  carefully  assessed.  UNHCR  considers  an
         IFA/IRA as reasonable only  where  the  individual  can  expect  to
         benefit from meaningful nuclear and/or extended family support  and
         clan protection mechanisms in the area of  prospective  relocation.
         When assessing the reasonableness of an IFA/IRA in Mogadishu in  an
         individual case, it should be kept in  mind  that  the  traditional
         extended family and  community  structures  of  Somali  society  no
         longer constitute as strong a protection and  coping  mechanism  in
         Mogadishu as they  did  in  the  past.  Additionally,  whether  the
         members of the traditional networks are  able  to  genuinely  offer
         support to the applicant in practice also needs  to  be  evaluated,
         especially given the fragile and complex situation in Mogadishu  at
         present.


         For the following categories of Somalis, UNHCR would consider  that
         an IFA/IRA will not be  reasonably  available  in  the  absence  of
         meaningful nuclear and/or extended family support  and  functioning
         clan protection: unaccompanied children or adolescents at  risk  of
         forced recruitment and other grave violations; young males at  risk
         of being considered Al Shabaab sympathizers  and  therefore  facing
         harassment from government security forces; elderly people;  people
         with physical or  mental  disabilities;  single  women  and  female
         single heads of households with no male protection  and  especially
         originating from minority clans. In any other exceptional cases, in
         which the application of an IFA/IRA in Mogadishu is considered even
         in the  absence  of  meaningful  family  or  clan  support  to  the
         individual, the person would need to have access to  infrastructure
         and livelihood opportunities and to other meaningful protection and
         support mechanisms, taking into  account  the  state  institutions'
         limited ability to provide security and meaningful protection." (my
         emphasis)

21. For the Appellant Mr Hussain relied on this country guidance.  For  the
    Respondent Mr Harrison did not seek to persuade  me  that  the  country
    guidance should not be  applied.  He  pointed  to  the  'hole'  in  our
    understanding about where the Appellant actually comes from  and  asked
    me to consider whether there was the evidence to support a finding that
    the Appellant was without help in Mogadishu.

22. I have considered the facts as found  against  the  country  background
    material and the helpful guidance given in MOJ.  The Appellant  has  no
    known links to Mogadishu. It can be assumed that she  has  some  family
    somewhere, likely in the North, but I am not  satisfied  that  she  can
    call upon her former husband or family for assistance because she  will
    have the presence of two additional children to explain. In the context
    of Somali society she is likely to incur considerable hostility because
    she has had these children outside of wedlock.   This will no doubt  be
    exacerbated if it was her husband or natal  family  who  paid  for  her
    departure from Somalia. It is therefore unlikely  that  she  will  make
    contact with her family, or seek to return  to  the  North.   She  will
    therefore be a lone woman without male protection in Mogadishu. I  find
    it to be unlikely that she would be able to work  to  support  herself,
    since she has the young children to care for. Without a support network
    it is very difficult to see how she  would  manage  employment  without
    childcare. I am satisfied, having heard the evidence of Mr Y,  that  he
    is committed to her and that he would seek  to  support  her  upon  her
    return to Somalia. He told me that he supports  her  financially  today
    and I have no reason to believe that he would not  continue  to  do  so
    should she and the children be removed.    She would therefore have the
    safety net of some remittances. Having considered all of these  factors
    I am not satisfied that the Appellant and her children would be safe in
    Mogadishu, or that it would be reasonable for her to live in the  city.
    Although she may be able to avoid the more squalid IDP camps by  virtue
    of Mr Y's remittances,   I find the terms of the UNHCR guidance  to  be
    striking: she is a female head of a household without male  protection.
    The evidence to the Tribunal in MOJ  was  replete  with  references  to
    sexual violence against women, in particular IDPs: see for instance the
    accepted evidence of Amnesty International, the UN, Dr  Hoehne  and  Mr
    Mullen.  There is nothing in the more up to date evidence  provided  by
    Dr Hoehne in this appeal to indicate that the  situation  has  improved
    [see paragraphs 21-25].   The presence of the children would render her
    even more vulnerable.    I am satisfied that return to Mogadishu is not
    safe or viable for this Appellant.    Accordingly she has made out  her
    claim under the Refugee Convention.






    Human Rights: Article 8 ECHR

23. It is not in dispute that the Appellant has two children  with  her  in
    the UK.  At the date of the hearing before me  they  were  respectively
    approaching their second and first birthdays.   Nor is  it  in  dispute
    that the youngest child is a British national, by virtue  of  the  fact
    that his father Mr Y was a British citizen when he  was  born.  At  the
    hearing I was informed that the couple are expecting a second child:  I
    was shown medical evidence confirming that  the  Appellant's  estimated
    date of delivery is the 23rd March 2016.  Mr Harrison agreed that if  Y
    is the father of this child (this assertion being unchallenged  by  the
    Respondent) this child too will be a British citizen. Although I cannot
    take the best interests of this unborn child into account I am entitled
    to consider whether it is reasonably foreseeable that it will be  born,
    and consider the hypothetical situation in which it would be  returned,
    as an infant, to Somalia with his mother.


24. The parties agree that the Appellant cannot succeed in  her  Article  8
    claim with reference to the Immigration Rules. She and  Mr  Y  are  not
    married, nor can they be considered partners, since they have not  been
    cohabiting for at least 2 years. I must consider Article 8  outside  of
    the Rules.


25. I am satisfied that there is a family life between  the  Appellant  and
    her children. I am satisfied that there is a family life between  Mr  Y
    and his baby.  I am satisfied that there is a family life shared by  Mr
    Y and the Appellant. They are not presently living together but  it  is
    apparent from  their  evidence  that  this  is  because  of  a  set  of
    complicating factors rather than by choice. First of all the couple are
    cousins, and their relationship has placed  a  great  strain  on  other
    relationships within the family. Mr Y's mother took  the  Appellant  in
    after her arrival in the UK and was then extremely unhappy to  discover
    that her niece had been sleeping with her son. The Appellant was  asked
    to leave the family home as a result. She is now accommodated  by  NASS
    and there is a specific prohibition in her tenancy agreement preventing
    anyone else from staying the night in the property.  In any event Mr  Y
    works at night as a security guard.  Mr Y told me  that  despite  these
    challenges he and the Appellant are committed to one another  and  that
    when the Creator permits it, they will be  married.  He  said  that  he
    visits the  Appellant  and  the  children  regularly  and  that  he  is
    providing her with financial support. They are looking forward  to  the
    birth of the new baby and he will do all that he can  to  support  her.
    I am satisfied that this  is  a  relationship  of  substance  and  that
    notwithstanding the Appellant's failure to meet the criteria in GEN.1.2
    of Appendix FM, this is a family life within the rubric of  Article  8.
    I am by extension satisfied that Mr Y now shares a family life with the
    eldest child of the family. He told me, and there is no evidence to the
    contrary, that they are a family.


26. I am satisfied that the removal of the Appellant and the children would
    result in an interference with their family life with Mr Y. It  is  his
    evidence that he would not return to Somalia, a country he has not been
    to since he was a teenager.  I consider it extremely unlikely  that  he
    would leave the UK. He is a British national, with family, a  home  and
    employment here.   I therefore find Article 8 to be engaged.

27. The decision to refuse leave to remain to persons who do not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules  is  one  lawfully  open  to  the
    Respondent and it is taken in pursuit of the  legitimate  Article  8(2)
    aim of protecting the economy.

28. In assessing proportionality I must have regard to the factors set  out
    in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.
    All of the factors set out in  117B  (1)-(5)  must  weigh  against  the
    Appellant, or put another way,  must  be  considered  to  diminish  the
    weight to be placed in her side of the scales.  She entered the  United
    Kingdom illegally and has  not  had  any  leave  to  remain  since  her
    arrival. She does not, as far as I  am  aware,  speak  English  to  any
    degree of competency. She is not financially self  sufficient;  she  is
    presently assisted  by  NASS  and  relies  on  Mr  Y  for  help.  Their
    relationship was established when her status  was  at  the  very  least
    precarious, if not unlawful. Mr Hussain accepts all of this. He  relies
    however on the terms of paragraph  117B(6)  as  it  has  recently  been
    interpreted by the President in Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6))
    [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC).  Where the criteria in 117B(6) are met,  there
    is no public interest in the removal of the person concerned:

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, and


         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.

29. A 'qualifying child' is a child who has been in the UK for a continuous
    period of seven years or more, or  is  a  British  citizen.  Since  the
    Appellant's youngest child is British he is a  qualifying  child.   She
    has a genuine parental relationship with him.   The question  therefore
    is whether it would be "reasonable" for the Appellant's  British  child
    to go to live in Mogadishu with her.


30. 'Reasonable' does not meet  proportionate  in  the  sense  that  it  is
    understood in the Article 8 sense.  Whether it is reasonable  that  the
    child is expected to leave the UK must be  assessed  in  light  of  all
    relevant factors, but it is not a matter where the public interest  has
    an automatically substantial weight. The child in question is an infant
    and knows little of his surroundings bar the love and affection of  his
    parents, and possibly his interaction  with  his  big  brother.  He  is
    'home' when he is with his mother. The fact that he would be travelling
    with his mother is then a weighty factor. I must also  have  regard  to
    the fact that he is British and  that  he  is  entitled  to  enjoy  the
    benefits of his nationality: per Hale LJ in ZH (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC
    4. That this is so is expressly recognised by  the  Respondent  in  her
    Immigration Directorates  Instruction  Family  Migration:  Appendix  FM
    Section 1.0b Family Life as a Partner or Parent:  10 Year Routes. Under
    the heading at 11.2.3 "would it be unreasonable  to  expect  a  British
    child to leave the UK?" the answer is given:
         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer of a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice judgment in
         Zambrano.
         Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that parent
         or primary carer".
31. I find that as a young infant the child cannot be  separated  from  his
    mother. She would be removed to a country outside of the EU.  In  those
    circumstances the decision  would  contravene  this  guidance  and  the
    principles established in Zambrano: see further Sanade and Ors (British
    children - Zambrano-Derici) [2012]  UKUT  00048  (IAC).   It  would  be
    unreasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the   UK.   In   those
    circumstances there is  no  public  interest  in  the  removal  of  the
    Appellant and her appeal must be allowed with reference  to  Article  8
    ECHR.




    Decisions

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains error of laws  and  it
    is set aside.


33. I remake the decision in the appeal as follows:

    "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


      The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection  because  she
      is a refugee.


      The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".

34. I maintain the direction for anonymity made by the First-tier Tribunal:


      "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant
      is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
      or indirectly  identify  her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This
      direction applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
      Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of  court
      proceedings".







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                 29th
                                February 2016




      Fees


      There were no fees paid in this asylum appeal and there can therefore
      be no fee award.








                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                 29th
                                February 2016


      -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Reid on the 10th June
2015
[2] D11 Respondent's bundle at 4.4
[3] Report dated 30th January 2015 at para 38
[4] ibid at 45

