
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/10320/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13th July 2016                        | On 27th July 2016                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                     F R
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, instructed by Lambeth Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Miss Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran who was born in  1994.  Her  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision to remove her from the UK on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds was dismissed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge C M Phillips in  a  decision  promulgated  on  29th
    April 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed on  the  grounds  that  the  judge  had  made  a
    material mistake of fact, had failed to put  material  matters  to  the
    Appellant and had misdirected herself as to the standard of  proof  and
    misapplied HJ (Iran) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2010] UKSC 31.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Haynes
    on 25th May 2016 on the grounds that it  was  arguable  the  judge  had
    misunderstood the evidence as to whether the Appellant  and  her  uncle
    lived in the same street and it was also arguable that the reference to
    evidence not being convincing may indicate that the judge was  applying
    the wrong standard of proof.

 4. Having read Mr Nicholson's extensive grounds, I invited Miss Ahmad  for
    the Respondent to deal, in particular, with the mistake of fact and the
    standard of proof.   Miss Ahmad submitted that although the  judge  had
    stated in the decision that the Appellant's evidence was  unconvincing,
    she had also referred on numerous occasions to the  lower  standard  of
    proof. The judge had used the word unconvincing in the context that she
    did not accept the evidence as credible. The judge was  well  aware  of
    the standard of proof and had  applied  the  correct  standard  to  the
    evidence that was before her. The  judge's  mistake  of  fact  was  not
    material because the judge had given several other reasons for why  she
    did not find the Appellant's account to be credible.


 5. Miss Ahmad relied on paragraph 5 of Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v Maheswaran [2002] EWCA Civ 173 which states:

         "Where much depends on the credibility of a  party  and  when  that
         party makes several inconsistent statements which  are  before  the
         decision maker that party manifestly has a forensic  problem.  Some
         will choose to confront the inconsistencies straight  on  and  make
         evidential or forensic submissions on them. Others will  hope  that
         the  least  said  soonest  mended  and   consider   that   forensic
         concentration on the point will only make matters worse and that it
         would be better to try and switch the Tribunal's attention to  some
         other aspects of the case.  Undoubtedly it is open to the  Tribunal
         expressly to put a particular inconsistency to a witness because it
         considers that the witness may not  be  alerted  to  the  point  or
         because  it  fears  that  it  may  have  perceived   something   as
         inconsistent  with  an  earlier  answer  which  in  truth  is   not
         inconsistent. Fairness means some circumstances require this to  be
         done but this will not be the usual  case.   Usually  the  Tribunal
         particularly if a party is represented will remain silent  and  see
         how the case unfolds."

6.   The fact that the judge had not put any of  the  points  on  which  she
    made adverse credibility findings to the Appellant at the  hearing  did
    not amount to an error of law. Further, the judge had given lengthy and
    sufficient reasons as to why she did not find the Appellant's  evidence
    to be credible. Accordingly, there was no materiality  in  the  judge's
    mistake of fact.

7.   Miss Ahmad submitted that the issue  was  whether  the  other  findings
    were  sufficient  to  sustain  the  decision  or  whether  a  different
    conclusion could have been reached notwithstanding these  findings.  It
    was the Appellant's own evidence  that  she  was  not  opposed  to  the
    marriage and therefore the judge's overall finding was not affected  by
    the errors of law identified in the grounds.

8.   Mr Nicholson submitted that whilst the judge had set  out  her  reasons
    at length there were in  fact  very  few  reasons  and  the  judge  had
    actually referred to and relied on the error of fact at paragraphs  57,
    59 and 86 of the decision.  The judge had got one  of  the  core  facts
    wrong and had repeatedly held it against the Appellant  throughout  her
    reasoning.  This was compounded  by  the  judge's  reference  in  three
    paragraphs of the decision to the fact that she found the oral evidence
    of the Appellant or her mother to be unconvincing. Whilst the judge had
    referred to the correct standard of proof, in other paragraphs  of  her
    decision, it would appear that in assessing the oral evidence the judge
    had applied a higher standard of proof.


Discussion and Conclusions

9.   I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law  in  applying  a
    higher standard of proof in  relation  to  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and her mother. The judge found at  paragraph  44  that  "the
    Appellant in oral evidence did not provide any convincing  evidence  of
    any opposition to the wedding".

10.  At paragraph 78, the judge stated:

         "I find unconvincing the evidence that the Family Attorney was  not
         instructed to safeguard the interests of the family on  receipt  of
         the  summons.  I  find  unconvincing  the  oral  evidence  of   the
         Appellant's mother giving as a reason for this  omission  the  fact
         that the Appellant was not  in  Iran  and  the  Appellant's  mother
         wished to bring  the  summons  to  the  UK  to  show  this  to  the
         Appellant."

11.  And at paragraph 80, she stated:

         "The Appellant has been unable to provide  convincing  evidence  of
         the reason for the summons because  at  the  asylum  interview  the
         Appellant was unable to give a reason for her summons stating  that
         because she was not in Iran she does not know what the reasons  for
         them are."

12.  Whilst the judge has referred to the correct lower  standard  of  proof
    at other parts of her decision it would appear that, when she assessing
    the oral evidence and the Appellant's explanation for the summons,  she
    applied a higher standard than a reasonable degree of likelihood.  With
    several findings such as these it cannot  be  assumed  that  the  judge
    would have come to the  same  conclusion  had  she  applied  the  lower
    standard to  the  entirety  of  the  evidence  which  was  before  her,
    including the oral evidence.

13.  I also find that the judge made a material mistake  of  fact  amounting
    to an error of law for the following reasons. The  judge  concluded  at
    paragraph 57:

         "The fact that the Appellant was able to undertake  these  journeys
         to Turkey with her mother  when  according  to  her  first  witness
         statement they  were  living  in  the  same  street  as  her  uncle
         undermines her claim to be at real risk on return  because  despite
         the death of  her  father  and  the  proximity  to  her  uncle  the
         Appellant plainly had, prior  to  travel  to  the  United  Kingdom,
         enjoyed freedom of movement and the freedom to travel outside  Iran
         and return."

14.  In the Appellant's witness statement  it  quite  clearly  states  that,
    whilst at one time the Appellant did live on the  same  street  as  her
    uncle, she did not at the time that she made her application for a visa
    and she was not living on the same street as her uncle when she came to
    the UK. The judge's conclusion is based on a mistake of fact.

15.  This error is material  because  it  affects  the  judge's  credibility
    findings in respect of  the  whole  of  the  Appellant's  evidence.  At
    paragraphs 59 and 86,  the  judge  relies  on  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence based on the fact that the Appellant and her  uncle  lived  in
    the same road. The judge relies on the same mistake of  fact  on  three
    occasions throughout the decision. It cannot be said that this  mistake
    of fact was not relevant given the judge's other  findings  because  it
    quite clearly is part for the judge's conclusion as to the  credibility
    of the Appellant on the whole of the evidence.

16.  Given these two errors of law, I  find  that  the  judge's  credibility
    findings are unsafe. I have decided, in accordance with  paragraph  7.2
    of the Practice Statements of 25th September 2012,  that  the  decision
    dated 15th April 2016 and promulgated on 29th April 2016 should be  set
    aside and the appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete
    rehearing. None of the judge's findings of fact are preserved.



                                 DIRECTIONS

(i)  The Tribunal is directed pursuant to section 12(3)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to reconsider the appeal at  a  hearing
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    C M Phillips.

(ii) I direct that the Appellant serve on the Respondent  and  the  Tribunal
    not less than 14 days before the  hearing  any  further  evidence  upon
    which she intends to rely.

(iii)    No interpreter is required. Time estimate of three hours.


Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed

J Frances

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances                                     Date:  26th
July 2016


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed

J Frances

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances                                     Date:  26th
July 2016
