
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/10769/2012
     AA/10771/2012
     aa/10773/2012
     aa/10774/2012
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 June 2013                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     I B
                                     M F
                                     U U
                                     B V
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

I direct that the appellants be identified only by the initials given above

Representation:
For the Appellants:    No appearance or representation
For the Respondent:    Ms M Tanner, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Uzbekistan. Two of the appellant are  the
    children of the other two appellants. They are about 6 and 4  years  old
    respectively and in all the circumstances I have decide  to  follow  the
    First-tier Tribunal by directing that they appellants are identify  only
    by the initials indicated above.

 2. They appeal against a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing
    their appeals against a decision of the respondent  to  refuse  to  vary
    their leave to remain and to remove them from the United Kingdom.  It is
    accepted the decision to remove them, in the light of the  present  law,
    was wrong and  the  appeals  against  the  removal  decision  should  be
    allowed. This does not mean that the appellant are entitled to remain in
    the United Kingdom but that the respondent must make a further  decision
    if she wants to remove them.

 3. Permission to appeal was refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Keki? who  indicated  in  her  grant  of
    permission that the real point of concern was the decision to remove and
    she suggested that the appeals should be disposed of properly, solely by
    allowing the appeal to the extent indicated.  This was not acceptable to
    the appellants and Judge Keki? decided that it would be inappropriate to
    hear the subsequent appeal as  she  might  have  been  thought  to  have
    prejudiced herself by giving the directions that she did.   Accordingly,
    the appeal came before me.

 4. The appellants did not attend.  I do not know why they did  not  attend.
    The papers show they were given proper notice of the hearing and in  the
    absence of any explanation I resolved to continue with the hearing.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal's determination is very  thorough  and  helpful.
    The scene is set by the opening paragraphs which I set out below:

         "1.  The appellants are citizens of Uzbekistan, born, respectively,
         on XX XX 1979, XX XX 1984, XX XX 2007 and XX XX  2009.   The  first
         two appellants are husband and wife and  the  remaining  appellants
         are their children.

         2.   The first appellant was originally granted leave to enter  the
         UK on a student visa on 1 May 2003.  He thereafter obtained various
         extensions of that leave until 31  October  2002.   His  wife,  the
         second appellant, was issued with a student visa on 6 October  2006
         and  had  subsequently  been  granted  leave  to  remain   as   the
         appellant's dependent spouse in the UK until 30 October 2012.   The
         two children also have leave as dependants until 30  October  2012,
         having arrived in the United Kingdom on 29 February 2012.

         3.   On 3 October 2012, the appellants applied for asylum.   On  15
         November 2012 those applications were refused,  they  were  refused
         any variation of their leave to remain, and a removal decision  was
         made as to their return to Uzbekistan.   They  now  appeal  against
         that decision."

 6. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the first appellant had, on one of
    his many visits to Uzbekistan been arrested, interrogated  and  detained
    about his activities in the United Kingdom.  It is said that  there  was
    concern about his renewed interest in practising Islam. It is,  I  find,
    unremarkable that national security forces became interested in a person
    who, on a visit to the United Kingdom, had become  more  devout  in  his
    observance of Islam. Many devout Muslim are pious, peace loving  people.
    Some are not.

 7. I do not suggest that detention overnight in a police station  would  be
    at all agreeable but it is not persecution and it was  not  said  to  be
    persecution.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered very carefully the evidence and
    submissions before it. The key findings are at paragraph 22 where it was
    noted that the real concern of the first appellant is that he would  not
    be able to practise the Muslim faith as he wished to do because he could
    not wear religious dress without attracting attention  of  a  kind  that
    could lead to a degree of societal disapproval.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge looked for  but  was  not  given  evidence
    indicating quite what the consequences would be.   There  was  something
    described as "administrative detention" but that was not  explained  and
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge was not able to say whether such detention
    could be described properly as persecution.   In  any  event  the  first
    appellant made it clear that he would in fact not wear religious  dress.
    In Uzbekistan only old people wore such garments.  The  first  appellant
    would attend the official mosques and  offer  his  prayers  wearing  the
    ordinary fashionable clothes of the day.

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was satisfied  that  for  this  particular
    appellant this conformity with social mores would be a restraint on  his
    desire to express his religious convictions in the way that he wanted to
    do but it was a restraint  at  the  peripheries  of  his  expression  of
    religion.  He would certainly be able to conduct himself in a  way  that
    identified himself to anybody who wanted to know that he is a Muslim and
    he would not be restricted in any way from attending mosque and carrying
    out religious observances associated with attending the mosque.

11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge decided that  this  kind  of  restriction,
    although annoying for the appellant, did not amount to persecution.

12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge had reminded himself of the  decisions  in
    HJ (Iran) but took the view that the kind of restriction imposed was not
    the kind of restriction that was identified there as  a  restriction  on
    religious observance.  It would be  quite  different  if  the  appellant
    lived in a country where he could not practise as a Muslim and so had to
    pretend  he  had  no  religious  convictions  or   different   religious
    convictions to avoid persecution.  Such a person would almost  certainly
    be a refugee.  The First-tier Tribunal found that this person would  not
    be  able  to  observe  religious  dress  and  that  did  not  amount  to
    persecution in his case.

13. Although the grounds are quite extensive and are  presented  under  five
    headings this is really  the  point  that  they  challenge  in  slightly
    different ways.  Ground 3, I think, is immaterial.   It  criticises  the
    judge for referring to decided cases that were not cited before him.  We
    are all presumed to know the law and although it is unhelpful  sometimes
    to look at cases about which argument  has  not  been  heard,  there  is
    nothing in the grounds that suggested this was a material error in  this
    case and I am not persuaded that it was.

14. I note in ground 1 that there is a particular reference to  no  findings
    being made on the appellant's claim to  follow  a  banned  cleric  named
    Nazarov but that does not impress me because there were  clear  findings
    that the appellant could join a mosque and worship and pray.  I  do  not
    see what being a follower of Nazarov adds to the mix which would support
    a different conclusion.

15. The  other  grounds  purport  to  challenge  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings and approach leading to the  conclusion  that  the  restriction
    associated  with  not  being  able  to  wear  religious  dress   without
    attracting disapproval was persecutory.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    concluded that it was not and I am  wholly  unpersuaded  there  was  any
    error of law either in the analysis of the evidence or  the  application
    of the law on that approach.

16. It follows therefore that I dismiss the appeals against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appeals  except  against  the
    decision to remove.

Decision

The appeal against the decision to remove the appellants is allowed and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. If the  respondent  wishes
to remove the appellants she must make a fresh decision.

Otherwise the appeal is dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 28 June 2013                   |











