
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10554/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30th June 2015                    |On 24th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                MAKDA ASGEDOM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Stevens, Legal Representative of Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion, I shall continue to refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 2. On 23rd February 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Grant-Hutchison
    gave permission to the respondent to appeal  against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal J S Law in which he allowed the appeal
    on asylum grounds against the decision  of  the  respondent  to  refuse
    asylum, humanitarian and human rights protection to  the  appellant,  a
    female citizen of Eritrea.

 3. The grounds of application contended that the judge failed to take into
    consideration factors which could have led to the conclusion  that  the
    appellant would not have been at risk on return for failing to complete
    military service or the fact that her uncle  and  father  were  freedom
    fighters which might have put the appellant  in  a  limited  exceptions
    category allowing her to  leave  the  country  illegally.   The  latter
    category is outlined in paragraph (iv) of MO (Illegal exit  -  risk  on
    return) Eritrea CG [2011].

 4. Judge Grant-Hutchison granted permission on the basis that the  grounds
    of application were arguable. That was because the appellant might have
    been exempted  from  military  service  as  a  married  woman  who  had
    completed six years  of  military  service  and  because  her  father's
    activities might have meant she left the country legally.

Error on a Point of Law

 5. Mr McVeety confirmed that the respondent relied  on  the  grounds.   He
    further submitted that the judge had  found  that  the  appellant  left
    Eritrea  illegally  without  consideration  of  her  background  as  MO
    required.

 6. Mr Stevens relied on the response dated 8th May 2015.  In  this  it  is
    argued that the guidance set out in MO enabled the  judge  to  conclude
    that the appellant was  at  real  risk  of  persecution  on  return  to
    Eritrea.  Any argument about her  having  completed  national  service,
    which was heavily disputed by the appellant, was irrelevant to  whether
    or not she qualified for asylum.   Further,  if  the  appellant  was  a
    person who had left Eritrea illegally the fact that her late father was
    a freedom fighter should make no difference to risk  as  the  appellant
    had not given important service to the Eritrean government herself.  It
    is also pointed out that the appellant had provided compelling evidence
    in the form of photographs to show  that  she  had  undergone  national
    service which she had been  unable  to  avoid  because  of  her  family
    connections.  Finally, it was contended that the decision  was  careful
    and balanced with the judge making both positive and negative  findings
    which showed a critical analysis of the evidence.

 7. Mr Stevens also drew my attention to the judge's reference in paragraph
    13(i) of the decision to the issue of the appellant's military  service
    and potential exemption from it.   Nevertheless,  Mr  Stevens  conceded
    that  specific  reasons  were  difficult  to  find  for   the   judge's
    conclusions in paragraphs 22 and 23 that the appellant had left Eritrea
    illegally, particularly taking into consideration the issues raised  by
    the respondent.  Mr Stevens argued that any errors should not  be  seen
    as material.

Conclusions

 8. After considering the matter for a few moments I announced that  I  was
    satisfied that the decision showed errors on points of law  as  claimed
    for the reasons which now follow.

 9. The decision does not show that the judge grappled with the possibility
    that the appellant might have been demobilised from military service on
    the basis that she was married and taking into consideration  that  she
    had already served six years.  These were factors referred  to  in  the
    COI Report of 18th September 2013 at  paragraphs  9.51  and  9.52.  The
    report was before the judge in the appellant's bundle submitted on 15th
    January 2015.  Additionally,  the  judge  makes  no  reference  to  the
    relevant point raised in the head note to MO at  paragraph  (iv)  about
    military service exemption for those who were perceived as having given
    valuable service.  That  was  an  issue  specifically  referred  to  in
    paragraphs 51 and 52 of the respondent's reasons for refusal letter and
    therefore required to be dealt  with.   The  judge's  failure  to  give
    adequate consideration to the two relevant issues therefore amounts  to
    a material error on a point of law such that the decision should be set
    aside.

10. Both representatives agreed that any re-making of the  decision  should
    take place before the First-tier Tribunal as  fresh  findings  of  fact
    would be necessary.  This would accord with  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the
    Practice Statements for the Tribunal made by the  Senior  President  on
    25th September 2012.

DIRECTIONS

11. The appeal will be heard afresh before the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
    at Stoke on 1st February 2016.

12. A Tigrinyan interpreter will be required for the First-tier hearing.

13. The hearing should not be before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  J  S
    Law.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

