
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
aa/10052/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke             |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 30th June 2016                         |  On 6th July 2016                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                              Amirwafa Dawlatzy
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs D Dhaliwal of Counsel instructed by JD Spicer
Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision  of  Judge  Kershaw  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 4th April 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Afghanistan born 1st January 1997 so
    he is now 19 years of age.  The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom
    illegally in September 2009 and claimed asylum.  His claim was  refused
    but he was granted discretionary leave to remain  as  an  unaccompanied
    asylum seeking child.  The discretionary leave to remain ended  on  1st
    July 2014 and in June 2014 the Appellant applied for further  leave  to
    remain.

 3. This application was refused on 23rd June  2015,  and  the  Appellant's
    appeal was heard by the FTT on 4th March 2016.

 4. The FTT found that the Appellant would not be at risk  if  returned  to
    Afghanistan, and decided that the Appellant was not entitled to asylum,
    or a grant of humanitarian protection, and that to remove him from  the
    United Kingdom would not breach any of his human  rights  protected  by
    the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission was granted by Judge Grant-Hutchison on one ground only, and
    I set out below the grant of permission in part;

         "2.  It is submitted that the judge erred in law on the basis of:
              (a) approaching the test of credibility  of  the  Appellant's
                  account from the rationale of the country of  adjudication
                  and not the country of origin at paras 43  to  45  of  the
                  decision and reasons (reference is made to  Karanakaran  v
                  SSHD [2000] EWCA Civ 11);
             (b)  the Appellant's failure to provide  independent  evidence
                  or documentary evidence about his father's death when  the
                  Appellant was only 11 years of age on arrival and no  such
                  specific corroboration is required; and
             (c)  failing to consider the cultural norms of Afghanistan  in
                  the context of family tracing.
         3.    The  judge  considered  the  evidence  and  made  appropriate
             findings which were open to him to make.  It was open for  the
             judge to consider what weight he felt it appropriate to  place
             on the evidence before him.   The  judge  finds  that  as  the
             Appellant's evidence in relation to the death  of  his  father
             was scant, documentary evidence would have been of  assistance
             not that the Appellant required to corroborate  his  evidence.
             There is no error for the judge to suggest that the Red  Cross
             seek out his mother or siblings in addition to his uncle  with
             whom his mother and siblings were living.  The judge has given
             adequate reasons for his decision.
         4.   However it is arguable that the judge has misdirected  himself
             in not considering sections 117A  to  D  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002   when   considering   the
             Appellant's Article 8 claim outside the Immigration Rules."

 6. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary it was noted that permission had been granted only in
    relation to consideration of Article 8.  It was submitted that although
    the judge had used the word 'exceptional' an  exceptionality  test  had
    not been applied.  It was considered  that  the  FTT  did  not  err  in
    finding that the circumstances  did  not  warrant  a  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the rules, and therefore a section 117B consideration
    was not required.  In any event, if the FTT had gone on to consider the
    application outside of the rules, the  grounds  do  not  refer  to  any
    factors which would arguably have led to a different conclusion.

 7. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FTT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Oral Submissions

 8. Mrs Dhaliwal submitted that the FTT had failed to carry  out  a  proper
    Article 8 assessment, and had failed to carry out the correct  approach
    outlined in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  The FTT failed to consider  any  of
    the factors set out in sections 117A - D of the 2002 Act.

 9. The FTT erred in paragraph 65 by recording;

         "There is nothing exceptional about this Appellant's case  such  as
         to warrant consideration outside of the rules."

10. Mr McVeety relied upon the rule 24 response but accepted that  the  FTT
    had erred by making reference to 'exceptional' in paragraph  65,  which
    was not the test to be applied.  However Mr  McVeety  argued  that  the
    error was not material, as the FTT had considered the  relevant  issues
    at paragraph 64 when considering the Appellant's private life  pursuant
    to paragraph 276ADE(1).  There was therefore no need for the FTT go  on
    and consider Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

11. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

12. Both representatives accepted that permission to appeal had  only  been
    granted in relation to the FTT's approach  to  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  I therefore have to decide whether the FTT erred by
    failing to carry out an Article 8 assessment  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

13. In my view Mr McVeety was correct to accept that there is an  error  of
    law in paragraph 65 in making reference to 'exceptional'  and  the  FTT
    should have considered the guidance contained in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA
    Civ 387 paragraph 33 which I reproduce below in part;

         "In our judgment, even though a test  of  exceptionality  does  not
         apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
         accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of
         special contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances
         would need to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of  LTR
         outside the new rules in Appendix FM.   In  our  view,  that  is  a
         formulation which is not as strict as a test of exceptionality or a
         requirement of 'very compelling reasons'  (as  referred  to  in  MF
         (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  rules  applicable  to  foreign
         criminals), but which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
         consideration of public interest factors as finds expression in the
         Secretary of State's formulation of the new rules in Appendix FM."

14. Therefore the appropriate test that should have been considered by  the
    FTT is whether  there  were  compelling  circumstances  which  required
    consideration of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

15. It is not in dispute that the Appellant could not  succeed  by  relying
    upon the provisions of Appendix FM in relation  to  family  life.   The
    findings made by the FTT  in  relation  to  private  life  pursuant  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1) have not been challenged.

16. The FTT made findings in paragraphs 49  and  56  which  have  not  been
    successfully challenged.  These findings  are  that  the  FTT  was  not
    satisfied that  the  Appellant  was  in  any  danger  from  anybody  in
    Afghanistan, there was no feud in existence, and the Appellant was  not
    being sought by any particular person  or  family.   The  FTT  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant has no family in Afghanistan and therefore
    was not satisfied that the Appellant is an orphan.

17. The Appellant's Article 8 claim is based on the fact that he has  lived
    in this country since  2009,  and  been  educated  here,  has  obtained
    qualifications by reason  of  his  education,  and  made  friends.   He
    submitted a witness statement dated 11th June 2014 which indicated that
    at that time he was living in semi independent accommodation  and  that
    he received support from Kent Social Services.

18. At the date of the hearing before the FTT the Appellant was  an  adult,
    and although described by the FTT as being 18 years of  age,  it  would
    seem that he was in fact 19 years of age at the date of hearing.

19. It could not be said that the Appellant had established a  family  life
    that would engage Article 8.  At paragraph 64 the FTT acknowledges that
    the Appellant arrived in this country when he was around  11  years  of
    age, and that his teenage years had been spent here.  The FTT  describe
    the Appellant as having developed a great deal in this country  between
    the ages of 11 and 18, and developed skills that could be  utilised  in
    Afghanistan.

20. The FTT found that the Appellant would have no language difficulty  and
    stated;

         "I have taken into account his education and the fact that  he  has
         achieved a number of things whilst in the UK but these  are  things
         that can only assist him should he be returned."

    Having taken all these factors into account, the FTT went  on  to  find
    that the Appellant's appeal could not  succeed  pursuant  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1).

21. I do not find that there are factors that have not been  considered  by
    the FTT when considering 276ADE(1) that would  need  to  be  considered
    under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

22. It is correct that the FTT did not consider section 117B  of  the  2002
    Act, but this would not need to be  considered  unless  Article  8  was
    considered  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   If  section  117B   was
    considered, then the fact that the Appellant can  speak  English  would
    not have assisted his case, as the Upper Tribunal in AM  Malawi  [2015]
    UKUT 0260 (IAC) found that an Appellant can obtain no positive right to
    a grant of leave to remain from either section 117B(2) or (3)  whatever
    the degree of his fluency in English or the strength of  his  financial
    resources.

23. Section 117B(5) would have to be taken into account, which states  that
    little weight should be given to a private life established by a person
    at a time when the person's  immigration  status  is  precarious.   The
    Appellant has always had a precarious immigration status in that he has
    only ever had limited leave to remain.  Therefore the  FTT  would  have
    had  to  accord  little  weight  to  the  private  life  that  he   has
    established.

24. I therefore conclude that although the FTT erred in believing the  test
    for considering Article 8 outside the rules to be one of exceptionality
    rather than  compelling  circumstances,  the  error  is  not  material,
    because the  FTT  considered  all  relevant  matters  when  considering
    Article 8 pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT did not involve the making of an error  on  a  point
of law such that the decision must be set aside.  I do  not  set  aside  the
decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FTT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and I see no need to make an  anonymity
order.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             1st July 2016

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the FTT decision stands, so does the decision not to make a fee award.




Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             1st July 2016
