
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10007/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Birmingham ET               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 January 2016                   |On 26 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |



                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     AT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza, solicitor, Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ Pirotta, promulgated on 26
    March 2015. Permission to appeal was granted on  7  September  2015  by
    Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker.

Background


 2. The appellant was encountered in Dunkerque on 2 April  2012  attempting
    to gain entry to the United Kingdom clandestinely. He  was  removed  to
    France. The appellant returned to the United Kingdom and claimed asylum
    on 18 April 2012. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim is that  he
    is at risk in Albania on the basis of a blood feud, which started after
    his further carried out a murder.

 3. The Secretary of State refused that application  owing  to  a  lack  of
    corroboration as well as a number of inconsistencies in the appellant's
    account. The appellant  declined  assistance  in  tracing  his  family,
    stating that he was in regular telephone contact with them. The British
    Embassy in Tirana confirmed that a person with the appellant's name and
    date of birth was registered in Albania and identified his parents; the
    details of which were consistent with those given by the appellant.

 4. This appeal was previously heard on 6 December 2013 and allowed by FTTJ
    Phull. That determination was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge  Hanson
    and the matter remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  with  no  findings
    preserved.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Pirotta dismissed the asylum aspect of  the  appeal
    on the basis that there was no blood feud  in  existence.  Furthermore,
    the appellant's removal to Albania was considered proportionate.

Error of law


 6. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis  that  firstly,  the  FTTJ
    made certain assumptions and secondly, wrongly drew adverse  inferences
    owing to omissions in the appellant's knowledge of events. Thirdly,  it
    was said that the  appellant  was  disadvantaged  by  the  respondent's
    failure to attempt to trace his family members. Permission was  granted
    on all grounds, with the first  ground  considered  to  have  the  most
    merit.

 7. The Secretary of State's response  of  14  May  2015  stated  that  the
    respondent opposed the appeal  as  it  was  considered  that  the  FTTJ
    appropriately directed  herself.  The  grounds  were  described  as  an
    attempt to re-argue the appeal.

The hearing


 8. Mr Reza briefly addressed each of the grounds. He  also  stressed  that
    the respondent now accepted that the appellant's father was a convicted
    murderer in Albania, which was not the case previously. He argued  that
    the  respondent  ought  to  reconsider  the  application,  giving   the
    appellant the benefit of the doubt.

 9. With regard to the first and second grounds, Mr Reza  argued  that  the
    FTTJ speculated regarding issues which were never put to the  appellant
    and which were used to impeach his credibility. Those matters  included
    why the appellant did not discuss the blood feud with  his  father  and
    why the appellant was able to safely reside in Albania for a year after
    the age of 15 prior to his departure.

10. Mr Reza further argued that the appellant's age was  never  in  dispute
    and that he had lost the opportunity of obtaining  Discretionary  Leave
    to Remain (DLR) as an unaccompanied minor. Furthermore, the  respondent
    could have found out  more  details  of  the  blood  feud  if  she  had
    contacted the appellant's family in Albania.

11. Mr McVeety replied, stating that the appellant had  signed  a  document
    stating that he did not want the respondent to trace his family because
    he was already in touch with them. There had been  no  failure  in  the
    duty  to  trace.  He  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  had  been
    disadvantaged by not being granted DLR, given that it would  only  have
    been granted for a very short period of time. The delay in his case had
    benefited the appellant and allowed him to remain in the United Kingdom
    longer. It was not for the Secretary of State to check the veracity  of
    applicant's accounts in their countries of  origin  and  there  was  an
    implicit risk in doing so. Otherwise, Mr McVeety argued that  the  FTTJ
    did not err in her credibility findings  and  relied  on  the  case  of
    Chiver, in that the FTTJ found that the core of the  appellant's  claim
    was credible, that it his father had killed  someone;  but  that  other
    aspects, including that there was a blood feud, were not credible.

12. In reply, Mr Reza acknowledged that blood feuds were declining  however
    they had not stopped and the lower standard applied. While  the  burden
    of proof was on the appellant to prove his case, UNHCR say there  is  a
    joint responsibility. The Secretary of State  steps  to  check  whether
    appellant was a minor and his father's conviction, why should  she  not
    go further and find out from his family whether there is a  blood  feud
    or not.

Decision on error of law

13. I decided to uphold the decision  of  the  FTTJ  as  I  found  she  was
    entitled to conclude that the appellant's account of being at  risk  in
    Albania owing to a blood feud was not credible.

14. The first ground of complaint was  that  it  was  said  that  the  FTTJ
    wrongly inferred that the appellant returned to his family  in  Albania
    upon being returned from France and  that  his  family  twice  paid  an
    agent. I note that it is the appellant's own evidence that he  returned
    to Albania; albeit he only claimed this once  the  respondent  produced
    evidence that he had been removed from Dunkerque.  It  would  not  have
    been unreasonable for the FTTJ to find, in the absence of any  evidence
    to the contrary, that the appellant, as a minor, returned to his family
    while plans were made to send him abroad  for  the  second  time.  This
    finding would have been open to the FTTJ. However,  that  was  not  her
    finding. She in fact concluded that she did not find it  credible  that
    the appellant returned to Albania if he considered his life  to  be  in
    danger. Furthermore, she did not find it credible that  his  father,  a
    shepherd with five other children, would have been able  to  twice  pay
    for the appellant to leave Albania with an agent.  In  fact,  the  FTTJ
    accepted no aspect of the appellant's account  of  his  departure  from
    Albania and travel to the United Kingdom owing to serious discrepancies
    throughout his account.

15. The second ground of appeal was that the FTTJ did not  have  regard  to
    cultural norms in Albania and that it would not be reasonable to expect
    the appellant to question his father regarding his  criminal  sentence.
    At [25] of the decision and reasons, the FTTJ referred  to  differences
    between the appellant's evidence and the documents he relied upon as to
    the length of his father's sentence  and  noted  that  the  appellant's
    evidence was that he had not asked his father for these details.  There
    was no expert evidence before the FTTJ to support the  ground  that  it
    was unreasonable for a teenage child in Albania  to  know  about  their
    father as is contended. Furthermore, the appellant reads and writes and
    brought documents to the United Kingdom, which related to his  father's
    sentence and which he would have been able to  read  for  himself.  The
    FTTJ made no error in  referring  to  the  appellant's  discrepant  and
    lacking evidence in this regard.

16. The FTTJ's reasons are set out from [23] to [40] of  the  decision  and
    reasons and make it clear that there were a large  number  of  concerns
    with the appellant's evidence, which infected each and every aspect  of
    his claim. Even without the matters referred to  in  the  grounds,  the
    FTTJ would have reached an identical decision.

17. Lastly, the FTTJ rightly concluded at [42] that there was no failure by
    the Secretary of State to trace the appellant's family. The  respondent
    had taken steps  to  trace  the  family,  which  began  by  asking  the
    appellant to complete family tracing forms. There was  evidence  before
    the FTTJ that the appellant declined to authorise  tracing  because  he
    knew where his family were and was in contact with them himself.

18. The appellant also argues that he has lost the opportunity of  a  grant
    of DLR owing to the  respondent's  delay.  The  appellant  applied  for
    asylum in April 2012 and that application was refused 18 months  later,
    in October 2013 and therefore even if  he  had  received  an  immediate
    decision, any grant of DLR would have expired in October 2013, when the
    appellant was aged 17 and a half. He has no legitimate expectation that
    any such leave, had it been granted, would have been extended. The FTTJ
    considered all these issues thoroughly at [43] of the decision and  did
    not fall into error.

19. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

20. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  I
    consider it appropriate that this be continued and therefore  make  the
    following anonymity direction:

    "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. "

Conclusions


     The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
     the making of an error on a point of law.

     I uphold the decision of the FTTJ.


Signed      Date: 24 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
