
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10041/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                   |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 6th September 2016                           |On 13th October 2016       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                     SG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford of Counsel instructed by Freedom
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. In a renewed application for leave  to  appeal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Bruce gave permission to the appellant to appeal against  the  decision
    of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ransley in which she dismissed  the
    appeal on all grounds against the decision of the respondent to  refuse
    asylum, humanitarian and human rights protection to  the  appellant,  a
    female citizen of Iran.

 2. Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce gave permission stating that it was arguable
    that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to  consider  post-country
    guidance evidence on risk on return to Iran for failed asylum  seekers.
    Permission was, however, granted on all grounds.

 3. The original grounds of application, which were relied upon before  the
    Upper Tribunal, contended that the judge had  not  considered  all  the
    evidence before her in relation  to  the  appellant's  fear  of  severe
    punishment for not conforming to Islamic  standards  of  female  dress,
    that the judge failed to consider  the  appellant's  vulnerability  and
    mental health when considering credibility  and  failed  to  adequately
    analyse and give reasons for the conclusion that the appellant had  not
    shown that she had committed herself  to  Christianity.   It  was  also
    contended that the judge had failed to consider risk on return for  the
    appellant as a failed asylum seeker who had left Iran illegally.

 4. Mr Bedford indicated to me that reliance was no longer placed upon  the
    alleged failure to consider post-country guidance evidence on  risk  on
    return.  On the basis that permission had been granted on all  grounds,
    he relied upon  an  alleged  failure  by  the  judge  to  consider  the
    credibility of the  appellant  adequately  taking  account  of  medical
    evidence.  He also contended that the appellant's  claimed  failure  to
    follow Islamic modes of dress pointed to a  restriction  on  conscience
    which would require consideration following the guidance set out in  HJ
    (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.

 5. Mr Bedford thought that the conclusion that the appellant had not  told
    the truth about her claim to have been ill-treated  and  raped  by  two
    male police officers, did not take into  consideration  the  background
    material which is referred to in paragraph 8 of  the  original  grounds
    about the strict enforcement of the Islamic dress code for  women.   He
    drew my attention to the medical evidence commencing on page 21 of  the
    appellant's original trial bundle (marked  App  Bundle  A1)  which  had
    referred to the appellant's complaint of sexual  assault  or  rape  and
    attempted suicide and diagnosed PTSD.  He fairly conceded that  one  of
    the medical documents he was referring to was simply a patient  record,
    and the evidence had not been incorporated into a medical report by  an
    expert.  He then referred me to the  other  medical  records  asserting
    that the judge should have been alert to  all  the  matters  raised  in
    those documents.  He then made  reference  to  cases  before  the  ECHR
    which, he contended, suggested that the respondent should have obtained
    further evidence of her own volition to displace the appellant's  prima
    facie case of suffering harm and medical problems.

 6. The first case to which I was  referred  is  JK  and  Others  v  Sweden
    (Application Number 59166/12) at paragraphs 51 and 52 which suggests  a
    requirement for a contracting state to assess asylum claims  adequately
    and with sufficient supporting evidence and objective sources.  He also
    referred  to  the  case  of  M.A.  v  Switzerland  (Application  Number
    52589/13) at paragraph 55 which indicates that, owing  to  the  special
    situation  in  which  asylum  seekers  often  find  themselves,  it  is
    frequently necessary to give them the benefit  of  the  doubt  when  it
    comes to assessing credibility.  The same  paragraph  goes  on  to  say
    that, when information is  presented  which  gives  strong  reasons  to
    question the veracity of an asylum seeker's submissions, the individual
    must provide a satisfactory explanation for the alleged  discrepancies.
    Mr Bedford emphasised that the decision also suggests  that  where  the
    asylum seeker adduces evidence capable of showing there are substantial
    grounds for believing that they would be exposed to real risk on return
    it is for the "government" to dispel any doubts about it.

 7. Finally, in relation to credibility issues, Mr Bedford  submitted  that
    the judge had failed to take into consideration that the  discrepancies
    in evidence relating to the sex of the police officers who arrested the
    appellant wrongly drew upon information given  in  screening  interview
    and so should not have counted against her.

 8. Mr Bates drew my attention to paragraph 24, where the judge  refers  to
    background evidence relating to the Islamic dress code for  women,  and
    the judge's adoption of  this  information  as  a  further  reason  for
    rejecting the appellant's claim to have suffered any sanctions for  her
    breaches of the dress code whilst at university.  He pointed  out  that
    the appellant may have suffered harassment  but  that  would  not  have
    amounted to persecution.

 9. As to the appellant's claims about her conversion to  Christianity,  my
    attention was drawn to paragraphs 40 and 41 of the decision setting out
    the respondent's  views  on  this  additional  ground  of  appeal.   He
    submitted that the judge's conclusions in paragraph 47 meant  that  she
    was not satisfied that the appellant had, actually, changed her faith.

10. Mr Bates also commented on the judge's  consideration  of  the  medical
    evidence.  He  emphasised  that  no  expert  medical  report  had  been
    submitted.  In paragraphs 52 to 60 the judge had given adequate reasons
    for concluding that there was no qualified diagnosis of  PTSD  for  the
    appellant.  He considered the judge's approach to the  limited  medical
    evidence as reasonable.

11. In relation to the argument that the judge should not have  taken  into
    consideration the appellant's  responses  in  screening  interview,  Mr
    Bates pointed out that the judge had given good reasons for her  action
    reaching findings which were open to her.  He  also  reminded  me  that
    there were other inconsistencies found in the evidence  such  as  those
    identified in paragraphs 32 and  33  relating  to  the  alleged  sexual
    assault upon her.

12. In conclusion Mr Bedford argued that there was country guidance in  the
    appellant's main bundle to show that wearing of the hijab was mandatory
    and evidence to suggest the use of sexual torture by  the  authorities.
    This supported the appellant's claims. In relation to  the  appellant's
    faith he contended that the appellant was no longer  a  Muslim  and  so
    would display her lack of faith on return.

Conclusions

13. It is unnecessary  for  me  to  consider,  as  a  discrete  issue,  the
    contention, found in the Upper Tribunal grant of permission,  that  the
    judge failed to address  post-country  guidance  evidence  on  risk  on
    return to Iran for failed asylum seekers. That point is not pursued  by
    Mr Bedford.  However, as I indicate below, such  consideration  may  be
    necessary when this appeal is re-made for the reasons I give, below.

14. The criticisms of the judge's credibility findings on  the  basis  that
    they  are  inadequately  reasoned  appears  without  foundation.    The
    decision, as  a  whole,  is  comprehensive,  thoughtful  and  carefully
    reasoned in its rejection of the claims to  have  been  arrested,  ill-
    treated and to have converted to Christianity in this country. But  the
    decision does not show that the judge  considered  the  claims  in  the
    light of the limited medical evidence  made  available.  This  evidence
    suggested (in correspondence from Gail Ashton) that the  appellant  had
    presented with symptoms of Post-traumatic Stress  Disorder  and  stated
    she had been referred  for  cognitive  behaviour  therapy.  Whilst  the
    medical evidence is not  in  the  form  of  a  medical  report  and  is
    considered by the judge in conjunction with the Article 8  claim,  that
    was an inadequate approach to consideration of the credibility  of  the
    claims.  It  was  incumbent  upon  the  judge  to  consider  and  reach
    conclusions about that medical evidence when examining the  credibility
    of the main claims.  The fact that the limited medical evidence did not
    persuade the judge to conclude that the appellant's  Article  8  rights
    would be infringed if she were to be returned did not  mean  that  such
    evidence would have no  relevance  to  the  appellant's  other  claims.
    Guidance such as that set out in JL  (Medical  reports  -  credibility)
    China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC) needed to be followed.  This was  clearly
    not done and it cannot be said that if  the  judge  had  done  so,  the
    appellant's claimed mental condition  would  not  have  influenced  the
    credibility findings.

15. Additionally, the judge's conclusion  that  the  appellant  was  "still
    searching for a faith" should have prompted the judge to consider  risk
    on return, not only as a failed asylum seeker but also a person who, if
    questioned, might not be able to indicate that she was  a  follower  of
    Islam.

16. The above matters amount to material errors on points of law  and  mean
    that the decision as a whole cannot stand.  As it will be necessary for
    the appeal to be heard again with the taking of fresh evidence  and  an
    examination of relevant objective material, it is appropriate that  the
    matter should be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing
    afresh.  This  accords  with  the  Practice  Statement  of  the  Senior
    President of Tribunals of 25th September 2012 at paragraph 7.2(b).

Anonymity

I make the following anonymity direction:

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

DIRECTIONS

 1. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
    Manchester for hearing afresh.

 2. The hearing should not be before Judge Ransley.

 3. The time estimate for the hearing is three hours.

 4. The hearing will take place on a date  to  be  given  by  the  Resident
    Judge.

 5. A Farsi interpreter will be required for the hearing.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt              13th October 2016

