
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10134/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 27 July 2015                      |On 13 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                     S K
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr K Scott, Solicitor, of Pickup Scott, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before us for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Sweet ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 27 February  2015,  in
    which she dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  refusal  of
    asylum and humanitarian protection and under Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

 2. We also maintain the anonymity direction made at the asylum pre-hearing
    review on 2 February 2015 because we want to eliminate any possibility,
    however remote, of the Appellant being put at risk because of publicity
    about his claim for international protection.

Background and Submissions

 3. The Appellant's nationality is in dispute.  He claims to be an  Iranian
    citizen. The  Respondent  accepts  the  Appellant  is  a  Kurd  but  is
    undecided as to whether he is from Iran or Iraq.  She made  a  decision
    to remove the Appellant "to Iran or Iraq".

 4. The Appellant entered the UK clandestinely and was apprehended  by  the
    police. He claimed asylum on 28 July 2011.  His claim  was  refused  by
    the Respondent but he was granted discretionary leave until 28 November
    2013 because he was a minor.

 5. On 27 November 2013 the Appellant applied for further leave  to  remain
    in the UK but this was refused on 10 November 2014.  The hearing of his
    appeal took place on 17 February 2015.  The FTTJ noted at paragraphs 30
    and 33 that the Appellant  accepted,  through  his  representative,  Mr
    Scott, that none of the  grounds  under  the  Refugee  Convention  were
    engaged.  In so doing, the FTTJ makes reference in her decision to  the
    Appellant's representative's oral submissions  and  skeleton  argument.
    The FTTJ noted that the Appellant's claim was based on the fear of harm
    from his uncle.  The FTTJ accepted  the  Respondent's  representative's
    submissions  on  the  Appellant's  adverse  credibility.  She  made  no
    findings  as  to  the  Appellant's  nationality.   Notwithstanding  the
    concession with regard to the Refugee Convention at  the  hearing,  the
    Appellant's representative made further submissions at the hearing that
    the Appellant was at risk of persecution on return as a member  of  the
    Kurdish community.  The FTTJ noted some objective  material  but  found
    that the Appellant was not at risk on return and that his asylum  claim
    failed; further she found that Articles 2 and 3 were not engaged by the
    Respondent's decision.  She  also  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
    refusal of humanitarian protection and under Article 8.

 6. The Appellant appealed to this Tribunal on various  grounds:  the  FTTJ
    had failed to make findings with regard to his nationality;  there  was
    no proper assessment of credibility and she had failed to consider  the
    asylum claim against the background material.

 7. In view of these grounds, we invited the Appellant's representative  to
    address us with regard to the purported concession to the FTTJ that the
    Refugee Convention was not engaged. We granted a short  adjournment  to
    enable him to take instructions. On his return, Mr Scott told us he did
    not seek to amend the grounds of appeal to this Tribunal.  He  told  us
    that, relying on his skeleton argument before the FTT, he had submitted
    to the FTTJ that the Appellant was no longer a child and therefore  not
    a member of a particular social group; he said that,  to  that  extent,
    the Appellant could not rely on the Refugee Convention. However, he had
    indicated in his skeleton argument that the Appellant was  at  risk  on
    return as a result of his being a Kurd.  Mr Scott submitted to us  that
    that issue was live before the Tribunal and that  the  FTTJ  had  given
    inadequate  consideration  to  risk  on  return  as  a  result  of  the
    Appellant's  ethnicity,  both  under  the  Refugee  Convention  and  in
    accordance with Article 3.  He submitted  that,  whilst  the  FTTJ  had
    taken  into  account  the  absence  of  evidence   of   the   Appellant
    experiencing mistreatment or harm in Iran, she had failed  to  consider
    the risk on return to either Iran or Iraq at the date of hearing.  Nor,
    he said, had the Judge made a proper finding as  to  which  country  he
    would be returned.

 8. Mr Scott accepted that the FTTJ had not been provided with evidence  or
    background material relating to risk on return to Iraq;  she  had  only
    been provided with background material relating  to  the  situation  in
    Iran.  However, he said, that material was  sufficient  to  demonstrate
    that he was at risk in Iran as a result of his being a Kurd.

 9. It was submitted to us by Mr Scott that the FTTJ  had  simply  accepted
    the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer's  (HOPO's)  submissions  on  the
    credibility of the Appellant as a witness. However, he  submitted,  the
    Appellant had provided  reasonable  explanations  for  his  failure  to
    contact his family in Iran and the remaining parts of paragraph  34  of
    the decision were insufficient for an assessment  of  credibility.   Mr
    Scott accepted the FTTJ did not necessarily have to make findings as to
    the Appellant's nationality but noted that it was one of the issues  in
    dispute.

10. For the Respondent, Mr Avery submitted that the Appellant's  claim  was
    related to the risk on return to  Iran;  there  was  no  evidence  with
    regard to the risk on return to Iraq.  He submitted that the  FTTJ  had
    dealt with the appeal on the  basis  that  the  Appellant  was  Iranian
    albeit she had not made a finding to that effect.   Mr  Avery  observed
    that the FTTJ had been in difficulties because she did not believe  the
    Appellant's  claim,  there  being  no  reasonable   evidence   of   the
    Appellant's nationality apart from his own account; in such a situation
    it was difficult, if not almost impossible, for  the  FTTJ  to  make  a
    definitive finding as to  the  Appellant's  nationality.   It  was,  he
    submitted, inevitable that no findings were made, given the quality  of
    the  evidence.   He  noted  that  the  FTTJ  had  recorded  the  HOPO's
    submissions at length in her decision: she had set out her reasons,  in
    paragraph 34, for concluding that  the  Appellant's  evidence  was  not
    credible. He submitted that, given the limited evidence,  the  findings
    were adequate and supported.

11. As regards risk on  return,  Mr  Avery  submitted  that  there  was  no
    evidence of difficulties with the authorities; it  had  been  suggested
    for the Appellant that, being a Kurd, he was at general risk on return.
    He  submitted  that,  even  at  its  highest,  the  risk  was  one   of
    discrimination as  a  result  of  the  Appellant's  ethnicity,  nothing
    greater.  He  submitted  that  the  FTTJ  had  dealt  with  the  matter
    adequately at paragraph 35 of her decision.  He submitted that, even if
    there were  an  error  of  law,  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to
    demonstrate the Appellant was at risk of persecution or harm on  return
    such as to engage the Refugee Convention and/or Articles 2 or 3.

12. In reply, Mr Scott conceded  that  not  every  Kurd  was  at  risk  but
    submitted that the FTTJ should have taken into account the  Appellant's
    age and lack of family support on return.  The US Department  of  State
    report supported the Appellant's claim to be at risk on  those  grounds
    and the FTTJ had failed to take it into account.

Discussion

13. We note the Appellant's skeleton argument which was before the FTTJ. It
    states that the Appellant accepts "he is no longer a child and not  any
    longer "a member of a  particular  social  group"  ".   It  states  the
    Appellant would be returning to Iran as a young man without any  family
    support and at risk of ill treatment and that he would not be protected
    by the authorities.  It further states that the Appellant "is  at  risk
    of ill treatment as a young man of Kurdish ethnicity without any family
    support and it is therefore a breach of article 3 of the  ECHR  if  the
    Appellant is forced to return to Iran".

14. It is also claimed in the Appellant's skeleton argument that, if it was
    not accepted that the Appellant was from Iran, but was considered to be
    from Iraq, it would be a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR "if he is sent
    to Iraq because of the current situation in Iraq and the risks to  life
    imposed by Isis or Islamic State and in particular  because  he  is  of
    Kurdish ethnicity".

15. Given the content of this skeleton argument,  with  its  references  to
    claimed mistreatment on the grounds of the  Appellant's  ethnicity,  we
    find that this was a live issue before the FTT and that it was a matter
    to be resolved by the FTTJ in her decision.

16. However,  the  FTTJ  made  adverse  credibility  findings  against  the
    Appellant. She, in effect, adopted the oral  submissions  of  the  HOPO
    which she had set out  at  some  length  at  paragraphs  26-29  of  the
    decision.  We are satisfied that the FTTJ conducted  an  assessment  of
    the Appellant's evidence because she noted in her paragraph 34  various
    matters of concern to her with regard to the  Appellant's  evidence  in
    addition to accepting the HOPO's submissions. These  concerns  included
    the implausibility of various aspects of the Appellant's  evidence  and
    the lack of medical evidence to support his account  of  previous  harm
    sustained in his claimed country  of  origin.   We  consider  that  the
    FTTJ's findings with regard to the credibility and reliability  of  the
    Appellant's account are sustainable on the evidence and adequate.  They
    are not perverse.

17. Given the FTTJ's findings on credibility, we do not criticise the  lack
    of  any  finding  on  the  issue  of   the   Appellant's   nationality,
    particularly as there was no evidence on this issue apart from that  of
    the Appellant himself which was found to be unreliable.

18. The FTTJ's findings with regard  to  the  Appellant's  credibility  are
    relevant also to her findings on the issue of risk on  return.  It  was
    submitted in the Appellant's skeleton argument that the Appellant would
    return as a young man without family support.  It would not  have  been
    appropriate for the FTTJ to proceed on the basis of that account  given
    her credibility findings.  Mr Scott referred us to the US Department of
    State report, which was before the FTTJ, but this is insufficient for a
    finding that  the  Appellant,  being  a  Kurd,  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution or harm contrary to the Refugee Convention and/or  Articles
    2 or 3.  This report does not support a claim that the Appellant  would
    be at risk of persecution or harm as a result of  his  being  a  failed
    asylum seeker and/or his ethnicity.   The  FTTJ's  decision  that  "his
    asylum claim fails, as therefore does any claim under Articles 2 and 3"
    is sustainable on the background material and evidence before her.  Her
    reasons for her conclusions on this issue are adequate, given the  lack
    of support from the background  material  provided  by  the  Appellant.
    Given the FTTJ did not find the Appellant's evidence credible,  it  was
    open to her to find, implicitly, that he  would  not  be  returning  to
    Iran, his claimed country of origin, as a vulnerable young man  without
    family support.  We find therefore that there is no material  error  of
    law in the FTTJ's decision and reasons insofar as the risk on return to
    Iran is concerned.

19. Mr Scott told us he accepted that the FTTJ did not have before her  any
    background material or evidence to demonstrate  the  Appellant  was  at
    risk of harm on return to Iraq. There  can  therefore  be  no  material
    error of law on that issue either.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not give rise to a material
    error on a point of law.

21. We do not set aside the decision.

22. We dismiss the appeal.


Signed      Date 12 October 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Anonymity Direction

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) we make an anonymity order. Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings. We do so in  order  to  avoid  a  likelihood  of  serious  harm
arising to the appellant from the contents of his protection claim.

Fee Award

No fee has been paid or is payable and there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date 12 October 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
