
[pic]

Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: AA/10400/2012
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATI ON ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh                |Determination Sent         |
|On 13 June 2013                                 |On 27 September 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                Nenping zhang
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Devlin instructed by Latta & Co, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a Chinese citizen from Sichuan province.   He  appeals
    with permission against the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Scobbie, dismissing his appeal against  the  decision  to  set  removal
    directions to China, and to refuse asylum, humanitarian  protection  or
    leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant has a dependent son, born in July 2012,  also  a  Chinese
    citizen.  The appellant says the child's mother has abandoned  both  of
    them and that he is his son's sole carer.  The parties were not and are
    not married.

 3. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the appeal was based on the appellant's
    conversion to Christianity, and his having a child outside the  Chinese
    family planning policy, for  which  he  risked  being  charged  SUC  to
    register the child.  He argued that he had no family in China and would
    be unable to work, by reason of childcare difficulties.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal applied the country guidance given by the Upper
    Tribunal in AX (family planning scheme) China CG [2012] UKUT  97  (IAC)
    and held that the appellant would be able to find childcare and that he
    would be given time to pay the SUC.  It considered that the appellant's
    credibility was low overall and disbelieved  his  account  of  being  a
    Christian convert.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted based on the appellant's assertion  in
    his grounds of appeal that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had (1) failed
    to consider the best interests of the baby; (2) failed to provide clear
    reasons for his finding that the appellant would be given time  to  pay
    the SUC; and (3) failed to consider the  consequences  if  the  child's
    hukou were not registered because of the appellant's inability  to  pay
    the SUC.

 6. He also relied on paragraphs 25.36 and 26.15 of the Country  of  Origin
    Report for China, indicating that there  had  been  children  illegally
    abducted and sold by local officials in an  attempt  to  implement  the
    population planning policies.   There was no challenge to  the  finding
    that the appellant was not a  Christian  convert  nor  to  the  overall
    negative credibility finding.

 7. The respondent  filed  a  rule  24  notice,  opposing  the  appeal  and
    submitting that, despite the lack of reference to s.55  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal determination, there was no material error of law in  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge   had   clearly
    considered that it would be in the  best  interests  of  the  child  to
    return to China and grow up there with his father, albeit with the  use
    of childcare facilities. That was the basis on which  the  appeal  came
    before the Upper Tribunal.

 8. That was the basis on which the appeal came before the Upper  Tribunal.



Submissions

 9. For the respondent, Ms O'Brien relied on AX (China). The child was less
    than a year old and a Chinese citizen.  The  child's  mother  was  from
    Hong Kong, where the birth regulations were less strictly applied.  The
    father was from Sichuan province.

10. The appellant had no income in China while in the  United  Kingdom  and
    since SUC is a multiple of income, she submitted that any SUC would  be
    zero, or very low indeed.  Ms O'Brien drew our attention to  paragraphs
    186-190 of AX (China) which deal  with  the  position  of  foreign-born
    children.  She referred the Tribunal to paragraph 204 of AX (China) and
    argued that the SUC would be based on average  income  in  the  region,
    with the appellant being given time to pay, if indeed it was imposed.

11. The First-tier Tribunal had not  erred  in  applying  existing  country
    guidance or in finding that informal childcare would  be  available  to
    the appellant on return.  There was no real risk of harm either to  the
    appellant or the child and the Upper Tribunal should  find  that  there
    was no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal determination.

12. For the appellant, Mr Devlin argued that the welfare of the  child  had
    not been considered under s.55.   The  appellant  was  a  man  with  no
    visible means of support and would not  be  in  a  position  to  access
    childcare on return.  He accepted that there had been major credibility
    problems with the appellant's core account that his  parents  had  been
    killed in an accident and that his only brother now lived in Australia.
     The need to pay off the SUC, even if time to pay  was  available,  and
    the burden of doing so while also paying for childcare, should be taken
    into account. Since the child had been born out of plan,  there  was  a
    risk that the multiplier for SUC might be doubled.

13. Although statutory protection existed against abuses by officials,  and
    seemed to be available (at least to husbands  and  fathers)  it  was  a
    remedy after the  event  and  would  be  insufficient  to  prevent  ill
    treatment if there were a real risk of such treatment.

14. In relation to the best interests of the  child,  under  s.55  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, Mr Devlin acknowledged  that  the
    child would be with its parent; that childcare is available  in  China,
    and indicated that he was not relying on the argument  concerning  risk
    of abduction.

Discussion

15. We discussed the grounds with Mr Devlin at the hearing,  referring  him
    to the paragraphs of the determination and of the country  guidance  to
    which  we  refer  below.   Mr  Devlin  accepted  that  the  appellant's
    arguments could not succeed, in the light of  those  findings,  and  we
    announced at the hearing that, having regard to the country  background
    evidence, the country guidance, the First-tier  Tribunal  determination
    and the grounds of appeal, we were not satisfied  that  there  was  any
    material error of law in the determination.

16. Dealing first with ground 1, that the First-tier Tribunal's decision in
    relation to time being granted to pay SUC is irrational, we  note  that
    the judicial head note in AX (China) at point (7) held that:

         (7) Where an unauthorised child is born, the family will  encounter
         additional  penalties.  Workplace   discipline   for   parents   in
         employment  is  likely  to  include  demotion  or  even   loss   of
         employment. In addition, a 'social upbringing  charge'  is  payable
         (SUC), which is based on income, with a down  payment  of  50%  and
         three years to pay the balance.

    There is no irrationality in the First-tier Tribunal finding  that  the
    SUC was not payable immediately and in full on  that  basis;  it  would
    have been an error of law had the First-tier Tribunal not followed  the
    country guidance, absent any cogent evidence to the contrary. We reject
    the suggestion that the multiplier would be increased, on these  facts:
    the appellant would return to Sichuan, with the one child to  which  he
    is entitled, born abroad to a woman from Hong Kong.  We  consider  that
    the SUC imposed if any would  be  very  low  and  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  was  entitled  to  find  that  there  was  no  real  risk  of
    destitution on that basis.

17. In relation to ground 2, the availability of childcare, both formal and
    informal, we note that at  paragraph  173  of  AX  (China),  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that:

         "173.       Hundreds of thousands of unauthorised children are born
         every year.  Family planning officials  are  required  to  register
         them, once the SUC has been paid: they have no incentive to  refuse
         registration, since registration fees are a significant  source  of
         income for local family planning authorities, as are birth  permits
         and SUC. There is a tension between  that  profitability,  and  the
         quota of births for the town, county and province, which is subject
         to regular national reporting and pressure on  local  officials  to
         bring their province, district, or area back within the  quota,  or
         face  workplace  discipline  and  career  consequences  themselves.
         Education and medical treatment are available, but  are  no  longer
         free. We remind ourselves that the vast majority of nursery schools
         in Shanghai are in private hands, and are fee paying."

    On the basis of that evidential finding, the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not err in finding that the child would be  registered  on  return  and
    that there was childcare  available  in  private  nurseries  which  the
    appellant could use.

18. Turning to ground 3, the risk of this child being abducted and sold, as
    already stated this was not relied upon before us.

19. Finally, dealing with s.55, we note that although no express  reference
    is made in the First-tier Tribunal determination to that provision,  it
    is clear that he had the 'best interests' test in mind.  The First-tier
    Tribunal Judge stated at paragraph 51 that he  had  acquainted  himself
    with the case law, mentioning both  AX  (China)  and  ZH  (Tanzania)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4,  which  is  a
    case on s.55.    The child in this case is not yet two  years  old  and
    has been living with his father since he was born.   At  paragraph  75,
    the judge found that there would be no breach of family life since  the
    appellant's son would return to China with him.   The  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal does not indicate any circumstances which would
    lead us to conclude that the child's  best  interests  do  not  lie  in
    growing up in the country of his nationality with what is  said  to  be
    his only effective parent, his mother having deserted them both.

20. For all of the above reasons, we  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination contains no material error  of  law  and  we  decline  to
    reopen it.



Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. We do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  Nothing in  the
material now before us suggests that an anonymity direction  is  appropriate
in this appeal.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
