
IAC-fH-nl-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/10872/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 25 February 2015                          |On 4 March 2015               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                      suresh sebastian caderaman pulle
                         (anonymity ORDER not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter of Counsel instructed by Mansfield
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Herbert OBE promulgated on 20 January 2014 dismissing the appeal of  Mr
    Pulle against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department dated 28 November 2013 to remove him from the United Kingdom
    following rejection of his asylum claim.



Background

2.   The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on  11  March  1979.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in the company of  his  wife,  Ms  Karuna
    Pedige (date of birth 13 January 1987).  The Appellant had included his
    wife as a dependant in his asylum claim.  There has  been  no  relevant
    immigration decision in respect of Ms Pedige and so she does  not  have
    her own appeal: a file was opened under reference AA/10924/2013 when  a
    Notice of Appeal was lodged on Ms Pedige's behalf,  but  by  way  of  a
    decision promulgated on 16 December 2013 it was determined that she had
    no valid appeal.  Necessarily in those  circumstances  the  outcome  of
    this appeal will have a likely impact also upon the Appellant's wife.

3.   The Appellant's immigration history is summarised at  paragraph  10  of
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  It is set out in more  detail
    in the  Respondent's  'reasons  for  refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  of  28
    November 2013 at paragraph 10 in these terms:

          "The claimant applied for and  was  granted  a  Tier  4  (General)
         Dependants visa valid from 26/02/2010  until  the  27/06/2012.   He
         left Sri Lanka on the 13/03/2010 and travelled directly to  the  UK
         arriving  at  Heathrow  on  the  14/03/2010.   He  applied  for  an
         extension of his visa on the 22/05/2012.  This was refused  on  the
         23/10/2012.   [He]  then  appealed  this  which  was  dismissed  on
         1/03/2013.  [He] made applications to the  First  and  Upper  Tiers
         respectively, which were both refused and [he] became Appeal Rights
         Exhausted  (ARE)  on  the  23/04/2013.   [He]  sought   asylum   on
         17/08/2013 and [his] claim was  registered  on  the  30/08/2013  at
         Croydon."

4.   The basis of the Appellant's claim for  asylum  is  summarised  in  the
    RFRL at paragraphs 5-9 - see also in this context the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs 11-21.  For present  purposes  it  is
    unnecessary to rehearse the bases of the Appellant's claim here.

5.   The Appellant's application for asylum was refused for reasons set  out
    in the RFRL, and a removal decision was made in consequence.

6.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

7.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for
    reasons set out in his determination.

8.   The  Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
    Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker on 6 January  2015.   Judge
    Zucker also extended the time for appealing notwithstanding that  there
    had been a very considerable delay  between  the  promulgation  of  the
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  The reasons for that delay are set  out  in  the
    grounds submitted in support  of  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal and are supported by a witness statement signed by the Appellant
    on 15 December 2014.

9.   At the commencement of the hearing before me  today  Ms  Kenny  brought
    this delay to my attention.  However in circumstances where the  matter
    has already been the subject of judicial consideration by Judge  Zucker
    I do not propose to re-visit the issue in respect of delay and  proceed
    on the basis that time was duly extended and permission to  appeal  was
    granted.

Consideration

10.  In granting permission to appeal Judge Zucker summarised  the  arguable
    grounds as broadly falling under three heads, which Mr Slatter  adopted
    today in his submissions.

    (1)  The Judge erred in looking for corroboration, (which I  note  that
         the grounds plead as "a misapplication of the burden of proof");

    (2)   The  Judge  erred  in  failing  adequately  to  engage  with  the
         supporting medical evidence provided by the Appellant;

    (3)  There was insufficient  engagement  by  the  Judge  with  'country
         guidance' cases. in particular the case of  GJ  and  Others  (Post-
         Civil War returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319.

    I address these grounds in turn before addressing a residual matter.

11.  The complaint in respect of corroboration is  summarised  at  paragraph
    7(ii) of the grounds in support of the application  for  permission  to
    appeal, and directs its focus on paragraph 37 of the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The relevant part of  paragraph  37  is  as
    follows:

         "...although the Appellant gave a consistent account in relation to
         his distant relatives there was no published  news  report  of  the
         attack on Colombo airport, nor  the  arrest  or  detention  of  any
         suspects nor the fact that any motorbike had  been  seized  by  the
         authorities.  One would have expected  with  such  a  high  profile
         terrorist  event  there  would  have  been  some  local   newspaper
         reporting of the incident.  None was produced by the Appellant."

12.  I do not accept  that  that  passage  is  demonstrative  of  the  Judge
    elevating the assistance that might be derived from supporting evidence
    to a requirement to provide such evidence.  Where there is  an  absence
    of supporting evidence that might be expected to  be  widely  available
    and which it would be reasonable  for  an  applicant  or  appellant  to
    produce, it is open to a decision-maker to attach adverse weight  to  a
    failure to advance such materials.  In context this is what  the  Judge
    did.  I do not consider that he required corroboration as a  matter  of
    principle, or as a strict legal requirement: rather  he  evaluated  the
    materials before him, took into account that materials  that  he  would
    have expected to have been available as important  corroboration  of  a
    core element of the Appellant's had not been  presented,  and,  as  was
    open to him, drew an adverse inference in this  regard.   I  detect  no
    error of law in these circumstances.

13.  In respect of medical evidence, the Appellant provided  in  support  of
    his application a medical report dated 21 August  2013  from  Professor
    Lingam of  the  Medical  Express  Clinic.   The  report  considered  in
    particular two physical aspects of the  Appellant's  presentation.   It
    was observed that there was a scar on his  left  thigh  and  also  that
    there was an apparent abnormality in respect of two of  his  toes.   In
    respect of the scar on the Appellant's thigh the  medical  practitioner
    in part said this:

         "There are suture marks and on a clinical basis I would simply  say
         it is consistent with the history.  Such scars are very common from
         childhood injuries and it is for this reason I have indicated  that
         the scar here is consistent according to Istanbul protocol."

14.  As regards the Appellant's toes the following is stated:

         "The patient stated that they pulled the nails from the  two  toes.
         I have shown the toes in the photographs.   As  seen  here  on  the
         photographs there are clinically visible abnormalities however  the
         nails have now grown which is the usual case.  In this case I would
         say the clinical findings are consistent  of  the  history.   I  am
         unable to give alternative causes here as  what  happened  here  is
         rare, and surgical removal of toe nail in total  is  never  carried
         for a medical reason out and I would say this finding is  difficult
         to prove clinically.  Here I have taken the findings as stated  and
         as  seen  on  the  photographs  there  are  definite  evidence   of
         abnormalities which are keeping with removal of nails in two  toes.
         Thus, I would say the findings are consistent according to Istanbul
         protocol."

15.  The Respondent addressed the issue of the medical report  in  the  RFRL
    at paragraphs 16-23.  This is summarised  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge at paragraphs 25-27 of his decision.  So far as  it  is  relevant
    the RFRL states the following:

         "17. With regard to the medical report detailing your scars  it  is
         noted that it was  written  by  Professor  Lingam  of  the  Medical
         Express Clinic which is a genuine organisation.   With  regards  to
         the report itself, it is noted that there are various spelling  and
         grammatical errors.

         18. It is noted that he states that your  injuries  are  consistent
         with the description you have given as to their cause...

         20. However, he has failed to identify what  the  abnormalities  on
         the toes are....  Furthermore he states that

             "...surgical removal of toe nail in total is never carried for
             a medical reason out..."...

         21. It is considered  that  this  is  incorrect  given  this  is  a
         standard procedure offered on the National Health Service.   It  is
         considered that this report is of poor  quality  and  lacks  proper
         consideration as to the alternative causes of your injuries despite
         acknowledging they are a  possibility.   Therefore,  no  weight  is
         placed upon it when considering this aspect of your claim."

16.  There is included in the RFRL by way of a footnote a reference  to  the
    National Health Service website in respect of ingrown toenails  and,  a
    relevant document was produced at the  appeal  hearing  which  confirms
    that indeed it is the practice to remove  the  whole  nail  in  certain
    circumstances - which  runs  contrary  to  the  apparent  statement  in
    Professor Lingam's report.

17.  The Judge,  as  indicated  above,  makes  reference  to  the  fact  and
    contents of the Respondent's observations in  respect  of  the  medical
    report at paragraphs 25-27 of his decision.  The Judge's next reference
    to the medical evidence is at paragraph 40, which in its entirety is in
    the following terms:

         "I find that Section 8 does seriously undermine the credibility  of
         the Appellant in this  regard  and  that  coupled  with  the  other
         discrepancies in his evidence as well as the absence of any  cogent
         medical evidence relating  to  the  torture  he  says  he  received
         undermines his credibility."

18.  I accept that the Judge's reasoning in respect of  the  medical  report
    falls below the standard of reasoning that one might reasonably  expect
    of an experienced First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Beyond the identification
    of the Respondent's view of the  report  the  Judge  makes  no  further
    comment except to state his  finding  that  there  is  not  any  cogent
    medical evidence relating to torture.

19.  However, in context, it  seems  sufficiently  clear  that  the  Judge's
    finding is essentially based on the reasons advanced by the Respondent.
     In any event I have seen nothing in the Skeleton Argument presented to
    the First-tier Tribunal or in the submissions recorded by the Judge  as
    having been made, and Mr Slatter has not drawn my attention to anything
    specific, that would justify placing any more  weight  on  the  medical
    report such  that  it  could  be  characterised  as  providing  'cogent
    evidence of torture'.

20.  Further criticism might also be made of the Judge in that at  paragraph
    40 the juxtaposition of the reference to the medical evidence  and  the
    phrase "undermines  his  credibility"  gives  an  appearance  that  the
    failure of the medical evidence to  establish  torture  undermined  the
    Appellant's credibility, rather than it being merely a neutral  factor.
    On balance, I do not think that is what the Judge  meant:   it  is  the
    Section 8 considerations and other discrepancies in  the  account  that
    undermine credibility, which is not ameliorated by  the  production  of
    cogent medical evidence relating to torture.

21.  Be that as it may, in my judgement the Judge has at paragraphs  38,  39
    and the first parts of paragraph 40 made a number of adequate  findings
    and observations in  respect  of  credibility  justifying  reaching  an
    overall adverse view, such that  any  possible  error  with  regard  to
    characterising  the  medical  report  as  undermining  the  Appellant's
    credibility when looked at 'in the round' is not ultimately material.

22.   The  third  aspect  of  the  challenge  identified  in  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal is in respect of supposed insufficient  engagement
    with  'country  guidance'  cases.   There  are  two  elements  to  this
    submission: the first that country guidance cases should be taken  into
    account as a background context assisting evaluation of the veracity of
    an account; and the second that they are relevant to an  assessment  of
    risk.  Necessarily, on the facts of this particular case, in regard  to
    the second  such  consideration,  the  assessment  of  risk  is  really
    premised  on  the  Appellant's  account  being  accepted   -   as   was
    acknowledged by Mr Slatter.  In the  event  that  his  account  is  not
    accepted, then there is no materiality  to  a  failure  to  attempt  to
    analyse his claim against any risk factors that might be identified  by
    way of country guidance.

23.  So far as the first element is concerned - country information  by  way
    of setting a context for an evaluation of the individual account  -  it
    seems clear to me that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did have regard to
    the country information.  He states at  paragraph  36  certain  matters
    that he has drawn from the "background objective information",  and  at
    paragraph 37 he also makes reference to the COIR Report of March  2012.
    Whilst the use of the phrase 'objective information' in the context  of
    country information is to be discouraged, it is nonetheless plain  that
    the Judge has had  regard  to  background  information,  and  in  those
    circumstances - and  absence  the  identification  by  the  Appellant's
    representatives of anything specifically germane  in  country  guidance
    cases that has been disregarded - I find that there is no substance  to
    this ground of challenge.

24.  One final matter  is  in  relation  to  a  newspaper  report  that  the
    Appellant produced in support of his application.  An original copy  of
    the newspaper was provided and is on file together with  a  translation
    which appears at page D1 of the Respondent's bundle before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  It is an article headed "In  search  of  a  suspect  of
    supporting LTTE by the Intelligence Department", and suggests that  the
    Appellant  is  being  sought  in  connection  with  an  attack  on  the
    Katunayakaye International Airport.

25.  The Judge made reference to this document variously at  paragraphs  32,
    37 and 42 of the decision.   At  paragraph  32  he  observed  that  the
    Respondent considered that such articles could be  fabricated  and  the
    Judge also comments "whilst the newspaper article does  appear  genuine
    there is no proof to say that it was not a story that was inserted  for
    the payment of money or some other consideration".  It is not  entirely
    clear in context whether the Judge is, at paragraph 32,  there  setting
    out a submission made by the Respondent or making his  own  independent
    observation.  Be that as it may, the Judge  clearly  took  forward  the
    fact  of  the  existence  of  the  document  to  his  'in  the   round'
    consideration of the Appellant's account.  As I have  already  said  he
    refers again to the newspaper article at paragraph 37, and at paragraph
    42 he says this: "In summary I do  not  find  any  credibility  in  the
    Appellant's account whatsoever  notwithstanding  the  newspaper  report
    that he  is  somebody  who  was  sought  in  relation  to  a  terrorist
    incident".  In my judgment that is an  assessment  entirely  consistent
    with the principles in Tanveer Ahmed whereby the Judge has  had  regard
    to the weight to be attached to the supporting documentary evidence  by
    reference  to  all  of  the  evidence  'in  the   round'.    In   those
    circumstances I do not consider that there is any material error of law
    in this regard either.

26.  I reject the Appellant's challenge to the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

27.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  does  not  contain  any
    material errors of law and stands.

28.  The appeal is dismissed.

29.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



    The above represents a corrected transcript of an  ex-tempore  decision
    given at the hearing on 25 February 2015.



Signed        Date: 3 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

