
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10841/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29 February 2016                      |On 6 April 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     N R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richardson, Woodford Wise Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   I will refer to the respondent as the appellant as she was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan  and  her
    date of birth is [ ] 1990.  She made an application for asylum and this
    was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision  dated  1  December
    2014.  She appealed against this decision and her appeal was allowed by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hendry on asylum grounds.

2.   Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan on  23  December
    2015.  The appellant's case is that prior to coming to the UK she lived
    with her family in Jellum Pakistan. She came to the UK  in  June  2012.
    She had been granted a visa in order to study.  When she  was  aged  12
    she was engaged to her cousin.  I shall refer to the cousin as A.  When
    the appellant was 18 she decided that she did not want to marry A.  She
    communicated this to her mother, but her mother like the appellant, was
    powerless to do anything about it because A was from a powerful family.



3.   In 2009 when the appellant was studying she met  S.   Their  friendship
    developed in secret.  S came to the UK  in  2011  and  he  remained  in
    contact with the appellant.  In 2011 A  threatened  the  appellant  and
    physically assaulted her.  The appellant persuaded her parents to allow
    her to come to the UK in order to study and it was arranged for her  to
    come here and live with her maternal aunt.  She did not tell anyone  in
    Pakistan that she was coming to the UK because she did not  want  A  to
    find out.

4.   Whilst she was living with her aunt, she  suggested  to  the  appellant
    that she married her son, M. The appellant did not want to marry M, but
    felt unable to object because her family  who  supported  the  marriage
    were financially supporting her.    However,  the  appellant  left  her
    aunt's home and told M about her relationship with S  and  did  not  go
    through with  the  marriage  to  M.   In  retaliation  M  informed  the
    appellant's family and A's family about the appellant relationship with
    S.  S is from a different caste to the appellant.

5.   On 9 January 2013 A and his father reported the  appellant  as  missing
    to the police.  A notice was served on the appellant's father requiring
    him to resolve the issue between the appellant an  A.   A  summons  was
    issued on 14 January 2013 requiring the appellant's father to attend an
    arbitration council. On 21 April 2014 A and his father  applied  for  a
    fatwa against the appellant which was granted on 2 May 2014.  They made
    a First Information Report ("FIR") at Civil  Lines  police  station  in
    Jellum which asserted that the appellant had violated Islamic law.  The
    police attended  the  appellant's  home  asking  her  whereabouts.  The
    appellant's mother sent copies of the fatwa  and  the  FIR  along  with
    verification from an advocate to the appellant. On 18  April  2014  the
    appellant and S were married in a Muslim ceremony, in the  UK,  against
    the wishes of her family

6.   In support of the appellant's claim she  submitted  the  abovementioned
    documents.  The FIR that she submitted in support  of  her  application
    was dated 2 May 2014.  She lodged a  second  FIR  which  was  identical
    other than that it was lodged at a different police station.

7.   The respondent's case was that the FIR was not genuine and  in  support
    of  this  a  document  verification  report  was  relied   upon.    The
    respondent's case was that as this document was not genuine it followed
    that the rest of the documents that were relied upon by  the  appellant
    were not genuine.  It was  noted  that  the  fatwa  and  the  FIR  were
    provided by the appellant's mother and the verification letter from the
    advocate was also obtained by the appellant's mother.

8.   The judge made findings at paragraphs 81 and 82 as follows:

         "81.     The SSHD also  raised  particular  issue  because  of  the
             document relied on by the appellant as the FIR lodged at Civil
             Lines police station. There  was  conflicting  evidence  about
             this report.  The SSHD stated that  the  FIR  report  was  not
             accepted as genuine because enquiries instigated by  the  High
             Commission  in  Islamabad  showed  that  the  FIR  under   the
             reference given related to a different person and  crime.   It
             was for the appellant to show that any documents on which  she
             seeks to rely can be relied  on  Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT
             00439.  The  SSHD  said  that  this   meant   that   the   FIR
             documentation could not be relied on, and that this cast doubt
             on the other documents she  had  produced  and  on  which  she
             sought to rely.  I take account  of  the  relative  ease  with
             which forged and fraudulent documents  can  be  obtained  from
             Pakistan, as indicated by the background information, and  the
             report from the High Commission that  the  FIR  could  not  be
             verified, but there was no such  evidence  about  any  of  the
             other  documents,  including  the  Fatwa.  The  appellant  had
             produced a series of documents relating to the  background  of
             the dispute between her family and A  and  his  family,  which
             covered a period from January 2013 to April 2014. The FIR  was
             not the only document which she had produced.


         82.  Broadly, I accepted as credible the appellant's account  about
             the history of her engagement, her meeting with  S,  departure
             to the UK,  and  her  ultimate  marriage  to  S.  She  was  an
             effective witness in her oral evidence. This background was at
             the core of her claim for asylum."


Error of Law

9.   In my view the judge conflated the   issue  of  a  document  not  being
    reliable and the Secretary of State's case that it was not genuine i.e.
    it  was  fraudulent.   A  consideration  of  reliability  requires   an
    assessment in accordance with Tanveer Ahmed which was  carried  out  by
    the judge here. However, whether or not the appellant  has  produced  a
    fraudulent document requires a finding as to whether the  Secretary  of
    State has discharged the burden of proof and it requires the  judge  to
    engage with the assertions made by the respondent and the  contents  of
    the document verification report.  Although there  is  mention  in  the
    judge's decision of the document being fraudulent, it is clear that the
    judge did not engage with conclusions and assertions  in  the  document
    verification report.

10.  There was in this case evidence of dishonesty and fraud and  the  judge
    needed to  engage  with  this  and  reach  clear  conclusions  why  the
    respondent has or has not discharged the burden of proof  and  in  this
    case it is relevant that the documents, namely the FIR  fatwa  and  the
    verification evidence are inextricably linked and thus capable of being
    undermined by the document verification report.

11.  The judge materially erred and the decision to allow the appeal is  set
    aside.

12.  Mr  Clarke  raised  issues  relating  to  the  judge's  conclusions  on
    relocation. Mr Richardson objected to  the  issue  being  raised  as  a
    ground of appeal on the basis that permission was granted  in  relation
    to the issue of the document verification report only. In my view Judge
    Canavan was not seeking to limit the scope of the grant of  permission,
    but in any event, this is not material to my decision.  Suffice to  say
    at this point that in relation to internal relocation in  my  view  the
    conclusions reached by the  judge  at  paragraph  86  are  inadequately
    reasoned; however, for other reasons the decision is flawed.

Notice of Decision

13.  Both parties agreed with me that the matter is remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a re-hearing.  Both parties agreed.

 Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date  16 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
