
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10398/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 January 2019                            |On 30 January 2019            |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                   Ms RMC
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Pipi, Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born on 24 November 1954, is  a  citizen  of  Kenya  who
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 10 July 2015  to  refuse  the  appellant's  protection
    claim (the appellant's previous appeal having been refused by the First-
    tier Tribunal and then her subsequent  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    being successful and the appeal remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    following the Upper Tribunal decision dated 5  December  2016  quashing
    the decision).  Although the appellant applied to the Court  of  Appeal
    for permission to preserve part of the  findings  that  permission  was
    ultimately refused.  In a decision, promulgated  on  8  November  2018,
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal E B Grant  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

 2. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal on the  grounds  that  the
    judge misdirected herself in:

      1) Failing to state the standard of proof;

      2) Failing to apply the  UN  Handbook  in  assessing  the  appellant's
         evidence;

      3) Failing to make  findings  on  whether  or  not  she  accepted  the
         appellant's explanations, in relation to  alleged  inconsistencies,
         put forward by the appellant;

      4) Misdirecting herself in relation to part of the chronology,  as  it
         was the appellant's evidence that it was only  in  2004,  when  the
         appellant's second escape failed, that she was held captive; and

      5) Failing to make a substantive decision regarding  private  life  in
         the context of mental illness; and

      6) Failing to take into account stigma and discrimination by the wider
         society in relation to mental health in Kenya; and

      7) Erring in the approach to Article  8  including  stating  that  the
         appellant could not succeed under Article 8  prior  to  considering
         proportionality.

Error of Law

 3. It was conceded by Mr Jarvis at the  outset  of  the  appeal  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal could not stand, and in  particular
    that the judge had materially erred in her approach to the  appellant's
    asylum claim.  It was accepted that the judge erred in relation to  her
    understanding of the appellant's chronology and when she had or had not
    been detained, which ultimately led to the  conclusions  at  [29].   Mr
    Jarvis accepted that the findings were additionally  materially  flawed
    in respect of the judge's findings that the appellant had undergone FGM
    in Kenya as a young adult ([19] and [21] of the decision  and  reasons)
    whereas it was the appellant's claim that this had  occurred  when  she
    was 46 years old.

 4. This material mistake of fact, it was conceded by Mr  Jarvis,  led  the
    judge into further error in her findings  at  [25]  in  making  adverse
    credibility findings that the appellant made no mention of her fear  of
    the Mungiki until June 2015, despite  claiming  asylum  using  a  false
    identity in December 1999, it being the judge's finding that  "she  had
    already suffered FGM"  "during  all  these  periods  of  time"  ([25]).
    Whereas it was the appellant's case that she did not undergo FGM  until
    after she returned to Kenya in 2000.

 5. Mr Jarvis' approach was the proper one as  the  basis  of  the  judge's
    conclusions on credibility are undermined by a misunderstanding of  the
    facts  of  the  appellant's  claim,  including  as  to  when  she   was
    circumcised and when she was held captive;  it  being  the  appellant's
    case that it was only in 2004 when her second "escape" failed that  she
    was actually imprisoned and held captive, whereas the judge  concluded,
    at [29], that the appellant's evidence showed that she had  flexibility
    whilst living in Kenya, was able to retain her passport and travel  and
    these were not the actions of a women imprisoned  by  the  Mungiki  and
    kept prisoner in her husband's compound as claimed.

 6. It was conceded that the errors went to the heart  of  the  credibility
    findings.  Although Mr Jarvis maintained that it  is  the  respondent's
    case that ultimately the appellant cannot  succeed  under  any  of  her
    protection  claim  grounds,  in  this   decision   the   human   rights
    consideration was also flawed in that it was predicated  on  the  basis
    that it was safe for the appellant to return,  whereas  I  accept  that
    those findings cannot stand.

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law. I set
    aside the decision pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.  Although I was  initially  minded  to
    retain the appeal in the Upper Tribunal, bearing in mind the nature and
    extent of the findings to be made, the matter should be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal, other than before Judge Grant  or  Judge  Malcolm,
    under Section 12(2)(b)(i) and further to  7.2(b)  of  the  Presidential
    Practice Statement.

Directions

 8. As discussed at the error of law hearing, the First-tier Tribunal would
    benefit from a further up-to-date  medical  report  for  the  appellant
    including to address her fitness to  give  evidence  at  that  remitted
    hearing  and  to  address  whether  her  condition  has   improved   or
    deteriorated in  the  interim.   The  appellant's  representatives  are
    directed to provide such a report no later than twenty one  days  prior
    to the re-listed hearing.

 9. In addition, Mr Pipi referred to ongoing difficulties with the  medical
    report in the appellant's bundle from 2015.  Although the fact that the
    appellant had been subjected to FGM  was  accepted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (although the circumstances  of  that  circumcision  were  not
    accepted), Mr Pipi confirmed that a page missing from the report of  Dr
    Comfort  Momoh,  dated  30  April  2015,  had  been  repeatedly  raised
    throughout the appeals' process.  This report is contained at pages  32
    to 36 of the appellant's bundle and indeed appears to stop at paragraph
    21 on page 34 of the appellant's bundle and recommence at paragraph 27.
     It was not entirely clear as to whether this was a mistake on the part
    of the author, or a  mistake  on  the  part  of  the  appellant's  then
    representatives in sending only part of the report, or a mistake on the
    part of the respondent in only photocopying part  of  the  report.   Mr
    Jarvis confirmed that the only copies of the report that were available
    to the respondent were also missing paragraphs 22 to 26.   Although  Mr
    Pipi conceded that it may well be that the  missing  pages  are  of  no
    import, he agreed that the best course  of  action  would  be  for  the
    appellant's representatives to approach the original author  to  either
    obtain a full copy of the original report and/or ascertain  whether  it
    was a case of misnumbering.  If such is not possible, Mr Pipi indicated
    that he would obtain a fresh report, either from Dr  Momoh  or  another
    expert, if the appellant's medical condition permits.

Conclusion

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  and  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  24 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  24 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

