
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10395/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 July 2016                                |On 11 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                            mubarek muzeyen kamal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mubarek Muzeyen Kamal was born on 5 October 1990  claims
    to be a citizen of Eritrea.  He appealed against the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 30 June 2015 refusing him  asylum  and  making
    directions  for  his  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom.   First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Manchester) in a decision promulgated on  10  May  2016
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I was assisted by both representatives at the Upper Tribunal hearing at
    Bradford on 6 July 2016.  Neither representative sought to  defend  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in  particular  Judge  Manchester's
    observations at [58]:

         "I have taken into account there was  acceptance  in  the  case  MO
         (illegal exit - risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011]  UKUT  190  (IAC)
         that, prior to  the  August/September  2008  date  restricting  the
         possibility of legal exit for  certain  categories  of  person,  it
         would be reasonably possible for persons of draft age to leave  the
         country legally.  Further, he having regard to the comments of  the
         Court of Appeal in MA (Eritrea) and my findings on  credibility,  I
         do not find that it behoves me to speculate how the appellant  left
         Eritrea and what precise basis he did so legally or how he would be
         able to establish that fact to the satisfaction of the  authorities
         on return."

 3. Both parties agreed that the judge erred  in  law  by  not  making  any
    findings on the evidence as to whether the appellant had  left  Eritrea
    legally or illegally.  With respect, it did behove the  judge  to  make
    the necessary findings and not simply to avoid the issue.

 4. In the circumstances, I set aside the judge's decision.  There needs to
    be a new fact-finding exercise which is best conducted  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 10 May  2016  is
    set aside.  None of the findings  of  fact  shall  stand.   The  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  (not  Judge  Manchester)
    for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 4 July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
