
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10907/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 7th October 2016                  |On 11th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                    M E O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes, Counsel instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Iran born on 21st September  1984.
    The Appellant entered the  UK  illegally  on  26th  February  2015  and
    applied for asylum.  That application was refused for the reasons given
    in the Respondent's letter of 28th July 2015.  The Appellant  appealed,
    and her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Phull (the
    Judge) sitting at Birmingham on 23rd May 2016.  She decided to  dismiss
    the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection, and  Articles  2  and  3
    ECHR grounds for the reasons given in her Decision dated 29th May 2016.
     The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on  29th  June
    2016 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.   Leave  to  appeal  was
    granted on only one of the grounds of application relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant, namely that the Judge had failed to consider the decision in
    AB and Others (Internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015]  UKUT
    257 (IAC) in relation to the Appellant's Facebook account.

 3. The Judge dismissed  the  appeal  because  she  found  the  Appellant's
    account of events in Iran to be lacking in credibility.   Further,  the
    Judge found that even  if  the  Appellant  had  been  arrested  by  the
    authorities in Iran in 2011, the Appellant had not been persecuted as a
    consequence and that she had not experienced any  further  difficulties
    living in Iran  thereafter.   As  regards  the  Appellant's  sur  place
    activities, the Judge found that the Appellant did not  belong  to  any
    anti-Iranian organisations in the UK, but that  she  had  attended  one
    demonstration in London in 2016.  This did not  put  the  Appellant  at
    risk on return because the Iranian authorities would  not  be  able  to
    identify her.  However, the Judge accepted that  the  Appellant  had  a
    Facebook page which identified her by name and in which  the  Appellant
    had  been  critical  of  the  Iranian  authorities  because  of   their
    importation of drugs.  However, the Appellant's Facebook  activity  was
    recent, and applying the decision in BA  (Demonstrators  in  Britain  -
    risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 00036 (IAC), it did not  place  the
    Appellant at risk on return  because  she  did  not  have  a  political
    profile as an activist in the UK.

 4. At the  hearing,  Mr  Vokes  referred  to  his  Skeleton  Argument  and
    submitted that the Judge had erred in law by coming to this conclusion.
     The Judge had failed to make proper findings  as  to  the  Appellant's
    arrest in 2011, and had failed to link that event  to  the  Appellant's
    sur place activities  in  the  UK  which  together  would  give  her  a
    political profile.  When considering those  sur  place  activities  the
    Judge had erred in fact in considering them  recent  whereas  they  had
    begun in March 2015 following the Appellant's  arrival  in  the  UK  in
    February 2015.  Further, the Judge had relied upon the decision  in  BA
    which was out of date.   She  had  not  referred  to  the  more  recent
    decision of AB and Others at all.  On a proper interpretation  of  that
    more recent decision, the Judge would have concluded that the Appellant
    was at risk on return.

 5. In response, Mr Mills referred to the Rule 24 response and argued  that
    there was no such material error of law.  The Judge had  made  a  clear
    finding that the Appellant had come to the  adverse  attention  of  the
    authorities in Iran in 2011 at paragraph 29 of the Decision.  Otherwise
    the Judge had made a further clear finding that the events in  Iran  in
    2015 claimed by  the  Appellant  were  not  credible.   The  Judge  had
    correctly decided that the  events  in  2011  alone  did  not  put  the
    Appellant at risk for the cogent reasons she gave.

 6. As  regards  the  Appellant's  sur  place  activities,  the  Judge  had
    correctly applied  the  current  Country  Guidance  case  of  BA.   The
    decision in AB  and  Others,  although  reported,  was  not  a  Country
    Guidance decision.  Applying BA, the Judge had correctly  decided  that
    one attendance at a demonstration did not put the Appellant at risk  on
    return.  Further, the Judge had made an appropriate finding as  regards
    the Appellant's Facebook activities.  There was not a long  history  of
    such.  It had been open to the Judge to find that the Appellant did not
    have a political profile in Iran.

 7. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.  The Judge made comprehensive findings in respect  of
    events in Iran in 2011 and 2015, and in the UK.   Those  were  findings
    which were open to her on the evidence before her and which  she  fully
    explained.  The  Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the  Appellant's
    Facebook activities did not amount to  a  great  deal,  and  even  when
    coupled with the arrest in 2011, did not give the Appellant a political
    profile which might  put  her  at  risk  on  return.   As  regards  the
    Appellant's attendance at a demonstration, the  Judge's  decision  that
    that also did not put the Appellant at risk on return is in  accordance
    with the current Country Guidance case of  BA.   It  is  true  that  as
    regards the Appellant's Facebook activities, that  the  Judge  did  not
    take account of the reported decision of AB  and  Others.   It  is  not
    referred to at all in the Decision.  However, this does not amount to a
    material error of law bearing in mind what is said at paragraph 470  of
    AB and Others.  In accordance with the fact-finding of the  Judge,  the
    Appellant would not have to  reveal  her  Facebook  activities  at  the
    "pinch point" of return.

 8. For these reasons I find no material error of law and the  decision  of
    the Judge is not set aside.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did make an order for  anonymity  which  I  continue
for the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
