

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10062/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                          |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 15 May 2014                            |                            |
|Determination delivered orally            |............................|
|                                          |...........                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     A T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Duncan instructed by Blavo & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

   2. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Eritrea who  was  born  on  19
      March 1990.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 26 September 2013 and
      made an application for asylum.  On 18 October 2013, the Secretary  of
      State refused his application for asylum and made a decision to remove
      him to Eritrea or Ethiopia.  The appellant appealed to the  First-tier
      Tribunal and in a determination promulgated on 22 January  2014  Judge
      Powell dismissed the appellant's appeal.

   3. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and on
      12 February 2014 the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Levin)  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal on the ground set out in paragraph 4 of
      his reasons for granting permission:

           "At para 31 of  his  determination  the  Judge  found  that  the
           appellant was an Eritrean from Ethiopia.  At para  42  he  found
           that the appellant was an Ethiopian with an Eritrean  background
           and at para 44 he found that the appellant would be at  risk  of
           persecution in Eritrea and that he cannot  be  removed  thereto.
           Given the Judge's finding that  the  appellant  is  at  risk  of
           persecution in Eritrea there is an arguable error of law in  his
           dismissal of the appeal."

   4.  In  her  rule  24  response,  the  Secretary  of  State  opposed  the
      appellant's appeal and submitted that the  Judge's  decision  was  not
      irrational and in particular:

           "He was entitled to conclude that the appellant was an  Eritrean
           who was living in Ethiopia and that he had failed to demonstrate
           that he could not obtain Ethiopian citizenship."

   5. Mr Richards, who represented the Secretary of State accepted that  the
      Judge had made no clear finding on the appellant's nationality.   That
      is clearly correct.   At  paragraph  31  the  Judge  found  that  "the
      appellant is an Eritrean from Ethiopia".  At paragraph  42  the  Judge
      found  that  "the  appellant  is  an  Ethiopian   with   an   Eritrean
      background".

   6. Mr Duncan, who represented the appellant sought to argue on the  basis
      of the rule 24 reply that the Secretary of State had in fact  conceded
      the appeal because she had accepted that the appellant was an Eritrean
      and it was conceded by the Presenting Officer before the Judge that if
      the appellant was an Eritrean his appeal must succeed.

   7. As I pointed out to Mr Duncan at the hearing the difficulty with  that
      submission is that it does not deal with the obvious inconsistency  in
      paras 31 and 42 of the  Judge's  determination  which,  it  is  argued
      before me, contains not just a lack of clarity  but  two  inconsistent
      findings.  The Respondent's rule 24 reply simply cannot be  understood
      to concede the appeal.

   8. The appellant's nationality  was  central  to  his  claim  for  asylum
      together with the factual background which he claimed put him at  risk
      because of his involvement with the OLF which the Judge did not accept
      in his determination.  It seems to me that, as  Mr  Richards  accepts,
      the inconsistent finding on  nationality  fatally  flaws  the  Judge's
      approach to the  appellant's  asylum  claim  and  risk  on  return  to
      Ethiopia or Eritrea, for that reason alone the decision  cannot  stand
      and should be set aside.

   9. None of the Judge's findings should stand and the rehearing should  be
      de novo.  The issue of the appellant's credibility and  other  matters
      raised on his behalf are matters which should be considered afresh  by
      a Judge.

Decision and Remittal

  10. For these reasons, therefore, the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to
      dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of law.
       That decision cannot stand and I set it aside.

  11. As there are no factual findings in relation to the appellant's appeal
      the proper disposal is that the appeal be remitted to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal to be heard de novo by a Judge other than Judge Powell.  None
      of the factual findings shall stand.


                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




















