
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA100582015
     AA100602015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th June 2016                              |On 14th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                    [M K]
                                    [H S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss D Urie (instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                             NOTICE OF DECISION


 1. This is an application to the Upper Tribunal  by  the  Appellants  with
    permission granted by me on 22nd April 2016.  The  Appellants  are  all
    Afghan nationals and they appeal the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kanagaratnam who in a Decision and Reasons  promulgated  on  29th
    March 2016 dismissed their asylum claims.

 2. The reason that I granted permission and the reason that I  am  setting
    aside the decision is that the Judge failed to take into account at all
    the Appellant supplementary bundle which included an  expert's  report.
    It is quite clear from the Judge's Record of Proceedings  that  he  had
    the bundle because it is specifically referred to,  as  is  the  expert
    report and indeed the pages numbers of the supplementary bundle 159-190
    are written in his notes and highlighted. However no mention is made of
    those at all in the Decision and Reasons.

 3. Whether or not those documents and the expert report would have made  a
    material difference is  not  the  issue.   I  find  the  Appellant  are
    entitled to have a decision made on the  basis of all the evidence  put
    forward on their behalf.  In this case that did not happen. That is  an
    error of law.  It is fundamental.

Notice of Decision

 4. The whole case will have to be reheard and for that reason I  remit  it
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Kanagaratnam.  It should be remitted to Hatton Cross for a rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 13th June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
