


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
AA/10444/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                   |            Decision & Reasons        |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On 7 September 2017                 |            On 24 October 2017        |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                    PJPB
                         (Anonymity DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes      (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson  (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to  the  Upper Tribunal,  brought  with
permission, from a  decision  of  the  First-tier Tribunal  (Judge Shimmin
hereinafter "the Judge") dismissing his appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
State's decision of 19 November 2014 refusing to revoke a deportation order
and refusing to  grant  him  asylum  or  any  other  form  of  international
protection.

2.    The First-tier Tribunal granted the claimant anonymity.  Nothing  was
said about that before me but I am  content  to  continue  the  status quo.
Accordingly, I continue the anonymity direction.

Background

3.     The  claimant's  factual  and  adjudication   history   is   somewhat
convoluted.  I hope to state it quite shortly.

4.    He was born on 3 April 1982 in Sierra Leone.  He is a  national  of
that country.  When aged about 10 years  he  was  abducted  and  forced  to
become a child soldier.   He  shot  his  uncle  as  part  of  an  initiation
process.  As a soldier  he  killed  people  and  committed  atrocities.   He
started to use drugs.  In or around 2000 he was  taken  to  a  place  called
St Michael's Lodge as part  of  a  programme  for  the  rehabilitation  and
reintegration of former child combatants.   Whilst  there  he  was  sexually
abused. In March 2002 he was sponsored by UNICEF to come to the  UK  for  a
short period in order to learn English.  Having come to the  UK  he  visited
Spain for a period of one month but was,  once  again,  a  victim  of  abuse
whilst there.  He then came back to the UK and lived, for a period, with  an
aunt but had to leave her home because she could no longer  afford  to  keep
him.  He then spent a period in  destitution  and  started  to  use  illegal
drugs.  He did, though, form a relationship with a person I shall  call  HS.
She is British.  The relationship has now ended.

5.    On 24 July 2007  the  claimant  was  convicted  of  five  counts  of
supplying a controlled drug (crack cocaine and heroin)  and  he  received  a
sentence of 42 months imprisonment.  In March 2008 he was notified of  his
liability to deportation and a decision to  make  a  deportation  order  was
taken.  On 2 February 2009 he claimed asylum and this was  treated  as  an
application for revocation of the deportation  order.   But  revocation  was
refused and so he appealed against that decision.  His appeal was  dismissed
by Judge Swaniker in a determination promulgated on 18 May 2010.

6.    Notwithstanding the above the claimant was not actually deported.   On
6 August 2011 he was convicted of further drugs  offences  (possession  of
Class A drugs with intent to supply) and some offences of  dishonesty.   He
received a sentence of six years imprisonment.  He contacted  the  Secretary
of State asserting, once again, entitlement to asylum and  was  subsequently
notified  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  intention  to  exclude  him  from
protection under the 1951 Refugee Convention pursuant to section 72 of the
Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act 2002.   Further  correspondence
followed which culminated in the decision of 19 November 2014 referred  to
above.  By this time the claimant, having been released  from  custody,  had
met a person who I shall call HG, also a British citizen, and had  commenced
a relationship with her.  That relationship still subsists albeit that  they
do not live together. They have a son who was born on 22 November 2015.

7.    The claimant's appeal against  the  19 November 2014  decision  came
before Judge Robson.  In a decision promulgated on 6 August 2015 he allowed
the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.  However,  his  decision  was
subsequently set aside by Upper Tribunal  Judge Taylor.   The  appeal  was
remitted with certain preserved findings to the  effect  that  the  claimant
had been a child soldier as claimed, had been  abused  as  claimed  and,  in
consequence  of  all  of  that,  had  suffered  from  post-traumatic  stress
disorder.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

8.    The claimant's appeal was considered by way of an  oral  hearing.   He
was represented by Counsel.  The Secretary of State  was  represented  by  a
Home Office Presenting Officer.  The claimant gave oral evidence as did one
Dr. Barbara Harrell-Bond who had provided an expert report.  It is  to  be
noted that, seemingly for the first time, the Secretary of State  argued  at
the  hearing  that  the  claimant  should  be  excluded  from  a  grant   of
humanitarian protection.

9.    The Judge, in a very detailed determination,  dismissed  the  appeal.
He concluded that the claimant was excluded  from  refugee  protection;  was
excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection; would not be  at  risk  of
persecution or serious harm upon return to Sierra Leone as a  former  child
soldier because such persons were not at risk on  that  basis;  was  not  at
risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment as a  bisexual  person  because
he is not bisexual; was not at risk of committing  suicide  if  returned  to
Sierra Leone; and that requiring him to leave the United Kingdom would not
amount to a breach of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights
(ECHR).

10.   I would note at  this  stage  that  the  report  of  and  evidence  of
Dr. Harrell-Bond  was  concerned  with  ill-treatment  the  claimant  might
receive upon return.  The tribunal also had written expert witness  material
from one Dr. Hartree which was concerned with the claimant's mental health.

The permission stage

11.   The claimant asked for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal.
In summary, it was  contended  that  the Judge  had  erred  in  failing  to
properly assess the matter of exclusion from refugee protection; in  failing
to properly assess the matter of exclusion from humanitarian protection;  in
failing to properly direct himself with  respect  to  suicide  risk  in  the
context of Article 3 of the ECHR; in conducting an unfair assessment of the
evidence of Dr. Harrell-Bond and in reaching unsafe findings  with  respect
to the claimant's contention that he is bisexual.

12.   Permission to appeal was initially refused by a Judge  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal.  However, it was granted by a Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge
and the salient part of that grant reads as follows:

      "     3.   The grounds of appeal disclose arguable errors  of  law  in
      the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin, in particular:

                 (i)   it is arguable that the Judge's decision  to  uphold
                 the section 72 certificate at [38] and [39] was materially
                 flawed through a failure to consider the  re-categorisation
                 report as to the lower risk the appellant presents  to  the
                 public and the fact that the appellant  has  not  committed
                 any further offence since his  release  from  detention  on
                 17.10.14;

                 (ii)  it is arguable that the Judge's decision to  exclude
                 the appellant from humanitarian protection at [41] - [43]
                 was materially  flawed  through  a  failure  to  take  into
                 consideration the  preserved  findings  of  fact,  set  out
                 at [46] viz that  the  appellant  was  a  child  soldier,
                 suffered sexual abuse and consequently suffered PTSD which,
                 along with the issue raised in  Ground 1, may be  relevant
                 to a proper consideration of paragraph 339D(iii),  it  not
                 being   disputed   that   the   appellant    fell    within
                 paragraph 339D(i).  It is also arguable that,  whilst  the
                 appellant Counsel  did  not  object,  it  was  procedurally
                 unfair for the respondent to raise the issue  of  exclusion
                 from humanitarian protection apparently for the first  time
                 at the hearing on 19 October 2006, despite the fact  that
                 the  appeal  had  already  been   heard   by   the   First-
                 tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal,  who  remitted  the
                 appeal for a further hearing with preserved findings [29];

                 (iii) it is arguable that the Judge's findings at  [86] -
                 [87] as to the Article 3 risk of suicide  are  materially
                 flawed for the reason set out in [6] - [13] of the grounds
                 of appeal;

                 (iv)  grounds 4, 5 have less arguable merit but  all  the
                 grounds may be argued."

The hearing before me

13.   Permission to appeal having been granted there was  a  hearing  before
the Upper Tribunal so that the question of whether the Judge had or had not
erred in law could be considered.  Representation at  that  hearing  was  as
stated above and I am grateful to both representatives.

14.   Essentially Mr Holmes maintained, and to some extent built upon,  the
grounds  of  appeal.   He  made  no  concessions  as   to   any   of   them.
Mrs Pettersen argued, in effect, that the Judge had properly considered all
relevant  matters,  had  not  erred  in  law  and  had  reached  sustainable
findings.

15.   Where necessary or  otherwise  appropriate  I  shall  refer,  in  more
detail, to what was said by the representatives when explaining the  view  I
have reached with respect to each ground of appeal.

My consideration of the grounds

16.   With respect to what I shall call Ground 1, this is  what  the Judge
had to say about why  he  was  deciding  to  uphold  the  certificate  under
section 72 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and,  hence,
to conclude that the claimant was excluded from the protection  afforded  by
the Refugee Convention:

      "The s.72 certificate

      32.   The respondent has made a certificate under section 72  of  The
      Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  the  relevant  parts  of
      which state:

            s.72 Serious criminal

            (1)  This section applies for the purpose  of  the  construction
                 and application of Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention
                 (exclusion from protection).

            (2)  A person shall be presumed to  have  been  convicted  by  a
                 final judgment of  a  particularly  serious  crime  and  to
                 constitute a danger to the community of the United Kingdom
                 if he is -

                       (a)   convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence,
                 and

                       (b)   sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  at
                 least two years.

                 ...

            (6)  A presumption under subsection (2),  (3)  or  (4)  that  a
                 person constitutes a danger to the community is  rebuttable
                 by that person.

                 ...

            (10) The Tribunal or Commission hearing the appeal -

                       (a)   must  begin  substantive  deliberation  on  the
                            appeal by considering the certificate, and

                        (b)    if  in  agreement  that  presumptions   under
                            subsection (2), (3) or (4) apply (having given
                            the appellant an opportunity for rebuttal) must
                            dismiss the appeal in so far as  it  relies  on
                            the ground specified in subsection (9)(a).

            (11) For the purposes o f this section -

                       (a)   'the Refugee Convention' means the  Convention
                            relating to the  Status  of  Refugees  done  at
                            Geneva on 28th July 1951  and  its  Protocol,
                            and ...

      33.    The  appellant  has  expressed  his  dissatisfaction  with  his
      conviction in 2007  and  particularly  his  conviction  in  2011.   It
      appears that about three years ago he consulted solicitors with a view
      to challenging the 2011 conviction but there is before me no  evidence
      of progress in that regard.  He has done nothing constructive  towards
      setting either conviction aside.  Mr Brown, for the appellant, accepts
      that he cannot go behind the convictions.  For the  purpose  of  these
      proceedings I find that  the  appellant  has  been  convicted  of  the
      offences and sentenced as  set  out  above.   I  find  also  that  the
      appellant's failure to accept his conviction but do nothing  about  it
      despite the considerable passage of time, indicates that he  does  not
      accept the reality  of  the  situation  and  the  seriousness  of  his
      criminal behaviour.

       34.    Following  the  2011  conviction  the  respondent  asked   the
      appellant to rebut the  presumption  that  he  was  a  danger  to  the
      community.  In a response dated 5 March, 2014 it was stated  by  his
      representatives that:

         . on the seriousness of the offences, he regretted his actions and
           that the offending was prompted by his mental health issues;

         . he believed that he did not pose a risk  to  the  community  and
           this was supported by a risk  assessment  dated  3 March, 2014
           which assessed the appellant as at a low  risk  of  reoffending.
           On the question of serious harm to others this  was  flagged  as
           'no data found';

         . the appellant  was  appealing  his  sentence  on  the  basis  of
           malicious prosecution (no evidence has been provided to  suggest
           that an appeal has been lodged).

      35.   The  judge  sentencing  the  appellant  on  14 September, 2007
      stressed the  seriousness  of  the  offences.   Very  soon  after  the
      appellant's release from the first sentence the appellant returned  to
      the same offending and this was reflected in  the judge's  sentencing
      remarks at the time of the second conviction on 26 August, 2011 when
      it was stated:

            'The aggravating features  in  your  case  it  seems  to  me  as
           follows:  first  of  all,  you  have  previous  convictions  for
           exactly the same sort of offending  as  brings  you  before  the
           court today.  It was some four years ago but, of  course,  given
           that, you received a sentence I think of 42 months, it was  not
           that long ago that you were released from that sentence  and  it
           seems to  me  you  have  gone  very  quickly  straight  back  to
           precisely the same offending that  got  you  into  trouble  last
           time.

            But what you have done, Mr B, is you have brought all  of  that
           tragedy and all that  misery  that  was  meted  out  to  you  in
           Sierra Leone over to this country and the drugs that you peddle
           cause misery, agony and destruction of people's lives.'

      36.   I find that individually these offences are  very  serious.   My
      finding is confirmed and amplified when the  offences  are  looked  at
      cumulatively and include repetitions of the same offences  which  took
      place within such a short time of each other.   For  these  reasons  I
      find that s.72(1) is met.

      37.   I go on to consider whether the appellant poses a danger to  the
      community of the United Kingdom under s.72(2).

      38.   The appellant's  NOMS  assessment  on  18 March, 2014  is  (at
      section 2b) that he is a low risk of serious harm.  In the face of the
      two convictions in quick succession of very serious offences I have my
      doubts that this  assessment  is  correct.   As  discussed  above  the
      appellant has not accepted responsibility for the later  offence.   He
      regards himself as a victim of malicious prosecution but has  made  no
      attempt to  substantiate  this  and  challenge  the  conviction.   The
      appellant blames his mental health but I have not been directed to any
      expert evidence which would lead the appellant to being absolved, even
      in part, from responsibility.  The appellant has not shown that he has
      actively addressed his offending behaviour.  When considering all  the
      circumstances I find he has not rebutted the certificate.

      39.    Taking  the  above  findings  into  account  I  find  that  the
      appellant poses a particular danger to drug users and the community of
      the United Kingdom in terms of the danger to the wider  interests  of
      society considering that the  supply  of  drugs  inevitably  leads  to
      higher levels of acquisitive criminal activity in  order  to  pay  for
      them, and to an increased call upon the publicly-funded Health Service
      in order to deal with its deleterious effects.  Accordingly, I  uphold
      the  respondent's  certificate  under  s.72.   It  follows  that   the
      appellant's asylum claim is refused on the basis that Article 33(2) of
      the Geneva Convention applies to the appellant  and  that  Convention
      does not prevent his removal from the United Kingdom."

17.   The criticism of the Judge, here, is twofold.  First  of  all  it  is
said that he disregarded an important piece of  evidence  described  as  the
"re-categorisation report".  Secondly it is said that he seemed not to  take
account of the fact that the claimant had, since his release from  detention
on 17 October 2014, not re-offended.

18.   The salient part of the re-categorisation report relied  upon  by  the
claimant for the purposes of his appeal to the Upper Tribunal is set out in
the written grounds of application.  It  is  said  that  that  evidence  was
particularly important because it provided an  explanation  as  to  why  the
claimant had been assessed as being of low risk to the  public.   That  must
be a reference to the words in the document  "you  have  engaged  well  with
your sentence plan".

19.   I would accept that the Judge did not, in his determination,  make  a
specific reference to the re-categorisation report.   However,  he  was  not
required to refer to each and every document which was  before  him  and  he
did make it plain, at  paragraph 31  of  his  determination,  that  he  had
"carefully considered all the evidence and  the  submissions  on  behalf  of
both parties".  He himself said that a failure to  mention  a  document  was
not to be taken as an indication that it had not been  considered.   He  was
aware of the fact that it had been  said  in  a  NOMS  assessment  that  the
claimant constituted  a  low  risk  of  serious  harm  to  the  public  (see
paragraph 38 of the determination).  But he explained  (see  paragraphs 38
and 39) why despite that assessment he took a different view.  He  did  not
specifically remind himself  that  there  had  been  no  re-offending  since
release but nothing in what the Judge had to  say  could  be  taken  as  an
indication that he believed otherwise or had lost sight of that.  The Judge
was entitled to attach weight, as he did, to the fact  of  there  being  two
convictions in relation  to  very  serious  offences  in  quick  succession.
Taking an overall view his conclusion as to the section 72 certificate  was
open to him on the material before him and,  despite  the  criticisms  made,
has been adequately explained.

20.   I conclude, in light of the above, that Ground 1 is not made out.

21.   I now turn to Ground 2.  As to exclusion from a grant of humanitarian
protection the Judge said this:

      "339D of the Immigration Rules

      40.   Under paragraph 339D of  the  Immigration  Rules  a  person  is
      excluded   from   a   grant   of   humanitarian    protection    under
      paragraph 339C(iv) where the Secretary of State is satisfied that:

            (i)  there are serious  reasons  for  considering  that  he  has
                 committed a crime against  peace,  a  war  crime,  a  crime
                 against humanity, or any other serious crime or  instigated
                 or otherwise participated in such crimes;

            (ii) there are  serious  reasons  for  considering  that  he  is
                 guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and  principles  of
                 the United Nations or has committed, prepared or instigated
                 such acts  or  encouraged  or  induced  others  to  commit,
                 prepare or instigate such acts;

            (iii)      there are serious reasons  for  considering  that  he
                 constitutes a danger to the community or to the security of
                 the United Kingdom; or

            (iv) prior to his admission to the  United Kingdom  the  person
                 committed a crime outside the scope of (i) and (ii)  that
                 would be punishable by imprisonment were  it  committed  in
                 the United Kingdom and the  person  left  his  country  of
                 origin solely in order to avoid  sanctions  resulting  from
                 the crime.

      41.   The appellant accepts that he killed  and  committed  atrocities
      in Sierra Leone as a boy soldier.  On the basis of these admissions I
      find that he comes within 339D(i) and (ii).

      42.   With regard to 339D(iii) I find that there are  serious  reasons
      for considering  that  the  appellant  constitutes  a  danger  to  the
      community for the United Kingdom for the same reasons  I  have  given
      above in respect of the section 72 certificate.

      43.   Accordingly, I find that the appellant is excluded from a  grant
      of humanitarian protection."

22.   The principle criticism  here,  in  looking  at  the  written  grounds
coupled with what was said to me at the hearing, was to the effect  that  in
deciding as he did the Judge had effectively  "gone  behind  the  preserved
findings of fact" which had been made by Judge Robson to  the  effect  that
the claimant had been a child soldier, had suffered  abuse  and  was,  as  a
consequence, suffering from  post-traumatic  stress  disorder.   But  it  is
appropriate to read the Judge's decision as a whole.  The Judge was  aware
of those preserved  findings  because  he  expressly  referred  to  them  at
paragraph 46 of his determination.  It is true that he made that  reference
in the context of his consideration as  to  the  possible  applicability  of
Articles 2 and 3  of  the  ECHR.   Nevertheless,  that  is  sufficient  to
demonstrate that he was clearly aware of  those  matters.   Further,  in  my
judgment, he was entitled to rely upon his reasoning and his  findings  with
respect to section 72 certificate.

23.   As to the suggestion of procedural unfairness given that the  argument
had only been raised at a late  stage,  that  was  not  a  matter  contained
within the written grounds and nor did Counsel who represented the  claimant
before the Judge, and whom I know to be very  experienced  Counsel  in  the
field, raise the matter or express any concerns at the hearing.   Mr Holmes
did not actively pursue the matter before me.  In the circumstances I  would
conclude that Ground 2 is not made out.

24.   As to Ground 3, which is concerned with suicide risk, the Judge said
this:

      "Medical claim

      79.   The appellant claims  he  suffers  from  Post Traumatic  Stress
      Disorder and that removal to Sierra Leone would breach his Article 3
      and 8 rights in that he will be at increased  risk  of  suicide.   He
      argues that the psychiatric treatment and medication he needs and  has
      in the UK will not be available there.

       80.    I  have  carefully  considered  the  medico-legal  report   of
      Dr Naomi Hartree dated 12 August, 2014, her addendum  medico-legal
      report of 30 March, 2015 and finally her letter dated 2 April, 2015.

      81.   Dr Hartree has addressed the appellant's  physical  and  mental
      state but, following the  finding  that  the  appellant  was  a  child
      soldier, it is only the appellant's mental state that is  of  interest
      in my decision.

      82.   In her main medico-legal report of 12 August 2014  Dr Hartree
      states:

                 22.3  Regarding suicide  risk  (including  the  risk  of  a
                 serious suicide attempt), in my view Mr B is currently  at
                 moderate risk of suicide (on a scale of low-moderate-high).
                  He has  some  significant  or  concerning  'risk  factors'
                 together with some protective factors.   His  risk  factors
                 are:

                       a)    he has a  past  history  of  attempts  or  near
                            attempts  at  suicide  by  serious  methods  (a
                            ligature and jumping from a cliff);

                       b)    he  has  existing  mental  illness  (PTSD)  and
                            symptoms of depression; both are recognised  as
                            increasing the risk of suicide;

                       c)    he has a  distressing  level  of  symptoms  and
                            thoughts that it would be better to die;

                       d)    he  expressed  prominent  ideas  of  guilt  and
                            remorse  and  showed  signs  of  shame  in  his
                            demeanour.  This may be a serious risk factor -
                            one study  of  military  personnel  found  that
                            guilt and shame are associated  with  increased
                            severity  of  suicidal  ideation  in   military
                            mental health outpatients, and that guilt has a
                            particularly strong relationship with  suicidal
                            ideation (Bryan 2013);

                       e)    he has ongoing  stress  factors  in  his  life,
                            such as being detained, and anxiety  about  his
                            situation;

                       f)    he reports feeling hopeless most  of  the  time
                            and  really  being  able  to  feel  optimistic.
                            Hopelessness is a significant risk  factor  for
                            suicide (Beck 1975);

                       g)    he has social risk factors  known  to  increase
                            suicide  risk  -   being   single,   male   and
                            unemployed.

                 22.4  (The current protective  factors  for  the  appellant
                            were then listed.)

                 22.5  If Mr B were removed from the UK, or faced with such
                       removal plans or attempts, in my  view  his  risk  of
                       self-harm and  suicide  would  be  highly  likely  to
                       increase.  In that situation he would  be  likely  to
                       become increasingly hopeless.  As detailed above,  he
                       has described feeling unable that  he  would  not  be
                       able to cope (sic) with  returning  to  Sierra Leone
                       because of the reminders of the past  that  it  would
                       bring him, saying in that scenario it would be easier
                       for him not to be alive, and showing visible distress
                       as he  said  this.   The  prospect  of  a  return  to
                       Sierra Leone, or an actual attempted  return,  would
                       therefore be likely to exacerbate  Mr B's  PTSD  and
                       depression symptoms together with  his  thoughts  and
                       urges towards ending his life.  Since he  is  already
                       reports (sic) a severe  level  of  symptoms  and  has
                       significant  suicide  risk   factors,   any   further
                       deterioration would  be  highly  concerning.   In  my
                       opinion his suicide risk if removed from the UK would
                       be high.

      83.   The appellant stated, and it was  accepted  by  the  respondent,
      that the appellant's condition had not changed since Dr Hartree's last
      report  (2 April 2015).   He  was  still  taking  mirtazapine  (an
      antidepressant) and chlorpromazine  (an  antipsychotic  at  low  dose)
      daily.

      84.   Dr Hartree's report of 2 April 2015 confirms that psychiatric
      treatment is available in Sierra Leone but is not of the quantity  or
      the quality that is available in the UK.  Dr Hartree  she  says  that
      chlorpromazine is available in Sierra Leone but he may have difficulty
      sourcing mertazapine.  Dr Hartree says that he could change to another
      anti-depressant but that mertazapine is a second line  antidepressant,
      after first-line antidepressants such as fluoxetine  have  been  tried
      and found insufficiently effective.

      85.   I find that the appellant has  not  established  that  he  needs
      inpatient care such as offered at a psychiatric hospital.  Dr Hartree
      describes this as  inappropriate  for  the  appellant  and  likely  to
      exacerbate his mental ill-health.

       86.    Although  in  short  supply,  outpatient  treatment  would  be
      available for  the  appellant  (as  set  out  by  Dr Hartree  in  her
      2 April, 2015 report).  It is agreed that the appellant's psychiatric
      condition has been stable for about two years and I am  not  satisfied
      on the evidence before me that the appellant's return to Sierra Leone
      would put him at Article 2 or 3 in terms of his suicide  and  mental
      health generally.  I find  that  he  would  have  the  assistance  and
      support of his family and he would  be  able  to  access  his  current
      medication or reasonable alternatives.

      87.   Accessing therapists would be difficult but they are  available.
       I remind myself that it is not the duty of the United Kingdom to  be
      the world's  hospital.   There  are,  I  find,  sufficient  facilities
      available to the appellant in Sierra Leone to protect from suicide and
      the worsening of his mental illness.

      88.   For the sake of  completeness  I  note  the  case  of  N v the
      United Kingdom - 26565/05/ [2008] ECHR 453 sets a very high threshold
      as to the seriousness of illness required to breach Article 3.  I find
      that the appellant's condition does not approach that level."

25.   In my judgment that represented a clear  and  thorough  evaluation  of
the evidence as to suicide risk and the arguments about it which  the Judge
was required to decide.

26.   To my mind what is said in the written grounds is really  very  vague.
Sections are quoted from the judgments in J v Secretary of  State  for  the
Home Department (2005) EWCA Civ 629 and Y & Anor (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of
State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362 and it is then said that
the Judge had failed to "properly direct himself in law in line" with those
judgments.  But there is no meaningful explanation as to how  that  was  so.
Before me it was contended that the Judge had wrongly treated the  case  as
being a "deathbed case" and, as I understand it,  had  applied  too  high  a
threshold.  It was also  argued  that  he  had  not  explained  why  he  was
rejecting the view expressed by Dr. Hartree.

27.   The Judge was clearly aware of the views of Dr. Hartree some of which
he set out in the part of the determination which I have  reproduced  above.
He noted that psychiatric treatment was available in Sierra Leone  even  if
not of the quality available  in  the  UK  (paragraph 84).   He  noted  the
availability,   albeit   in   short   supply,   of   outpatient    treatment
(paragraph 86).  Against that background it was open to  him  to  conclude,
along with his finding that there would be  family  assistance,  that  there
was no Article 2 or Article 3 risk in the context of suicide.  It cannot be
said that he ignored, did not acknowledge or did not consider what was  said
by Dr. Hartree.  The Judge took a holistic view  as  to  the  question  of
suicide risk and his reasoning incorporated the views of  Dr. Hartree.   As
to the "deathbed case" point, that seems to rest upon what the Judge had to
say at paragraph 88 of his determination.  However, he had already  reached
his view as to suicide risk by then.

28.   I conclude that this ground is not made out.

29.   As to Ground 4, it is right to say that the Judge was not  impressed
with the written or oral evidence of Dr. Harrell-Bond.  She  had  expressed
opinions as to risk the claimant would face upon return to Sierra Leone  as
a former child  soldier  and  as  a  bisexual  person.   Essentially  it  is
contended, in the  written  grounds,  that  the Judge  had  been  wrong  to
question the independence and impartiality of the expert (a  point  is  made
that she had given evidence before the tribunal in 20 other cases  and  the
appeals had been allowed in all but one such case)  and  had  erred  through
failing (as it was said fairness required) to put his  concerns  to  her  at
the hearing.  It was the latter point which Mr Holmes sought to focus  upon
before me.

30.   This is what the Judge had to say:

      "Risk as a former child soldier

      61.   I remind myself that the facts retained  from  the  decision  of
      Immigration Judge Robson are as follows:

            a)   the appellant was a child soldier as claimed;

            b)   he did suffer abuse as claimed;

            c)   as a result of being a child soldier and  the  consequences
                 of the same, he has  suffered  from  Post-Traumatic  Stress
                 Disorder.

      62.   I have before me the expert report of  Dr Barbara Harrell-Bond
      dated 12 October, 2016.  She is a legal anthropologist with '15 years
      of research experience in Sierra Leone and  throughout  West Africa,
      specialising in family law, administrative law and dispute  resolution
      through 'customary' courts'.  In 1982 she shifted  the  focus  of  her
      career to concentrate on  refugees  and  that  required  her  becoming
      familiar with  refugee  issues  and  supervising  research  in  forced
      migration globally; there were refugee crises over those years  mainly
      in Africa, Asia and Central America.  She is now Emerita Professor at
      the University of Oxford.

      63.   On retirement at the age of 65 she undertook EU funded  research
      in Kenya and Uganda working with teams of lawyers  in  both  countries
      (1997-2000) on the extent to which refugees could enjoy  their  rights
      in exile.  She states that  one  outcome  of  this  research  was  the
      realisation that legal assistance with  asylum  claims  was  the  most
      serious need of refugees and, with others, she founded the Refugee Law
      Project, Makerere University's Law Faculty in Uganda to provide  legal
      aid for refugees.  She also established a refugee legal assistance NGO
      in Cairo which formed the basis for establishing refugee legal aid  in
      other refugee hosting states.

      64.   Dr Harrell-Bond has experience in interviewing and representing
      boy soldiers in their claims for resettlement through UNHCR in  Egypt.
      She has served as an expert witness for lawyers,  courts  and  refugee
      status decision-makers in the USA, Algeria, Britain and several  other
      countries.

      65.   I am concerned as to the independence and  impartiality  of  the
      evidence given by Dr Harrell-Bond.  She told me that she has lived in
      Sierra Leone with her children for several years, that she was an FGM
      expert witness, a West African researcher until  1982  and  has  many
      contacts in Sierra Leone who check the veracity of witness statements
      of people  on  whom  she  is  preparing  reports.   She  was  last  in
      Sierra Leone in 2004 and 2005.  I note that she runs  a  website  for
      refugees and lawyers which leans towards assisting refugees and  their
      representatives  rather  than  researching  and  reporting  on   their
      circumstances.   This  is  a  thread  running  through  much  of   her
      experience.  Furthermore, that  experience  is  fragmented  among  the
      countries of West Africa and beyond.  She  appears  to  have  limited
      specialism in Sierra Leone.

      66.   Dr Harrell-Bond told me  in  evidence  in  chief  that  in  the
      20 cases in which she had appeared in a forum such as the Tribunal all
      had been allowed except one which was a case in which  she  had  stood
      bail for the appellant.  I regard the giving of  expert  evidence  and
      standing as a surety for the same appellant to  display  an  error  of
      judgment which gives the appearance of  lack  of  independence  as  an
      expert.  This further undermines my confidence in the expert  evidence
      given.

      67.   As a result of my above analysis  I  find  that  I  give  little
      weight to the opinions of Dr Harrell-Bond.

      68.   She was instructed on behalf of the appellant on four issues:

            1.   the potential risk to the appellant in Sierra Leone  as  a
      former child soldier;

            2.   the potential risk to  the  appellant  as  someone  who  is
      bisexual;

            3.   what medical treatment is available  to  the  appellant  to
                 treat and manage his condition long-term me:

            4.   the accessibility of any available  treatment  for  someone
                 in the appellant's position.

      69.   These instructions are put to the expert on  the  premises  that
      the appellant has no family in Sierra Leone and that he is  bisexual.
      I have made findings above that the appellant has not established that
      he has family there and that he is bisexual.  These findings undermine
      much of the basis of Dr Harrell-Bond's report.

      70.   In her report she relied on a report from 2008  which  indicated
      that returnees from Western countries were regarded as being  wealthy,
      foolish for returning to Sierra Leone and, when they are deported, as
      criminals.  This would mean  that  they  were  'not  well  perceived'.
      Dr Harrell-Bond goes on to deduce that, 'failed  asylum  seekers  are
      handed over to the immigration and security officials on arrival, then
      detained, often sent to prison tortured, tried  for  treason  or  even
      killed'. This is sourced  from  www.refugeelegalaidinformation.org/...
      which appears to be an organisation working  for  and  sympathetic  to
      refugees.  No additional support for the opinion  is  produced  beyond
      this one reference.  Next to this reference the reader is requested to
      look at Annex VI which refers to the DRC,  which  I  find  to  be  of
      limited assistance to this Sierra Leonean case.

      71.   In her evidence in  chief  Dr Harrell-Bond  accepted  that  she
      could not say definitely what happened to returnees  in  Sierra Leone
      but what she described happened elsewhere.

      72.   Under the heading of 'Risks of his being  subjected  to  revenge
      killing' Dr Harrell-Bond states (my emphasis), 'We have no  guarantee
      that a member of his family or that of the families of others whom  he
      killed will not seek him out and exact revenge.  Moreover, the  threat
      to a known former boy soldier may not just be limited  to  actions  by
      those directly connected with the atrocities that  he  committed,  but
      could come from other members of the community who have suffered  from
      the actions of boy soldiers  generally.'   These  statements  are  not
      supported by reference to any source.  Furthermore, the first part  of
      the statement is put on the basis of 'guarantee', which is  the  wrong
      standard and the second part is speculative  ('may  not'),  giving  no
      degree of likelihood.  Neither of these opinions is helpful to me.

      73.   The  following  are  questions  put  in  cross-examination  with
      Dr Harrell-Bond's replies:

            Q.   Do you have any evidence of  child  soldiers  remaining  in
      Sierra Leone?

            A.   My son told me of a report on the radio.

            Q.   Do you know of child soldiers returning to their families?

            A.   Heard of one on the radio.  There is a  special  agency  to
                 reintegrate boy soldiers in Liberia.

             Q.    So  you  say  that  most  child  soldiers  returning   to
                 Sierra Leone would be at risk?

            A.   I don't know.

       74.    I  find  from  her  replies  in  this  cross-examination  that
      Dr Harrell-Bond does not know if child soldiers in, or returning  to,
      Sierra Leone are at risk.

      75.   With regard to the appellant having been a child soldier I  note
      that he ceased this role in 1999, some 17 years ago.  As such I  find
      the threat of revenge will  have  reduced  with  time.   I  note  that
      immediately after he ceased his role as a child soldier the  appellant
      lived near Freetown.  It was known to the populace that  the  home  in
      which he lived housed child soldiers but, nevertheless, he lived there
      without substantial harm from the population.  If he was able to do so
      then I find that he is more likely to be able to do so now.

      76.   I find on the basis of all  the  evidence  before  me  that  the
      appellant  has  failed  to  establish  that  there  is  a   reasonable
      likelihood of him suffering torture, inhuman or degrading treatment on
      return to Sierra Leone as a former child soldier suffering from PTSD.
      He would  be  able  to  reintegrate  without  fear  of  ill-treatment,
      especially with the help of his family.

      77.   Because of my finding that the  appellant  has  not  established
      that he is bisexual it is not necessary that  I  consider  the  expert
      evidence of Dr Harrell-Bond in this regard.

      78.   Furthermore, as I have found that the appellant would not be  at
      risk on return to Sierra Leone as a former  child  soldier  suffering
      from PTSD it is not necessary for me to consider whether the appellant
      needs to internally relocate."

31.   It seems to me that the question of whether or  not  Dr. Harrell-Bond
had appeared before other judges and whether or not the appellants whom  she
had  testified  for  had  been  successful  or   not   were   not   relevant
considerations.  The Judge was called upon to assess matters, including the
reliability or otherwise of the expert evidence of Dr. Harrell-Bond, on the
basis of the material presented to him.  He was not obliged  to  accept  the
accuracy of the expert evidence simply because it was presented  to  him  as
being expert evidence.  But what  he  had  to  say  about  independence  and
impartiality demonstrates that he gave careful  thought  to  those  aspects.
He was entitled to take account of the fact that, for example, she  did  run
a website  for  refugees  which,  in  his  words  "leans  towards  assisting
refugees and their representatives rather than researching and reporting  on
their circumstances".  He was entitled to take into  account,  in  terms  of
reliability of the evidence, his view that  she  "appears  to  have  limited
specialism in Sierra Leone".  He was  entitled  to  attach  weight  to  the
history of her having stood as a surety  for  a  claimant  in  circumstances
where she had also provided expert evidence for the  same  claimant  and  to
conclude that that demonstrated  "an  error  of  judgment  which  gives  the
appearance of lack of independence".  Further, I cannot see that  the Judge
was obliged to put his concerns to  the  expert  for  her  comments  at  the
hearing.  It is certainly true that he could have done  if  he  had  wished.
It was an option.  But expert evidence had been offered to him  and  it  was
his task to assess the reliability or otherwise  of  that  evidence  and  to
then explain his view about it.  That is exactly what he did.

32.   I conclude that this ground is not made out.

33.   As  to  Ground 5,  it  is  suggested  that  the  findings  concerning
bisexuality were unsafe through lack of adequate  reasoning.   As  to  that,
the Judge said this:

      "Bisexuality

      55.   I make a finding of fact that  appellant  has  not  established,
      even to the lower standard, that he is bisexual.  My reasons for  that
      finding are as follows.

      56.   The appellant has been in the  United Kingdom  and  had  claims
      before the Home Office for many years.   On  27 February, 2008  the
      appellant was issued with a one stop notice under which he was legally
      obliged to provide the Secretary of State  with  all  the  reasons  he
      wished to claim asylum at that point.  It was not until 2014  that  he
      claimed he was bisexual and that this would cause him  persecution  on
      return to Sierra Leone.  The appellant says that he failed to mention
      this  earlier  because  of  embarrassment  and  the  cultural   stigma
      attaching to homosexuality in Sierra Leone.  Mr Brown  asked  me  to
      consider the country context  and  that  homosexuality  was  taboo  in
      West Africa.  He reminded me that the  appellant  had  explained  his
      causal relationships with men and given the name of one of those  men.



      57.   I find the appellant has not  given  reasonable  and  sufficient
      reasons for the delay.   The  appellant  was  in  the  United Kingdom
      seeking international protection and his claim was fully  investigated
      in the hearing in 2010.  It must have been plain to him that that, was
      potentially, a final stage in his claim for  protection  and  he  must
      raise all possible issues.  It was plain that he must put his trust in
      the systems in place in the UK if he was  to  gain  protection.   This
      imperative was  repeated  in  his  later  claims.   I  find  that  the
      appellant's delay damages the credibility of  his  claim  that  he  is
      bisexual.

       58.    Dr Hartree  has  produced  a  very  detailed  and  in  depth
      psychiatric report dated 11 September, 2014.   It  would  have  been
      reasonable for the appellant to have discussed  his  bisexuality  with
      the doctor.  There is no mention of it whatsoever in the report and  I
      find his failure to disclose it to  Dr Hartree  further  damages  the
      appellant's claim in this regard.

      59.   The appellant  has  known  for  many  months  that  his  claimed
      bisexuality would be an issue before this Tribunal but he  has  failed
      to provide any  corroboration.   In  cross-examination  before  me  he
      stated that he had had many relationships.  There  were  many  friends
      who knew of those relationships.   The  appellant  could  have  called
      those friends or his male former sexual  partners  to  give  evidence.
      Although supporting evidence  is  not  generally  necessary  in  these
      proceedings I am able to draw adverse inferences if evidence, which is
      readily available is not produced.  This is such a case.  I find  that
      it would be relatively easy for  the  appellant  to  bring  supporting
      evidence before me.

      60.   For the above  reasons  I  make  a  finding  of  fact  that  the
      appellant is not bisexual as he claims."

34.   The specific criticisms made in the written  grounds  concerning  that
passage of the determination are that the claimant  had  provided  what  was
said to be "a plausible reason  for  his  late  disclosure  of  his  claimed
sexual orientation" which  the Judge  had  not  given  proper  reasons  for
rejecting; and that the Judge had been wrong to have expected him  to  have
disclosed his claimed bi-sexuality to Dr Hartree.  Essentially similar oral
submissions were made to me by Mr Holmes.

35.   The Judge was clearly aware of the claimant's contention that he  had
not disclosed his  bi-sexuality  earlier  because  of  embarrassment  and  a
cultural stigma.  The Judge expressly referred to that at paragraph 56  of
his determination. He then  explained  why,  in  his  view,  notwithstanding
that, if the claimant was bisexual he  would  in  fact  have  disclosed  the
matter earlier.  He made the very cogent  point  that  his  claim  had  been
fully investigated at  a  hearing  in  2010  which  might  have  potentially
(although it turned out not to be) been "a final  stage  in  his  claim  for
protection" and yet he had not disclosed it then. The Judge was entitled to
conclude that, notwithstanding any embarrassment and cultural  stigma,  such
would have been disclosed at that hearing had the  claimant  genuinely  been
bisexual.  As to the point regarding Dr. Hartree, on one view it  might  be
argued, I suppose, that since she  was  concerned  with  his  mental  health
there would have been no particular need for him to have discussed  his  bi-
sexuality with her.  But to assert that is really just  to  simply  look  at
matters in a different way.  I cannot say it was not open to  the Judge  to
conclude that a potentially very important consideration such as that  would
not have been mentioned to a person who was preparing an expert  report  for
the purposes of his appeal.  In  any  event  there  is  the  further  cogent
point, made at paragraph 59, that despite having  claimed  to  have  had  a
number of relevant relationships the claimant  had  failed  to  provide  any
corroborative evidence at all regarding his claimed bi-sexuality.

36.   I would conclude, in light of the above that, the Judge was  entitled
to attach some weight to the failure on the part of the claimant to  mention
his claimed bisexuality to Dr. Hartree.  But in  any  event  I  would  also
conclude that, even if the Judge  had  not  attached  any  weight  to  that
failure, he would inevitably have reached  the  same  conclusion  given  the
force of the points made at paragraphs 57 and 59.  I conclude,  therefore,
that this ground is not made out.

37.   In short then, I accept Mrs Pettersen's submission to the effect that
the Judge properly considered all matters, reached findings and conclusions
open to  him  and  adequately  explained  those  findings  and  conclusions.
Indeed, to my mind, the determination is a most clear and thorough  document
which demonstrates that the Judge approached his task  with  diligence  and
care.

38.    I  detect  no  error  of  law  in  the Judge's  decision  which,  in
consequence, shall stand.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
error law.  Accordingly, that decision shall stand.


Signed:                      Date: 23 October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal granted the claimant anonymity.  I continue  to  do
so  pursuant  to  rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper Tribunal)
Rules 2008.  Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise  the
claimant is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  his  family.   This
direction applies both to the appellant and respondent.  Failure  to  comply
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                      Date: 23 October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Since no fee is paid or payable there can be no fee award.


Signed:                      Date: 23 October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

