
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10606/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January and 6 July 2016                 |On 12 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                              Aram Mahmud Ahmad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Cole, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 11 November 1991 and is  a  male  citizen  of
    Iraq.  By a decision promulgated on 24 September 2015, I found that the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to  be
    set aside.  My reasons were as follows:

         1.   The appellant, Aram Mahmud Ahmad, was born on 11 November 1991
         and is a male citizen of Iraq.  The appellant had appealed  against
         the decision of the respondent dated 24 November 2014 to refuse the
         appellant leave to enter the United  Kingdom,  having  refused  him
         asylum in this country.  The First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Batiste),
         in a  decision  promulgated  on  26  January  2015,  dismissed  the
         appellant's appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to
         the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The grounds of appeal are helpfully succinct.   The  appellant
         worked as a policeman in Kirkuk and claimed to have been threatened
         by the Islamic State (ISIL).  That fact had been  accepted  by  the
         respondent and by the judge [23].   The  judge  accepted  that  the
         appellant was at real risk of  persecution  in  Kirkuk.   The  only
         issue in the appeal related to internal relocation.  The judge  had
         relied on SM and Others (Kurds protection  -  relocation)  Iraq  CG
         [2005] UKIAT 00111.  The grounds of appeal  assert  this  authority
         was not  of  relevance  as  it  had  not  only  been  overtaken  by
         subsequent events and  the  appellant  himself  had  never  resided
         within the area controlled by the Kurdish authorities (now known as
         the Kurdish Region of Iraq - KRI).  The judge had  considered  that
         he was "obliged to follow  this  authority  unless  there  was  new
         evidence to the contrary" [24].  However, the judge went on to note
         that there had been "no  evidence  which  would  suggest  that  the
         conclusions within that  case  should  be  gone  behind".   As  the
         appellant  points  out  [13]  there  had  been  subsequent  country
         guidance cases concerning Iraq including  HM  and  Others  (Article
         15(c)) Iraq CG [2012]  UKUT  00409  (IAC).   The  respondent's  own
         country information and guidance for Iraq ("The Security  Situation
         in the 'Contested' Areas of Iraq") which is dated  22  August  2014
         indicates that HM should not be followed when considering return to
         a number of Governorates including Kirkuk, Diyala, Anbar, Salah  Al
         Din and Ninewa.  The later information guidance document issued  by
         the  respondent  on  24  December  2014  it  is  noted  that,  "the
         reasonableness of internal relocation ... must refer to the  latest
         country facts and guidance".   I  find  that  the  judge  has  paid
         insufficient attention to the most recent evidence concerning  Iraq
         including  the  respondent's  country  information   and   guidance
         documents.  It was, frankly, not enough in this instance to rely on
         a country guidance case from 2005 (the relevance of which  to  this
         appellant is somewhat doubtful) and to fail to engage with  country
         material which had been  put  before  the  judge  which,  at  least
         arguably, indicated an alternative outcome to that achieved in  the
         judge's analysis.

         3.   In addition, the grounds point out that returns to Iraq at the
         present time are only provided by Erbil International  Airport  for
         those returnees of Kurdish ethnicity and who derive from one of the
         three KRI Governorates, Erbil, Dahuk and  Sulymaniyah.   All  other
         enforced returns are made by Baghdad  International  Airport.   The
         appellant is  not  from  one  of  the  three  KRI  Governorates  as
         specified and he would therefore need to return to Baghdad and from
         that city travel to Erbil.  The judge has failed  to  consider  the
         practicality and  reasonableness  of  relocation  from  Baghdad  to
         Erbil, given  this  particular  appellant's  circumstances.   I  am
         satisfied  that  the  judge's  analysis  of  the  internal   flight
         alternative (the only issue in this case)  is  inadequate  for  the
         reasons stated in the grounds of appeal.  The determination of  the
         First-tier Tribunal is set aside  and  the  Upper  Tribunal,  at  a
         resumed hearing, will  consider  again  the  question  of  internal
         relocation within Iraq.  The  parties  may  adduce  fresh  evidence
         which must be served on each other and filed at the Upper  Tribunal
         no later than ten clear days prior to  the  resumed  hearing.   The
         resumed hearing will  take  place  before  a  panel  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal to include Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  26  January
         2015 is set aside.  The Upper Tribunal  will  remake  the  decision
         following a resumed hearing.

 2. Following a hearing at  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  12  January  2016  at
    Bradford, I directed both parties to file and serve written submissions
    on the only issue remaining in this appeal,  namely  that  of  internal
    flight  within  Iraq  (including  the  Iraqi  Kurdish  Region   (IKR)).
    Unfortunately, there was a delay in the respondent filing  and  serving
    written submissions and I am particularly grateful to Mr  McVeety,  who
    appeared before me on 6 July 2016, for  preparing  written  submissions
    very promptly following that hearing.

 3. Mr McVeety's submissions are as follows:

         Following  the  appeal  hearing  in  the  Upper  Tier  Tribunal  of
         06/07/2016, the Respondent now encloses  written  submissions.  The
         Respondent apologies to the Court and to the Representatives of the
         Appellant for the delay in the productions of these submissions.

         The Respondent accepts that as the Appellant is  from  Kirkuk,  and
         that this area comprises one of the "contested areas" of Iraq,  the
         Respondent  considers  that   the   relevant   considerations   are
         restricted to the issue of internal relocation to Baghdad or to the
         Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR).

         The Respondent  respectfully  submits  that  it  would  be  clearly
         reasonable to expect the Appellant to relocate either  to  Baghdad,
         or to the Kurdish Region.

         The Respondent relies on the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  AA
         (Article 15 (c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) , paragraphs  112-
         113, and 118 -137 where the Tribunal conclude that the there is  no
         real risk of Article 15 (c) harm arising in either Baghdad  or  the
         IKR. The Respondent submits the risk to the Appellant arises solely
         in his local area from ISIL fighters who have no  presence  in  the
         areas identified above.

         In  respect  of  onward  relocation  to  the  IKR,  the  Respondent
         respectfully submits that the Appellant would be able to avoid  any
         potential dangerous journey  by  road  to  the  Kurdish  Region  by
         utilising the existing air travel routes between Baghdad and Erbil,
         and by utilising the Iraqi ID card that the Appellant  confirms  he
         has possession of (paragraph 24 of AA)

         The Respondent submits  that  the  Appellant  clearly  confirms  at
         paragraph 14 of his witness statement that he has an Iraqi ID card.
         The Respondent submits that it is unable to confirm, in absence  of
         having seen the card, that the Appellant's card is in fact a  CSID,
         however the Respondent considers that it is likely that the card is
         in fact a CSID, in the absence of any alternatives as to  what  the
         "Iraqi ID" card could be.

         If the card is indeed a CSID, the Respondent relies on the Decision
         of the Upper Tribunal in AA (Article 15 (c)) Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT
         00544 (IAC) where the Tribunal found at paragraph 11  of  the  Head
         Notes inter alia:

             "... a CSID is generally required in order  for  an  Iraqi  to
             access financial assistance from the authorities;  employment;
             education; housing and medical treatment"

         As such the Appellant would clearly be  able  to  access  financial
         assistance and employment on return  to  Iraq,  combined  with  the
         funds given to the Appellant by the Secretary of State  (head  note
         11 of AA) and the familial support available to the Appellant  from
         his family in Iraq. The  Respondent  submits  the  Appellant  would
         therefore not face destitution on return to Iraq.

         In the alternative if the  card  is  not  a  CSID,  the  Respondent
         submits that the fact the Appellant has a valid ID  card  is  clear
         evidence that he would be able to apply for an  Iraqi  passport  or
         laissez passer. The Respondent further relies on paragraph  173  of
         AA, where the Tribunal record inter alia

             "... A request for a replacement CSID must be  accompanied  by
             any form of official document in support  of  the  applicant's
             identity ..."

         As the Appellant is evidently in touch with his family in Iraq, the
         Respondent submits it would be a simple matter to  obtain  relevant
         information from his family to enable the Appellant to provide  the
         required information to enable the issue of a CSID card as outlined
         in paragraph 174 of AA.

         As such the Respondent submits that the Appellant  either  has,  or
         clearly would be able to obtain a CSID in the United  Kingdom,  and
         as such the Respondent submits it would be reasonable to expect the
         Appellant to relocate either to Baghdad or to the IKR and to obtain
         the necessary means of support whilst he re-establishes himself  in
         Iraq.

 4. I also received submissions from Mr Cole, for the appellant:

         1.   The Appellant has been accepted as credible:

             a.   For example see paragraph 18 of the Reasons  for  Refusal
             Letter

             b.   His factual claim was stated by the  First-tier  Tribunal
             Judge to not be substantially in dispute (paragraph 17 of  the
             FtTJ's Determination)

             c.    The  Appellant's  core  account  was  accepted  by   the
             Respondent (paragraph 22 of the FtTJ's Determination)

             d.   Finally, the Appellant  was  not  cross-examined  by  the
             Respondent in relation to his new  Witness  Statement  at  the
             Resumed Upper Tribunal Hearing on the 12th January 2016

         2.   Thus, the key facts in this case are the following:

             a.   The Appellant is from Kirkurk (a "contested area")

             b.   He is Kurdish

             c.   He is Sunni Muslim

             d.   His first language is Kurdish Sorani

             e.   He only speaks a few basic Arabic phrases

             f.   He has no friends/family in Baghdad

             g.   He has never been to Baghdad

             h.   He has no money in the UK or Iraq

             i.   He has no friends/family in Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR)

         Internal Relocation - General

         3.   As it is accepted that the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
         serious harm in his home  area,  the  only  issue  relates  to  the
         possibility of internal relocation to either Baghdad or to the IKR.

         4.   Internal relocation must be safe and it must be reasonable.

         5.   In SSHD v. AH (Sudan) &  Ors  [2007]  UKHL  49  Baroness  Hale
         approved the UNCHR's statement in their intervention in that case:

             "... the correct approach when considering the  reasonableness
             of IRA [internal relocation alternative] is to assess all  the
             circumstances of the individual's case holistically  and  with
             specific reference to the individual's personal  circumstances
             (including past persecution or fear thereof, psychological and
             health condition, family and social  situation,  and  survival
             capacities). This assessment is to be made in the  context  of
             the conditions in the place  of  relocation  (including  basic
             human rights, security conditions, socio-economic  conditions,
             accommodation, access to health care facilities), in order  to
             determine the impact on that individual  of  settling  in  the
             proposed place of relocation and whether the individual  could
             live a relatively normal life without undue hardship."

         6.   The test of  whether  conditions  in  the  place  of  internal
         relocation are unreasonable or unduly harsh is  a  lower  threshold
         than whether conditions are such  as  to  amount  to  a  breach  of
         Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

         7.   In this regard it should be noted  that  the  UK  Home  Office
         Country Information & Guidance on Iraq dated  the  14th  June  2016
         states at paragraph 3.1.3 (page 125 of Appellant's Resumed  Hearing
         Bundle) that :

             "3.1.3 Those who cannot return to their home areas will become
             Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) on return. IDPs without  a
             support network may face humanitarian conditions which  breach
             Article 3 of the ECHR."

         8.   Finally in way of introduction, it is submitted that it is  of
         note that the UNHCR does in principle not consider  it  appropriate
         for states to deny persons from Iraq  international  protection  on
         the basis of the applicability of an internal flight or  relocation
         alternative.

         Internal Relocation - Baghdad

         9.   It is submitted that there are number of relevant issues  that
         must be considered in relation to whether  internal  relocation  to
         Baghdad is reasonable for the Appellant.

         10.  Firstly the Appellant must travel from  Baghdad  International
         Airport (BIAP) to the City Centre. Relevant  information  from  the
         Appellant's Resumed Hearing Bundle states the following:

             a.   "Camp Liberty (Camp Hurriya), located in  close  vicinity
             of BIAP's security perimeter, has been the scene  of  repeated
             rocket attacks over the last years." (see page 82)

             b.   "As the airport sits on the western edge of  Baghdad  and
             borders Al-Anbar governorate, an area contested by  ISIS  late
             2013, fighting and hit-and-run attacks  have  repeatedly  been
             reported in close proximity to the airport." (see page 82)

             c.   "Fatal attacks on military and civilian vehicles are also
             reported to occur on the road between Baghdad and  BIAP"  (see
             page 82)

         11.  Then, assuming that the Appellant can travel  in  safety  from
         the airport to the city centre, then the next  issues  are  whether
         residing in Baghdad is safe, whether  he  can  access  housing  and
         whether he will be able to find  work  to  support  himself  (these
         issues are relevant whether  it  is  proposed  that  the  Appellant
         remain in Baghdad long-term  or  whether  it  is  only  an  interim
         solution until he is able to obtain sufficient funds to be able  to
         buy a plane ticket to fly to the IKR).

         12.  In AA (Article 15(c)) (Rev 2) [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) the  Upper
         Tribunal identified a number of factors  that  are  likely  to  the
         relevant  to  whether  internal  relocation  to  Baghdad  would  be
         reasonable. The following are relevant to this Appellant:

             a.   "A US Congressional Research Service report  of  February
             2015 referred to the population of Baghdad city as  being  80%
             Shia" (see AA (Iraq) at page 147)

             b.   "There is no identifiable Kurdish area in  Baghdad  city"
             (see AA (Iraq) pages 147)

             c.   Thus, the Appellant is from minority  community  (as  per
             15(f) of AA (Iraq) page 155)

             d.   The Appellant has no family/friends  in  Baghdad  and  no
             sponsor to access a hotel room or rent accommodation  (as  per
             15(c) & (e) of AA (Iraq) page 155)

             e.   The Appellant cannot speak Arabic and thus is less likely
             to find employment (as per 15(b) of AA (Iraq) page 155)

         13.  The safety of  Sunni  Kurds  in  Baghdad  is  clearly  a  very
         relevant  factor  on  assessing  the  reasonableness  of   internal
         relocation.  Relevant  information  from  the  Appellant's  Resumed
         Hearing Bundle states the following:

             a.   "About 60 lawmakers, mostly from the minority Kurdish and
             Sunni  parties,  flew  out  of  the  capital  for  Irbil   and
             Suleymania, in the northern autonomous Kurdish  region."  (see
             page 67)

             b.   Shia militias control Baghdad:  "In  the  wake  of  ISIS'
             advances in Iraq in 2014,  Shi'ite  militias  have  reportedly
             been  emboldened  and  gained  broad  powers  in  areas  under
             government control,  including  in  Baghdad...Reports  suggest
             that the PMU  are  militarily  stronger  than  the  ISF...  In
             Baghdad, Shi'ite militias reportedly man checkpoints alongside
             ISF, patrol streets in unmarked vehicles,  and  conduct  house
             raids...Members of Shi'ite militias reportedly use checkpoints
             to threaten and disappear Sunnis." (see pages 82/83)

             f.   "...since the end of February 2016...Baghdad is no longer
             accessible for IDPs from conflict areas,  even  if  they  have
             sponsors... IDPs are no longer granted access to Baghdad" (see
             pages 83/84)

             g.   "...as a  result  of  the  sectarian  segregation  within
             Baghdad, which followed the large-scale sectarian violence  of
             2006/07,  areas  where  one  sect  is  in  the  majority   are
             reportedly not accessible for members of the  other  sect,  or
             only at the risk of serious security incidents" (see page 84)

             h.   "...mass attacks  affect  civilians  of  all  backgrounds
             given that there is hardly any area of Baghdad  that  has  not
             evidenced this type of violence." (see page 85)

             i.   "In 2014, the UN recorded  an  average  of  7.4  security
             incidents per day in Baghdad.  This  number  increased  to  an
             average of 10.6 security incidents per day in 2015, and up  to
             an average of 11.67 incidents per day in the first quarter  of
             2016...In the first three months of 2016,  Baghdad  reportedly
             saw an average of 8.9 security incidents per day."  (see  page
             86)

             j.   "Baghdad governorate was consistently the worst  affected
             governorate in terms of casualty figures every month in  2014,
             2015 and into 2016." (see page 86)

             k.   "UNAMI recorded a total of 3,228 civilian casualties (835
             killed, 2,393 wounded) in Baghdad  in  the  first  quarter  of
             2016."�(see page 86)

             l.   "According to the casualties recorded  for  May,  Baghdad
             was  the  worst  affected  Governorate  with  1,007   civilian
             casualties (267 killed and 740 injured."(see page 113)

             m.   "The death toll in Sunday's fiery suicide bomb attack  in
             Baghdad has jumped to at least 165..." (see page 146)

         14.  Whether the Appellant will be able to access accommodation and
         whether he will be able to find employment are key  considerations.
         Relevant information from the Appellant's  Resumed  Hearing  Bundle
         states the following:

             a.   "In Baghdad, pressure on the existing housing  market  is
             particularly high,  and  rents  have  increased  in  light  of
             heightened demand, especially in  the  Karkh  district,  which
             hosts the majority of IDPs in Baghdad."(see page 87)

             b.   "Furthermore, available housing often  does  not  provide
             adequate  living  conditions,   as   many   are   unfurnished,
             dilapidated and overcrowded." (see page 87)

             c.   "As of March 2016, over 36,800 IDPs are  recorded  to  be
             living in critical shelter arrangements  in  Baghdad  such  as
             informal  settlements,  religious   buildings,   schools   and
             unfinished or abandoned buildings." (see page 87)

             d.   "In Baghdad, by November 2015, 1.5 million  persons  were
             estimated to be in need of humanitarian assistance." (see page
             87)

             e.   "Unemployment among IDPs in Baghdad  is  reportedly  high
             and the majority does not have a regular  income."  (see  page
             89)

             f.   "Returnees from abroad are not as such  entitled  to  any
             particular assistance from government bodies  or  humanitarian
             actors;"  (see page 89)

             g.   "IDPs are further made vulnerable  by  the  inability  to
             provide for themselves. Job opportunities are scarce to  begin
             with, and there is often a fear of venturing out into the more
             urban areas where work might be found" (see page 133)

             h.   "The most common type of shelter arrangement for  Baghdad
             IDPs is staying with relatives..." (see page 152)

         15.  Therefore, it is submitted that internal relocation to Baghdad
         for this Appellant would be unsafe and unreasonable.

         16.  As a Sunni Kurd he would be a minority which would  place  him
         at risk from the Shia  militias.  Also,  Baghdad  is  generally  an
         exceptionally unsafe place with constant violent attacks leading to
         mass casualties.

         17.  The Appellant, with no friends, no family, no support  network
         and very limited Arabic, would be unable to access accommodation or
         employment in Baghdad and thus internal relocation there  would  be
         unreasonable.

         Internal Relocation - Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR)

         18.  In AA (Article 15(c)) (Rev 2) [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) the  Upper
         Tribunal stated the following about internal relocation to the IKR:

             "Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be expected
             to avoid  any  potential  undue  harshness  in  that  city  by
             travelling to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and  is  likely
             to involve an assessment of (a)  the  practicality  of  travel
             from Baghdad to the IKR (such as to Irbil  by  air);  (b)  the
             likelihood of K's securing employment in the IKR; and (c)  the
             availability of assistance from  family  and  friends  in  the
             IKR." (see page 155)

         19.  Thus, it would seem logical  to  deal  with  these  issues  as
         identified by the Upper Tribunal in AA (Iraq).

         20.  Initially, therefore, there is the issue of  the  practicality
         of travel to the IKR, which will also involve issues with  entry  &
         residence. This of course must be based on the assumption that  the
         Appellant has  been  able  (whilst  living  in  Baghdad)  to  raise
         sufficient funds to  buy  a  plane  ticket.  Obviously  it  is  the
         Appellant's case that this would not be possible  for  the  reasons
         stated above (the Respondent refers to funds given to the Appellant
         by the Respondent  but  "Returnees  receive  assistance  under  the
         Voluntary  Assisted  Return  and  Reintegration   Programme"   (see
         Respondent's Oral Submissions in AA  (Iraq)  paragraph  80)  -  the
         Appellant would not be a returning voluntarily and  thus  he  would
         not be entitled to any funds  from  the  Respondent  or  any  other
         organisation).

         21.  Despite the Appellant's assertion  that  getting  to  the  IKR
         would be impossible, the Appellant submits that, even  if  it  were
         possible, then it is unreasonable to relocate to the IKR.  Relevant
         information from the Appellant's Resumed Hearing Bundle states  the
         following:

             a.   Obviously the Appellant would have  to  make  the  return
             journey to the airport with the safety concerns highlighted in
             paragraph 10 above (see page 82)

             b.    "Access  to  the  KR-I  may  be   very   difficult   for
             IDPs...Access to the KR-I does not follow a consistent pattern
             and policies and practices are subject to change."  (see  page
             6)

             c.   "Various sources, however, mentioned barriers for  access
             to KRI and the Kurdish controlled areas."(see page 23)

             d.   "UNHCR said that access to KRI may be very difficult  for
             IDPs, unless they have some form of sponsorship or  a  certain
             ethnic or religious profile and some  sort  of  connection  to
             government officials or  people  employed  with  the  security
             forces in the area." (see page 23)

             e.   "Kurds ... are generally permitted entry ... without pre-
             existing  residence  documents.  However,  during  periods  of
             heightened security, these  groups  may  also  face  increased
             security restrictions." (see page 24)

             f.   "As regards Iraqi  citizens  who  want  to  apply  for  a
             residence permit, various sources stated that  it  requires  a
             sponsorship." (see page 24)

             g.   "PAO/KHRW said that if a person  wishes  to  stay  longer
             [than two weeks] in KRI, he must have  a  sponsor,  and  after
             finding a sponsor who must be publicly employed, the IDP  must
             find a place to live and get a support letter from  the  local
             mukhtar." (see page 24)

             h.   "IOM said that if a person wants to stay in KRI for  more
             than one week, the person must register at the local mukhtar's
             office and the closest Asayish centre in  the  area  where  he
             stays within the first week of the  stay...According  to  IOM,
             here, the individual or the head of the family must present  a
             Kurdish sponsor in  person,  a  place  of  residence  in  KRI,
             registration details of the case and full name." (see page 24)

             i.   "IRC said that, for someone who  is  not  connected,  the
             registration for a residence permit in KRI can take  a  couple
             of years." (see page 24)

             j.   "According to UNHCR, short-term residential documents are
             issued at the airport to those who come by air from abroad  or
             from other places in Iraq and are extended  at  the  place  of
             residence upon issuance of security clearance by  Asayish.  In
             this respect, IDPs are able to  settle  in  KRI  temporarily."
             (see page 26)

             k.   "Some of these sources, however, said that  if  an  Iraqi
             citizen does not originate from KRI, the  person  must  travel
             onwards to the area he or she is originally from when arriving
             through an airport in KRI." (see page 26)

             l.   "Head of the General Security Directorate, Asayish, Esmat
             Argushi... Asked if Iraqi citizens from outside KRI can return
             from abroad on a voluntary basis via airports  in  KRI,  Esmat
             Argushi replied that forced return does not take place, and no
             returnees from Baghdad have  been  seen  yet.  However,  if  a
             person from Baghdad returning to Iraq  from  abroad  tried  to
             enter KRI, he would be returned  to  Baghdad  by  the  Kurdish
             authorities. The same goes for a person from Kirkuk. He  would
             be returned to Kirkuk." (see page 26)

         22.  Thus, it can be seen that entry into the IKR is not  straight-
         forward, even for a Kurd. There is even a risk  that  he  would  be
         summarily returned to Kirkuk if he arrived in the IKR. Even  if  he
         were admitted, then he  would  require  security  clearance  and  a
         sponsor in order to even be able to apply for a residence permit in
         the IKR, which can take years to be granted. The Appellant  has  no
         friends or family in the IKR.

         23.  Even if the Appellant were admitted to the  IKR,  then  it  is
         submitted that internal relocation is not reasonable because of the
         difficulties  relating  to  housing,  employment  and  the  general
         humanitarian situation. Relevant information from  the  Appellant's
         Resumed Hearing Bundle states the following:

             a.   "Pressure on the existing housing  market  is  high,  and
             rents have increased in light of heightened demand." (see page
             8)

             b.   "Furthermore, available housing often  does  not  provide
             adequate  living  conditions,   as   many   are   unfurnished,
             dilapidated and overcrowded." (see page 8)

             c.    "Both  the  KRG  and  the   international   humanitarian
             community are struggling to provide IDPs with adequate  access
             to basic services given the large number of IDPs and the  vast
             humanitarian  needs  in  the  Kurdistan   Region,   which   is
             exacerbated  by  the   limited   availability   of   financial
             resources" (see page 8)

             d.   "...a total of 1.33 million persons are estimated  to  be
             in need of humanitarian assistance." (see page 8)

             e.   "Public services, including health, water and  education,
             are reportedly overwhelmed, affecting  both  host  communities
             and IDPs."  (see page 8)

             f.   "Unemployment among  IDPs  is  reportedly  high  and  the
             majority does not have a regular income...Prospects to finding
             employment are dire for IDPs..."  (see page 8)

             g.    "A  recent  assessment  conducted  by  the  World   Food
             Programme (WFP), Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO)  and
             REACH initiative found that humanitarian situation  of  Iraqis
             displaced in the KR-I is worsening due to  limited  access  to
             jobs and economic opportunities..." (see page 9)

             h.   "More than 765,000  persons  in  KR-I  are  estimated  to
             require food  assistance;  however,  the  Public  Distribution
             System (PDS) is reportedly not fully functioning and many  IDP
             families reportedly do not have access to their  food  rations
             in the place of displacement." (see page 9)

             i.   "At societal  level,  various  sources  referred  to  the
             Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI) infrastructure as unsustainable
             compared to the number of IDPs in need  of  protection."  (see
             page 21)

             j.   "Various sources stated that it is possible to enter  KRI
             without a sponsorship, however, in order to work or to  settle
             in KRI, a sponsorship  is  required  in  practice...A  western
             diplomat stated that nobody needs sponsorship  to  enter  KRI,
             but Iraqi citizens do need a sponsorship in order to  work  in
             KRI... Two sources said that Iraqi citizens who wish  to  work
             in KRI must have a sponsorship." (see page 23)

             k.   "The Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) Minister of  the
             Interior, Karim Sinjari, stressed  that  he  does  not  see  a
             future in which the current population of IDPs  is  integrated
             in KRI." (see page 31)

             l.   "Three sources said that the number of job  opportunities
             in KRI is very limited for the host community as well  as  for
             IDPs. In this respect, ERC stated that, due to  the  financial
             crisis in KRI, even people from the host community are  losing
             their jobs." (see page 45)

             m.   "...the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) has not  paid
             salaries to government employees since June 2015."  (see  page
             45)

             n.   "The lawyer working for an international NGO said that  a
             long-term residence permit is a residence permit of  at  least
             one year, and that  for  IDPs...it  is  almost  impossible  to
             obtain." (see page 45)

             o.    "A  western  diplomat  said  that   Kurdistan   Regional
             Government (KRG)  has  resisted  treating  IDPs  as  long-term
             residents and is denying them access to the labour  market..."
             (see page 46)

             p.   "Two sources  said  that  IDPs  in  KRI  do  not  receive
             financial support from the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG)
             or the central government in Baghdad to  rent  accommodation."
             (see page 46)

             q.   "Three sources explained that more  and  more  IDPs  will
             have to move to the camps as their savings are spent and  they
             are not able to go home anytime soon." (see page 47)

             r.   "Various sources said that there are waiting lists to the
             camps." (see page 47)

             s.   "According to IOM, approximately twenty  percent  of  all
             IDPs in KRI live in IDP camps."  (see page 48)

             t.   "The international NGO, generally speaking, characterized
             the conditions in the IDP camps as poor." (see page 48)

         24.  Thus, it is submitted that, the Appellant will not practically
         be able to fly to the IKR, but even if he were, then he may not  be
         granted entry, he is exceptionally unlikely to be granted long-term
         residence or granted permission to work as he would not be able  to
         get a sponsor as he has no friends or family in the IKR,  and  even
         if were given such permission he  would  be  unable  to  find  work
         because of the prevailing economic and  humanitarian  situation  on
         the IKR.

         25.  Thus, it is clear that internal relocation to the IKR would be
         unreasonable for the Appellant.

         Conclusion

         26.  It is submitted that, when the Appellant's  case  is  assessed
         holistically, taking into account the conditions in Baghdad and the
         IKR (including basic  human  rights,  security  conditions,  socio-
         economic  conditions,  accommodation,   access   to   health   care
         facilities), it is submitted that it is clear  that  the  Appellant
         could not live a relatively normal life without undue  hardship  in
         either Baghdad or the IKR.

         27.  It is therefore submitted that the appeal should be allowed.

 5. The country guidance is provided by AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq  CG  [2015]
    UKUT 00544 (IAC).  It is accepted by both parties in this  appeal  that
    the appellant cannot return to his  home  area  (Kirkuk).   The  first,
    question, therefore, is whether  the  appellant's  return  to  Iraq  is
    feasible.  In order to return, the  appellant  will  require  either  a
    passport or laissez passer.  The headnote of AA considers the  position
    on documentation where return is feasible at [8 - 13]:

         8.   It will only be where  the  Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the
         return of P to Iraq is feasible that the issue of alleged  risk  of
         harm arising from an absence of Iraqi identification  documentation
         will require judicial determination.

         9.   Having a Civil Status Identity Document (CSID) is one  of  the
         ways in which it is possible for an Iraqi national  in  the  United
         Kingdom to obtain  a  passport  or  a  laissez  passer.  Where  the
         Secretary of State proposes to remove P by means of a  passport  or
         laissez passer, she will be expected to demonstrate to the Tribunal
         what,  if  any,  identification   documentation   led   the   Iraqi
         authorities to issue P with the passport or laissez passer  (or  to
         signal their intention to do so).

         10.  Where P is returned to Iraq on a  laissez  passer  or  expired
         passport, P will be at no risk of serious  harm  at  the  point  of
         return by reason of not having a current passport or other  current
         form of Iraqi identification document.

         11.  Where P's return to Iraq  is  found  by  the  Tribunal  to  be
         feasible, it will generally be necessary to decide whether P has  a
         CSID, or will be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after  arrival
         in Iraq. A CSID is generally required in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to
         access  financial  assistance  from  the  authorities;  employment;
         education; housing; and medical treatment. If P shows there are  no
         family or other members likely to  be  able  to  provide  means  of
         support, P is in general likely to face a real risk of destitution,
         amounting to serious harm, if, by the time any funds provided to  P
         by the Secretary of State or her agents to assist P's  return  have
         been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still  have  no
         CSID.

         12.  Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P  should
         as a general matter be able to obtain one  from  the  Civil  Status
         Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using  an  Iraqi  passport
         (whether current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such
         a passport, P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend  on  whether  P
         knows  the  page  and  volume  number  of  the  book  holding   P's
         information (and that of P's family). P's ability to  persuade  the
         officials that P is the person named on the relevant page is likely
         to depend on whether P has family members or other individuals  who
         are prepared to vouch for P.

         13.  P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered
         if P is unable to go to the Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  P's
         Governorate because it is in an area where  Article  15(c)  serious
         harm is occurring. As a result of  the  violence,  alternative  CSA
         Offices for Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in
         Baghdad and Kerbala. The evidence does  not  demonstrate  that  the
         "Central Archive", which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able  to
         provide CSIDs to those in  need  of  them.  There  is,  however,  a
         National Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for formal
         recognition of identity. The precise operation of  this  court  is,
         however, unclear.

 6. Internal relocation to Baghdad will not be unreasonable or unduly harsh
    for a person from a contested area although AA does refer to  a  number
    of relevant factors:

         15.  In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for
         P to relocate to  Baghdad,  the  following  factors  are,  however,
         likely to be relevant:

             (a)  whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain  one  (see
             Part C above);

             (b)  whether P can speak Arabic (those  who  cannot  are  less
             likely to find employment);

             (c)  whether P has family members or friends in  Baghdad  able
             to accommodate him;

             (d)   whether  P  is  a  lone  female  (women   face   greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);

             (e)  whether P can find a sponsor to access a  hotel  room  or
             rent accommodation;

             (f)  whether P is from a minority community;

             (g)  whether there is support available for P bearing in  mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs

 7. Mr McVeety's submissions  (see  above)  concentrate  to  a  significant
    extent upon the possession by the appellant of an identity card.   But,
    as Mr McVeety notes, the appellant confirmed that he had such a card at
    [14]  of  his  witness  statement.   What  is  not  clear  from  either
    submission or indeed from the evidence is  whether  this  card  is,  in
    fact, a CSID (Civil Status Identity Document).  I note that  Mr  Cole's
    submissions were filed and served subsequent to those  Mr  McVeety  and
    there was no submission from  Mr  Cole  that  the  appellant  does  not
    possess a CSID card, what Mr McVeety submitted was  likely  to  be  the
    case.  I am reminded that the burden of proof in the  appeal  rests  on
    the appellant and, given the relevance of his possession or lack  of  a
    CSID, the Tribunal would have expected the appellant to  have  produced
    evidence to show that he did not possess such a card.  I have proceeded
    in this analysis, therefore, on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  does
    possess a CSID.

 8. The possession of a CSID by the appellant is relevant both to any  time
    he may spend in Baghdad (whether in transit or permanently) and in  the
    IKR.  It was noted in AA, the appellant would be able to use a CSID  in
    order to obtain a passport or laissez passer.  Both parties accept  the
    appellant's family live in the Kirkuk region  and,  realistically,  the
    assistance which they would be able to offer to the appellant should he
    be in either Baghdad  or  the  IKR  would  be  limited.   However,  the
    appellant would not need  to  entreat  the  assistance  of  his  family
    members in order to obtain  documentation.   Applying  AA,  and  having
    regard in the first instance to the appellant relocating permanently to
    Baghdad, I am aware that he does not speak very much Arabic and that he
    does not have family or family members in Baghdad able  to  accommodate
    him.  He is, on the other hand, apparently a fit and  able  young  male
    and there seems no reason why he should not be able to obtain  work  in
    the short to medium-term.  I am aware that Mr  Cole  submits  that  the
    appellant may have  difficulty  actually  getting  to  Baghdad  or  the
    Baghdad suburbs from the  international  airport  [10].   However,  the
    difficulties which he cites in his written submissions do  not,  in  my
    opinion, represent a real risk to this particular appellant.  The risks
    referred to by Mr Cole are of a  general  nature  referring  to  rocket
    attacks, hit and run attacks and the fact that the area  was  contested
    by ISIS in 2013, some three years ago.  Likewise, the fact that in  the
    past "fatal attacks on military and civilian vehicles are also reported
    to occur on the road between Baghdad and  BIAP  [Baghdad  International
    Airport]" whilst true does not in my assessment give  rise  to  a  real
    risk to this particular appellant.  The appellant will,  therefore,  be
    able to travel safely from the airport  to  Baghdad.   In  Baghdad,  he
    would be able to use his CSID in order to access  services  although  I
    acknowledge that obtaining accommodation in  the  short-term  might  be
    problematic.  Considering the  evidence  as  a  whole,  however,  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant will be able to avoid the destitution upon
    entry to Baghdad and that, notwithstanding his  Kurdish  ethnicity  and
    Sunni religion, he is likely to obtain employment  relatively  quickly.
    In all the circumstances, I find that it would not be unduly harsh  for
    the appellant to return to Baghdad.

 9. Even if the appellant cannot return to Baghdad, I find that he would be
    able to access the IKR.  Returns of Kurdish asylum seekers to  the  IKR
    are considered in AA at [17 - 21] (headnote):

         17.  The Respondent will only return P to the IKR if  P  originates
         from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with  the  IKR
         authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P to have an
         expired or current passport, or laissez passer.

         18.  The IKR is virtually violence free. There is no Article  15(c)
         risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.

         19.  A Kurd (K) who does not originate  from  the  IKR  can  obtain
         entry for 10 days as a visitor and then renew this entry permission
         for a further 10 days. If K finds  employment,  K  can  remain  for
         longer, although K will need to register with the  authorities  and
         provide details of the employer. There is no evidence that the  IKR
         authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from the  IKR  whose  permits
         have come to an end.

         20.  Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be  expected
         to avoid any potential undue harshness in that city  by  travelling
         to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is  likely  to  involve  an
         assessment of (a)the practicality of travel from Baghdad to the IKR
         (such as to Irbil  by  air);  (b)the  likelihood  of  K's  securing
         employment in the IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance  from
         family and friends in the IKR.

         21.  As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in a  home
         area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR.

10. The appellant did not originate from the IKR so  he  will  be  able  to
    obtain access using his CSID (or the passport or laissez  passer  which
    is obtained because he has a CSID) as a visitor.   Thereafter,  I  note
    that there was no evidence that  the  IKR  authorities  would  seek  to
    remove  the  appellant,   assuming   that   he   is   not   disruptive,
    notwithstanding the expiry of his visit visa.  As regards  travel  from
    Baghdad Airport to Irbil, I note that first of all the appellant  would
    not be at risk should he have to  spend  a  brief  period  of  time  in
    Baghdad (and then make a return journey from Baghdad  to  the  airport)
    and I also cannot see that there  is  any  particular  reason  why  the
    appellant should not seek to connect on to a  flight  from  Baghdad  to
    Irbil following his arrival  in  the  international  airport  from  the
    United Kingdom.  Once in the IKR, I see no  reason  why  the  appellant
    should not be able to secure employment in the  short  to  medium-term.
    He is self-supporting and represents no threat to the people of the IKR
    or to the authorities, I see no reason why he would not be  allowed  to
    remain.

11. Mr Cole's submissions make much  of  the  appellant's  lack  of  funds.
    However, very little,  if  any,  evidence  has  been  received  by  the
    Tribunal as to the appellant's financial situation and, should he  have
    wished to argue that he would be unable  to  fund  travel  to  Iraq  or
    within the country, then the burden was on him to produce the necessary
    evidence to prove that as a fact.  It is not enough  for  the  Tribunal
    simply to assume that, because he has been an asylum seeker  living  in
    the United Kingdom, he has  no  access  to  funds.   Further,  Mr  Cole
    submits [24] that  "the  appellant  is  exceptionally  unlikely  to  be
    granted long-term residence or granted permission to work  ...  in  the
    IKR".  I return again to the headnote of AA at [19]  and  observe  that
    there was no evidence (despite Mr Cole's submissions to  the  contrary)
    that, once having entered the IKR, the  authorities  there  would  pro-
    actively seek to remove the appellant either to Kirkuk or elsewhere.

12. I find, therefore, that the appellant can exercise internal  flight  to
    Baghdad and the IKR and that it would not be unduly harsh to expect him
    to do so.   In consequence, his appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

13. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent dated  24
    November 2014 is dismissed.

14. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 5 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 5 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
