
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10551/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22 July 2016                           |On 11 October 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                             MISS LIVERT ZHUWAO
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr W M Bhebhe, Walters Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal brought by the  Appellant  against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Hawden-Beal  dated  27  April  2016,
    dismissing the Appellant's asylum appeal.  The Appellant is a  national
    of Zimbabwe and entered the United Kingdom in August 2013 as a visitor.
     In June 2014 she claimed asylum on the basis that in August  2013  her
    father had called from Zimbabwe telling her to delay her return because
    the family was in danger from ZANU PF; the family had  left  the  house
    and the following day it had been gutted by  fire.  Further,  in  March
    2014 he had called her again and told her not to return because he  and
    the Appellant's brothers had been involved in a blog or  Facebook  page
    named 'Baba Jukwa'.  Country information establishes that  there  is  a
    Facebook page of that name in Zimbabwe which is critical of the  Mugabe
    regime and that arrests of a number of persons who were perceived to be
    associated with it have taken place.   The  Respondent  considered  the
    Appellant's application for asylum and refused it in a  decision  dated
    13 July 2015, finding the Appellant's account not credible.

2.   The Appellant pursued  an  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    matter came before the judge on 18 April 2016. The judge heard evidence
    from the Appellant but from no other member of the Appellant's  family,
    notwithstanding that the Appellant has a sister and two brothers in the
    United Kingdom. The  judge  disbelieved  the  Appellant's  account  for
    reasons which included the fact that there was  no  evidence  that  the
    Baba Jukwa blog/Facebook page existed prior to  2013,  whereas  it  had
    been part of the Appellant's case that her father had been involved  in
    that blog since 2008.  Further, whereas the Appellant had asserted that
    Baba Jukwa also operated on Twitter, there was no  evidence  supporting
    this.  The judge held that no satisfactory reason had been given by the
    Appellant as to why the father had delayed informing  her  until  March
    2014 of the reason behind the raid on the family home.  There was  also
    a query as to why, if  the  Appellant's  father  merely  worked  for  a
    beverages company, he was in the position of  having  any  relevant  or
    sensitive information to set out in the blog/Facebook  page  about  the
    ZANU-PF authorities in any event.  Other factors were also set  out  in
    the judge's decision, resulting in her conclusion that the  Appellant's
    family had not been involved in posting any material on the Baba  Jukwa
    blog/Facebook page and the Appellant's account was not credible.

3.   At paragraph 9 of the judge's decision, she referred to  evidence  that
    the Appellant had, after the refusal  of  her  asylum  claim,  attended
    vigils outside the Zimbabwean Embassy in London.  The judge  considered
    that evidence at paragraph 31 of her decision, as follows:

         "31. I note that since her asylum claim was refused  the  Appellant
             has started to attend the vigil outside the Zimbabwean Embassy
             because she claims she was interested in  human  rights.   She
             has revealed that she did not know anything  about  the  vigil
             outside the embassy until her representative told her.   I  am
             satisfied that her attendance at these vigils is an attempt to
             bolster her claim.  If she was  really  interested  she  would
             have been able to  find  out  online  about  supporting  human
             rights in Zimbabwe before her claim was refused and would  not
             have had to be given the information by her representative.


         32.  For all of the reasons above I am not satisfied that  she  has
             therefore discharged the burden of proof  of  having  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution for any Convention reason".


    The judge dismissed the appeal.


4.   The Appellant relied on grounds of appeal dated 26 April  2016  setting
    out Grounds 1(a) and (b), 2(a) and (b), and 3(a), although it seems  to
    us that the same ground is raised at 1(a), 1(b) and 2(b);  that  whilst
    the judge was aware of the evidence of the Appellant's participation in
    sur place activities outside  the  Zimbabwean  Embassy  in  London,  no
    proper assessment was made as to whether such activities gave rise to a
    real risk of serious  harm  in  Zimbabwe.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    specifically granted on that point by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Brunnen on 23 May 2016.   There  were  two  other  points  raised  only
    obliquely in the grounds of appeal; one is an allegation that the judge
    proceeded unfairly by raising certain issues in the decision which were
    not put to the Appellant at the hearing (ground  2(a)  and  3(a)),  and
    another that the judge failed to take into account that  the  Appellant
    was a minor child at certain points of the relevant account, she  being
    16 at the time that she received the telephone calls  from  her  father
    (ground 3(a)).  Those separate grounds were described by Judge  Brunnen
    as having no arguable merit but it is to be noted that  permission  was
    not specifically refused on those separate grounds.

5.   Before us Mr Bhebhe acting for the  Appellant  has  not  pursued  those
    second and third grounds in his oral submissions.  We find that it  was
    appropriate for him not  to  do  so.  Very  briefly  on  the  point  of
    procedural fairness, we find that  there  is  nothing  in  the  judge's
    decision which raised a  novel  point  in  relation  to  the  perceived
    plausibility of the Appellant's account which was not already  properly
    raised in the refusal letter.  The Appellant would not have been  taken
    by surprise by any issue relied  on  by  the  judge  in  her  decision.
    Secondly, although the Appellant was 16 at the time that  she  received
    the phone calls from her father, we find that she is an educated  young
    woman, the events were shortly prior to her claim for  asylum,  and  we
    find that there is no merit  in  any  argument  that  the  judge  dealt
    inappropriately with the Appellant,  who  gave  evidence  as  an  adult
    before her, simply because she had been a minor at  a  prior  point  in
    time during her claim.

6.   We deal with the principal point  advanced  by  the  Appellant  in  the
    following way.  Even if it would have been preferable for the judge  to
    have proceeded, having noted the Appellant had been involved in  vigils
    outside the Zimbabwean Embassy in London, to have specifically  made  a
    finding as to whether that activity would have resulted in  a  risk  of
    serious harm to the Appellant, we find  that  the  Appellant  has  been
    unable to produce to us evidence supporting  the  contention  that  any
    such risk would have arisen  as  a  result.   The  bundle  of  evidence
    supplied to the First-tier Tribunal, which has not been added to before
    us, did not contain any country information.  We  asked  Mr  Bhebhe  if
    there was anything within the relevant country guidance in relation  to
    Zimbabwe  (CM  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT  59  (IAC)),  discussing  the
    potential for a risk of  harm  to  arise  as  a  result  of  sur  place
    activities in the United Kingdom.  He did not draw our attention to any
    particular passage in CM.  Nor  does  he  produce  to  us  any  country
    information at all which supports the  proposition  that  opportunistic
    activity outside the Zimbabwean Embassy in London, which was  what  the
    judge found that the Appellant had been engaged in, would give rise  to
    any real risk of harm.  We therefore find that whilst it may have  been
    preferable for the judge to have included in her  decision  a  specific
    finding as to whether any risk would have arisen, there  is  simply  no
    evidence placed before us which could have supported  that  claim.   We
    find that any error on the part of the judge was therefore immaterial.

     Decision

7.   There is no material error of law in the judge's decision.   We  uphold
    it.  We dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


     No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                     Date 20 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan




We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                     Date 20 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


