
         [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10873/2014
                                                               AA/10874/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                  |Promulgated                           |
|On: 10 August 2015                |                   On: 14 August 2015 |
|                                  |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    EAAG
                                    MJAA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation

For the Appellant:      Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr S Chelvan, Counsel instructed by South West Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Britton in which he allowed the appeals of
    EAAG and MJAA, citizens of Yemen,  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse asylum. I shall  refer  to  EAAG  and  MJAA  as  the
    Applicants, although they were the Appellants in the proceedings below.


 2. The application under appeal was made  on  27  February  2014  and  was
    refused by reference to paragraph 336 of the Immigration Rules  (HC395)
    on 21 November 2014.  The Applicants exercised their right of appeal to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  This is the appeal which  came  before  Judge
    Britton on 11 March 2015  and  was  dismissed  on  asylum  grounds  but
    allowed on  humanitarian  protection  (Article  15(c)  of  the  Refugee
    Qualification Directive) and human  rights  (Articles  3  and  8  ECHR)
    grounds. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal.  The application was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cheales on 15 April 2015 in the following terms

       In her grounds for onward appeal, the respondent  asserts  that  the
       judge has not given adequate reasons for allowing the  appeal  under
       article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive and  Article  3.  Also,
       when he allowed the appeal under Article 8  did  not  refer  to  the
       immigration rules or the public interest.


       It is arguable that the judge has not  given  adequate  reasons  for
       allowing the appeal under article 15(c), Article 3 and  should  have
       considered the public interest in his reasoning on Article 8.




 3. At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Richards  appeared  to  represent  the
    Secretary of State  and  Mr  Chelvan  represented  the  Applicants.  Mr
    Chelvan submitted a copy of the rule 24 response that had been filed on
    12 May 2015 and a copy of the Court of Appeal decision in QD  (Iraq)  v
    SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 620.


Background

 4.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that  the  Applicants  are  mother  and  daughter  born
    respectively on 3 February 1985 and 23 March 2012. They  are  the  wife
    and child of JAMA who is a British citizen.  The Applicants left  Yemen
    with JAMA on 28 October 2013 arriving in the United Kingdom on the same
    day. They held valid visitor's visas. They applied  for  asylum  on  27
    February 2014 claiming fear of persecution in Yemen. Their  application
    was refused and in dismissing their appeals on asylum grounds the Judge
    found that the core of the First  Applicant's  account  of  persecution
    lacked credibility and was a fabrication designed to gain access to the
    United Kingdom. The  Judge  went  on  to  find  nevertheless  that  the
    Applicants would be at  risk  if  returned  to  Yemen  because  of  the
    political situation and that the Yemeni  government  was  not  able  to
    protect them from real risk of suffering serious harm  on  return.  The
    Judge found further that if the Applicants were returned to Yemen there
    is a real risk  that  they  would  suffer  a  breach  of  their  rights
    protected by Articles 3 and 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.


Submissions

 5. On behalf of the Secretary of  State  Mr  Richards  said  that  it  was
    conceded that there were exceptional circumstances and that  there  was
    no need to look at the Immigration Rules when considering Article 8, it
    was a matter of  accepting  proportionality.  The  Secretary  of  State
    concedes that there was no error of law in this respect. The Judge took
    into account the public interest; he properly took account  of  section
    55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and came  to  a
    proper conclusion on proportionality. Although the Respondent  concedes
    that the Judge did not err in law in allowing the appeal under  Article
    8 it was not conceded that the Judge was correct allow  the  appeal  by
    virtue of Article 3 or by  virtue  of  Article  15(c)  of  the  Refugee
    Qualification Directive.


 6. For the Applicants Mr Chelvan said that detailed evidence was  provided
    by the Applicants on the day of the hearing pertaining to the situation
    in Yemen. It was this evidence that resulted in the concession made  by
    the Presenting Officer at the hearing that the Secretary of State would
    not seek to return the Applicants to Yemen. There is some dispute as to
    the terms of that concession but it is  of  note  that  the  Presenting
    Officer at that hearing has not filed a statement of evidence.  In  any
    event following the grant of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    the Applicants submitted a detailed rule 24 response that was served on
    the Secretary of State and the Tribunal. This response included details
    of the humanitarian situation in Yemen. The Secretary of State has  had
    ample time to file evidence in reply but has not done so.  When  making
    his concession  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Presenting  Officer
    referred to family life saying that the Secretary of  State  would  not
    expect the Applicants to return to Yemen. In fact  there  was  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal that the Foreign and Commonwealth Office
    (FCO) had advised against all travel to Yemen. The Secretary  of  State
    provided no evidence to the First-tier Tribunal and accepted  that  the
    situation in Yemen continued to deteriorate. So far as Article 15(c) is
    concerned the Secretary of State accepts that the situation in Yemen is
    so dangerous that there is a travel advisory. Referring to the Elgafagi
    [2009] 1 WLR 2100 sliding scale there is increased individual  risk  to
    the Applicants as a woman and  an  infant  child.  I  was  referred  to
    paragraphs 35 and 36  of  Elgafagi  as  quoted  in  QD  (Iraq)  and  to
    paragraphs 35 and 36 of QD (Iraq). The reliance placed by the Secretary
    of State on paragraph 26 of the recital to the Qualification  Directive
    is wrong in law.


 7. Mr Richards limited his response to relying on the grounds of appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.


Error of law

 8. In my judgement the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not
    disclose a material error of law. The appeal was  allowed  under  three
    headings, Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR and Article 15(c) of the Refugee
    Qualification Directive. The Respondent concedes  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not err in allowing the appeal  by  virtue  of  Article  8
    which leaves only the two headings to consider. Nevertheless it  is  in
    my judgement firstly appropriate to consider why the appeal was allowed
    under Article 8 because there  is  no  doubt  that  this  informed  the
    Judge's decision in respect of the other two headings.


 9. The facts of this appeal are unusual and individual. The Applicants are
    the wife and child of a naturalised British citizen and the family  was
    living together as a family unit in Syria.  The  Second  Applicant  was
    born on 23 March 2012 and her father was not naturalised until November
    2012 so she is not a British national by birth. The family  left  Yemen
    together at a time when there can be little doubt  that  the  political
    stability and  humanitarian  situation  in  that  country  was  rapidly
    deteriorating. Having entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  visitors  they
    delayed making a claim for asylum and the claim  that  they  eventually
    made was refused and their appeal against that refusal dismissed  as  a
    fabrication. At their appeal they raised the issues of humanitarian and
    human rights protection and submitted an appeal bundle  which  included
    relatively limited information  concerning  the  current  situation  in
    Yemen. This limited information did however  include  the  Foreign  and
    Commonwealth Office travel advice updated on 6 March 2015 the first two
    sentences of which read as follows

        "The Foreign and Commonwealth Office advise against all  travel  to
        Yemen. This includes the mainland and all islands. You are strongly
        urged to leave immediately".


10. The report is succinct but very clear indeed as to why the  advice  has
    been given

        "There is  a  high  threat  from  terrorism  throughout  Yemen  and
        specific  methods  of  attack  are  evolving  and   increasing   in
        sophistication. Terrorists continue to threaten further attacks ...
        there is a very high threat of kidnap from armed tribes,  criminals
        and terrorists ..."


11. It is perhaps not surprising given  this  advice  that  the  Presenting
    Officer, Mr Hibbs, agreed that there  were  exceptional  circumstances.
    Whether he said that he would not seek the return of the Applicants  to
    Yemen (as recorded at paragraph 38 of  the  decision)  or  simply  that
    there were exceptional  circumstances  justifying  consideration  under
    Article 8 beyond the provisions of the  Immigration  Rules  is,  in  my
    judgement, immaterial because the Secretary of State now  accepts  that
    she will not seek the return of the Applicants to Yemen. She  will  not
    do  so  because  she  accepts  that  it  would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference in the family  life  that  the  Applicants  share  with  a
    British citizen who under British government advice should  not  travel
    to Yemen to require them to go there without him.


12. But the implications of the Secretary of State's concession go  further
    than that. It is clear from the FCO advice that the reason why  British
    nationals are "strongly urged" to  leave  Yemen  is  because  there  is
    considered to be a "high threat from terrorism" and a "very high threat
    of kidnap". The advice was issued because, if it is not followed, there
    is a real danger  of  serious  harm  befalling  those  individuals  who
    remain. The Refugee Qualification Directive provides

        Article 2(f)
        "Person eligible for subsidiary protection means"  a  third-country
        national or a stateless person who does not qualify  as  a  refugee
        but in respect of whom substantial  grounds  have  been  shown  for
        believing that the person concerned, if  returned  to  his  or  her
        country of origin, or in the case of a stateless person, to his  or
        her country of former habitual residence, would face a real risk of
        suffering serious harm as  defined  in  Article  15,  and  to  whom
        Article 17(1) and (2) does not apply, and is unable, or,  owing  to
        such risk, unwilling to avail himself or herself of the  protection
        of that country.

        Article 15
        Serious harm consists of: (a) the death penalty  or  execution;  or
        (b) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment  of  an
        applicant in the country of origin; or (c) serious  and  individual
        threat to a civilian's life or person by reason  of  indiscriminate
        violence in situations of international or internal armed conflict.




13. Article 15(b) mirrors Article 3 ECHR. Violence  through  terrorism  and
    kidnap easily fall  within  the  definition  of  inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment. The fact that there is internal armed conflict in  Yemen  is
    beyond peradventure. The seriousness of the threat  is  highlighted  by
    the FCO advice. The individual nature of that  threat,  to  the  extent
    given the Elgafagi sliding scale that such individual threat  needs  to
    be shown is clear from the fact the Applicants are a woman  and  infant
    child and the wife and daughter of a naturalised  British  citizen  and
    would be returning without him.  In  this  respect  Elgafagi  holds  as
    follows

        35. In that context, the word 'individual' must  be  understood  as
        covering harm to civilians irrespective of  their  identity,  where
        the degree of  indiscriminate  violence  characterising  the  armed
        conflict  taking  place  assessed   by   the   competent   national
        authorities before which an application for  subsidiary  protection
        is made, or by the courts of a Member State  to  which  a  decision
        refusing such an application is referred reaches such a high  level
        that substantial grounds are shown for believing that  a  civilian,
        returned to the relevant country or, as the case  may  be,  to  the
        relevant region, would, solely on account of his  presence  on  the
        territory of that country or region, face  a  real  risk  of  being
        subject to the serious threat referred  in  Article  15(c)  of  the
        Directive.


        36. That interpretation, which is likely  to  ensure  that  Article
        15(c) of the Directive has its own field  of  application,  is  not
        invalidated by the wording of recital 26 in  the  preamble  to  the
        Directive, according to which '[r]isks to which a population  of  a
        country or a section of the  population  is  generally  exposed  do
        normally not create in themselves an individual threat which  would
        qualify as serious harm'.


        37. While that recital implies that the objective finding alone  of
        a risk linked to the general situation in a country is  not,  as  a
        rule, sufficient to  establish  that  the  conditions  set  out  in
        Article 15(c) of the Directive  have  been  met  in  respect  of  a
        specific person, its wording nevertheless allows by the use of  the
        word 'normally' for the possibility  of  an  exceptional  situation
        which would be characterised by such a high  degree  of  risk  that
        substantial grounds would be shown for believing that  that  person
        would be subject individually to the risk in question.


        38. The exceptional nature of that situation is also  confirmed  by
        the fact that the relevant protection is  subsidiary,  and  by  the
        broad logic of Article 15 of the Directive, as the harm defined  in
        paragraphs (a) and (b) of that article requires a clear  degree  of
        individualisation. While it  is  admittedly  true  that  collective
        factors play a significant role in the application of Article 15(c)
        of the Directive, in that the person concerned belongs, like  other
        people, to a circle of potential victims of indiscriminate violence
        in situations of international or internal armed  conflict,  it  is
        nevertheless the case that that provision  must  be  subject  to  a
        coherent interpretation in relation to  the  other  two  situations
        referred to in Article 15 of the Directive and must, therefore,  be
        interpreted by close reference to that individualisation.


        39. In that regard, the more the applicant is able to show that  he
        is specifically affected by reason of  factors  particular  to  his
        personal circumstances,  the  lower  the  level  of  indiscriminate
        violence required for him to be eligible for subsidiary protection.


14. So far as the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  concerned  there
    can in my judgement be no material error of law, given  the  above,  in
    the decision made. Whereas the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    falls far short of a detailed analysis that could set any precedent for
    other cases involving Yemen there was, in short, a concession that  the
    Applicant's circumstances were exceptional.  Further  there  was  clear
    advice from the Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  not  only  advising
    against travel to Yemen but strongly urging British nationals to leave.
    The reason for  that  advice  was  the  threat  of  both  targeted  and
    indiscriminate violence.  There was no challenge at the hearing to  the
    evidence put forward on behalf of the Applicants  as  to  the  security
    situation in Yemen and there has been no answer filed to  the  rule  24
    response in this respect.


15. My conclusion from all of the above is that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contains no error of law  material  to  the  decision  to
    allow the appeal by reference to Articles 3  and  8  ECHR  and  Article
    15(c) of  the  Refugee  Qualification  Directive.  The  appeal  of  the
    Secretary of State is therefore dismissed.


  Summary

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law. I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.




Signed:                                                  Date:





J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


