
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA109092015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 April 2016                               |On 25 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     M M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson, Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born on [ ] 1980.  He  is  said  to
    have arrived in the UK on 15 January 2015. He made an asylum and  human
    rights claim in the same month.  The precise date of his  asylum  claim
    is not relevant for present purposes.

 2. On 28 July 2015 a decision was made to  reject  his  asylum  and  human
    rights claim.  His appeal against that decision came before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Malins ("the FtJ") on 23 November 2015, following  which
    the appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. The appellant's claim, in very brief summary, is that he has  converted
    from Islam to Christianity.  His mother and two sisters left  Iran  and
    came to the UK, where they claimed asylum in  2002,  they  also  having
    converted to Christianity.  It appears that the appellant's mother  and
    sisters have all been granted asylum in the UK.  I put  the  matter  in
    that way because I was not specifically  referred  to  the  documentary
    evidence confirming that fact.

 4. After the appellant's mother and sisters left Iran the authorities came
    to the house looking for them, according to his witness  statement,  on
    three occasions.  On the first occasion the appellant was not there and
    the appellant's brother was taken away for questioning and detained for
    two or three nights.  On the other  two  occasions  the  appellant  was
    there, was questioned, but was not detained.

 5. Through a Christian woman that the appellant met, he started  attending
    meetings of a Christian house church.  In December 2014 the meeting was
    held for the first time at the appellant's house,  but  the  house  was
    raided by Iranian security forces.  The appellant  managed  to  escape,
    and ultimately left the country for the UK.

 6. Since leaving Iran he has been  told  by  his  brother,  who  lives  in
    Tehran, that the authorities have come to the  house  looking  for  the
    appellant and questioning his  brother  as  to  his  whereabouts.   His
    brother was detained in January 2015 and held overnight.

 7. Since being in the UK the appellant has continued  his  involvement  in
    the Christian Church and has been baptised.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The FtJ rejected the credibility of the appellant's claim  in  all  its
    material respects.  She gave  a  number  of  reasons  for  her  adverse
    credibility findings.  She expressed doubts about the practise  of  the
    Christian faith of the appellant's mother and sisters  in  the  UK,  or
    indeed in Iran.  She did not accept  the  appellant's  account  of  the
    problems he experienced with the authorities in Iran, or those that had
    been experienced by his brother.

 9. It is worth quoting certain paragraphs of the FtJ's decision.  At  para
    11(a)(ii) she said as follows:

         "I  reject  the  veracity  of  the  appellant's  account   of   the
         authorities' coming to the house in Iran looking for his mother and
         sisters on three occasions post their  leaving  in  2002  (see  the
         quote above).  Why would the authorities 'take away my brother  for
         questioning - he was detained for two or three  nights'  (paragraph
         12) and indeed, detain his brother 'around  6th  January  2015  and
         held him overnight' for questioning thirteen years later (paragraph
         28)?

         Yet, when finding himself, the appellant, at home on two  occasions
         during  the  same  series  of  events,  the  authorities  contended
         themselves with asking 'if I knew about the conversion of my mother
         and my sisters, whether they had been at any church meetings and if
         so, whom they met.  I just told them I did not know anything  as  I
         was not there at the time'.  (Paragraph 12)?  This is not credible.
          The only explanation must be  that  the  account  given  in  these
         paragraphs of the witness statement,  is  untrue  -  the  brother's
         detentions being included to boost the asylum claim and no claim of
         detention being made for himself, for fear of  questions  revealing
         that this did not happen."

10. At para 11(e) the following is stated:

         "I reject the implausible account (see above)  of  the  appellant's
         extraordinary escape when 'security forces' (in the plural)  raided
         his home during the claimed holding  of  a  Christian  house  group
         (paragraph 22 of the witness statement).  Basic procedure  dictates
         that multiple personnel engaged in  such  operations,  fan  out  to
         cover all the premises and  possible  exits.   Furthermore  -  this
         matter was not referred to in response to any of the 207  questions
         at the appellant's interview.   Nor  were  the  subsequent  claimed
         visits of the authorities to his  old  home,  referred  to  at  the
         interview.  I reject the appellant's explanation at the  hearing  -
         'I didn't think it important'."

    The grounds of appeal and submissions before the Upper Tribunal

11. The grounds raise a number of issues in relation to the decision of the
    FtJ.  I need only refer to two matters in particular as set out in  the
    grounds.  It is asserted that the FtJ had been wrong at para  11(a)(ii)
    to have linked the detention and questioning of the appellant's brother
    in January 2015 with the appellant's mother  and  sisters  having  left
    Iran thirteen years earlier.  The arrest of the appellant's brother, it
    is asserted in the grounds, was solely due to the raid by  the  Iranian
    authorities that had taken place in December 2014 and  from  which  the
    appellant  escaped  before  coming  to  the  UK.   The  arrest  of  the
    appellant's brother in January 2015 had nothing to do with  the  events
    in 2002 when the appellant's mother and sisters left Iran.

12. Furthermore, the FtJ was also wrong at para 11(e) to reject  the  claim
    of the raid  on  the  appellant's  home  by  security  forces  and  the
    appellant's escape on the basis that the appellant  did  not  refer  to
    those matters at any point in the asylum interview.

13. Similarly, it is argued that the FtJ had erred in fact in stating  that
    the subsequent "claimed visits" by the authorities to  the  appellant's
    former home were not referred to in his interview.

14. In submissions Mr Hodson relied in general terms  on  the  grounds  but
    focused in particular on the two issues to which I have referred.   The
    other asserted errors, as set out in the grounds, were highlighted.

15. On behalf of the respondent Mr Staunton said that although he could not
    concede anything on behalf of the respondent, he did accept that it may
    be the case that the FtJ's conclusions at para 11(e) may have  infected
    the other adverse credibility findings.





    My conclusions

16. I do not consider it necessary to deal with  each  of  the  appellant's
    grounds because I am satisfied that with reference to  two  matters  in
    particular the FtJ erred in fact, amounting to an error of law.

17. I consider that there is merit in the complaint that the FtJ was  wrong
    to find that it was adverse to the  appellant's  credibility  that  the
    authorities questioned his  brother  13  years  after  the  appellant's
    mother and sisters left Iran.  As  the  grounds  explain,  it  was  the
    appellant's case that since leaving Iran the authorities  had  come  to
    the house looking for the appellant and questioning his brother  as  to
    his whereabouts, as explained at para 28  of  the  appellant's  witness
    statement.   At  para  11(a)(ii)  the  FtJ  linked  the  detention  and
    questioning of the appellant's brother referred to at para  12  of  the
    appellant's witness statement with an interval of 13  years  since  the
    appellant's mother and sisters  left  Iran.   When  one  considers  the
    appellant's witness statement as a whole, in particular at paras 12 and
    28, that detention and questioning in January 2015 was in  relation  to
    the appellant's whereabouts, not in relation to the appellant's  mother
    and sisters.

18. I am satisfied that the FtJ misunderstood this part of the  appellant's
    case.  I do observe however, that it is perhaps understandable that the
    FtJ made that error because the appellant's case in that regard, as set
    out in his witness statement and asylum interview, is  not  on  initial
    consideration entirely clear.

19. In addition, and perhaps more fundamentally, I am  satisfied  that  the
    FtJ erred in fact, such as to amount to an error of law, where at  para
    11(e) she said that the appellant had  not  referred  anywhere  in  his
    interview to the raid on his home when the appellant was amongst others
    holding a Christian  house  group  meeting,  and  following  which  the
    appellant escaped in December 2014.  He gives a full  account  of  this
    incident at questions 175 - 184 of the asylum  interview.   The  asylum
    interview is  not  copied  sequentially  in  relation  to  all  of  the
    appellant's answers on this issue, but his account in this  respect  is
    clearly set out.  I did at one stage consider whether what the FtJ  was
    saying at para 11(e), in terms of the matter not being referred  to  in
    the appellant's asylum interview, related only to his escape from  that
    raid.  However, his account includes the fact that he escaped from  the
    back of the house.

20. In addition, there is a further error of fact in the FtJ's  conclusions
    at para 11(e) where she stated that the appellant had not  referred  to
    subsequent claimed visits by  the  authorities  to  his  home,  in  the
    interview.  At questions 203 - 205, in answer to  the  question  as  to
    whether his brother had had any problems since the  appellant  came  to
    the UK, he said that "One night they took him after that incident"  and
    that he was asked to report (to the authorities) whenever they saw him,
    and that the appellant's brother had to provide contact numbers for the
    appellant's friends.  Although those answers  do  not  expressly  state
    that the authorities came to the appellant's brother's  home,  such  is
    readily implicit and certainly not  amenable  to  the  conclusion  that
    subsequent claimed visits by the authorities were not  referred  to  in
    the interview.

21. It does appear from para 11(e) of the FtJ's decision that the appellant
    was asked about this because the FtJ stated in  the  last  sentence  of
    that paragraph that she rejected the  appellant's  explanation  of  any
    lack of reference to those later visits, namely that he did  not  think
    that it was important.  However, the appellant's oral evidence  is  not
    summarised in the FtJ's decision and so it is  impossible  to  see  the
    context in which the appellant gave that  answer,  or  whether  he  was
    referred to what he said in interview.

22. As I have already indicated, the FtJ gave various reasons for rejecting
    the credibility of the appellant's account of the interest in  him  (or
    his family) by the  authorities,  and  of  his  claimed  conversion  to
    Christianity.  However, the issues I  have  identified  in  respect  of
    which the FtJ made mistakes of fact are fundamental to his case.   They
    are evidence, if believed, of direct interest in the appellant and  his
    family by the authorities on  account  of  their  and  the  appellant's
    religion.  Crucially, they are  evidence  of  recent  interest  by  the
    authorities.  It cannot be ruled out  that  other  adverse  credibility
    findings were infected by those errors.

23. In these circumstances, I consider that the decision of the FtJ must be
    set aside.  I canvassed with the parties their views as to whether,  if
    I found that the FtJ had erred in law such as to require  the  decision
    to be set aside, it was appropriate for the matter to be re-made in the
    Upper Tribunal or remitted to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").  Both Mr
    Hodson  and  Mr  Staunton  agreed  that  in  those  circumstances   the
    appropriate course would be for the matter to be remitted for  a  fresh
    hearing before the FtT.  I  also  take  that  view,  having  regard  to
    paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement.

24. Accordingly, the appeal is remitted to the FtT for a  hearing  de  novo
    before a  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Malins.   No
    findings of fact are to be preserved.

    Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision on all grounds is set  aside  and  the
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  hearing  de  novo
    before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Malins.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            25/05/16
