
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10684/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 June 2015                               |On 25 June 2015               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                     R M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer (Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in the determination before the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Bartlett) ("the FtT"),  promulgated  on  18  March
    2015 in which the appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse asylum was dismissed.

2.   The appellant, whose date of birth is 4 November 1977, is a citizen  of
    Sri Lanka.  She claimed that she was arrested on two occasions, in 2002
    and 2008 because of her and her cousin's involvement with the LTTE.  In
    December 2007 her cousin S M (a candidate for the United  Nation  Party
    and LTTE supporter) was killed.  He had been living with the  appellant
    prior to his death and this led to suspicion towards the  appellant  in
    2008. She came to the UK on 13 September 2008  as  a  student  and  had
    leave until 2013. In May 2013 she made an  application  under  the  EEA
    Regulations which was dismissed on appeal. She  claimed  asylum  on  12
    June 2014 following her cousin M G's arrest in May 2014 on suspicion of
    being an LTTE member.  Further the appellant claimed  that  she  was  a
    member of the British Tamil Forum (BTF) in the UK.

3.   In a Reasons for Refusal Letter,  the  respondent  concluded  that  the
    appellant failed to provide an internally  consistent  account  of  her
    claim and that  it  was  externally  inconsistent  with  the  objective
    material regarding the current situation in  Sri  Lanka.   It  was  not
    accepted that the appellant was a member of the  BTF.   The  respondent
    considered the appellant's fears in line with GJ and others (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

4.   The FtT concluded that the appellant's evidence was not  credible.   At
    [15] the FtT placed weight on the fact that the appellant's application
    for a visa to the UK was made on 6 September 2007, before  any  of  the
    alleged difficulties had  taken  place  and  further,  that  an  appeal
    against the refusal of the visa was received on 21 January 2008,  prior
    to the date that the appellant's claimed to have been detained  by  the
    Sri  Lankan  authorities.   The  FtT  was  unable  to   reconcile   the
    immigration history with the appellant's evidence  that  her  visa  was
    arranged by an agent that her mother had paid  to  secure  her  release
    from the Sri Lankan authorities and for her to leave the  country.   In
    addition the FtT found no  medical  evidence  to  support  the  claimed
    injuries [16].  Credibility issues were also considered  having  regard
    to the delay of six years before claiming asylum and the timing of  the
    claim following the rejection of an application under  EEA  Regulations
    [17].

5.   At [18] the FtT  considered  the  appellant's  evidence  that  she  had
    become involved in the BTF.

6.   At [19] the FtT acknowledged that  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  had
    arisen following the arrest of her cousin  in  2014.   The  FtT  placed
    little weight on the evidence from an  attorney-at-law  in  Jaffna  and
    statements from the appellant's family.

7.   Grounds of application:

    (1)  The FtT failed to take into account significant material evidence.


    (2)  The FtT made three adverse findings with regard to the appellant's
         immigration history, the lack of  medical  evidence  and  her  late
         involvement with the BTF.


    (3)  The FtT made no clear  findings  on  the  appellant's  arrest  and
         detention in 2008 and did not evaluate  the  evidence  put  forward
         regarding the circumstances of that arrest.  The appellant produced
         documented  evidence  of  the  murder  of  a  Tamil   parliamentary
         candidate to whom she claimed to be related and for whom she worked
         during the elections.


    (4)  The FtT failed to take into account and/or did not  given  reasons
         for rejecting the appellant's  husband's  evidence  concerning  the
         appellant's arrest in 2008.


    (5)  The arrest in 2008 was material to the appellant's  claim  because
         if found credible she would face a risk of persecution because  she
         would be in breach of her reporting conditions, which in turn would
         lead to the issue of an arrest warrant and this would place her  on
         a stop list and accordingly she would come within the  guidance  of
         those at risk in GJ.


    (6)  The FtT further failed to make findings on her evidence about  her
         relative, M G, who she  claimed  was  arrested,  detained  and  was
         evidence of continuing interest in her by the authorities.


    (7)  Whilst considering the evidence as to whether or not the appellant
         was a member of the British Tamil Forum the FtT failed to  evaluate
         the impact of that evidence as a "sur place" claim.

Permission to Appeal

8.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew granted permission  to  appeal  on  29
    April 2015.  He stated:

         "Whilst I accept that it is  not  necessary  to  make  findings  in
         relation to each and every part of the appellant's claim,  in  this
         case, the judge has made no findings  as  to  whether  or  not  the
         appellant was,  in  fact,  arrested  and  detained  in  June  2008.
         Further, no reasons have been given by the  judge  for  either  the
         acceptance or rejection of the appellant's husband's account of the
         arrest of the appellant in 2008 or of  her  forced  reporting.   In
         addition no findings have  been  made  as  to  the  risk  from  the
         appellant being a member of the British Tamil Forum in  the  UK  if
         she is returned to Sri Lanka."


Rule 24 Response

9.   In a response dated 18 May 2015 the respondent opposed the appeal.   It
    was acknowledged that the FtT  made  no  finding  in  relation  to  the
    alleged arrest and detention in 2008 but this  was not material to  the
    outcome of the appeal given the FtT found the appellant's claim  to  be
    lacking in credibility and adequate reasons were given at [16] to  [18]
    and [20] to [22] for rejecting the asylum claim.

Error of Law Hearing

10.   At  the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Palmer  relied  on  the  grounds  of
    application.  Mr Bramble indicated that he disagreed with the  position
    taken in the Rule 24 response.  His view was  that  the  FtT  erred  in
    failing to engage with the arrest and/or  circumstances  in  2008.   He
    acknowledged  that  there  was  some  evidence  of  the  death  of  the
    appellant's cousin's death in 2007.   Furthermore,  the  FtT  erred  in
    failing to make findings on how the appellant's membership of  the  BTF
    (a proscribed organisation in Sri Lanka) impacted on her risk on return
    and which was covered in background material.


Discussion

11.  I find that the decision and reasons was flawed by  material  error  of
    law and should be set aside. The FtT failed to engage with any  of  the
    detailed evidence about the arrest in 2008 which was at the core of the
    appellant's  claim  to  be  at  risk  of  persecution.   The  FtT  made
    sustainable findings  on  credibility  matters  having  regard  to  the
    appellant's immigration history, the lack of medical evidence  and  the
    delay in making an asylum claim.  However, the arrest  in  2008  was  a
    significant issue and there was independent evidence in relation  to  S
    M.  Furthermore, I find that the FtT made no findings  on  evidence  in
    relation to the appellant's cousin M G, who she claimed was arrested in
    2014 and which prompted the appellant's claim for asylum in June  2014.
    Clearly this was relevant to  the  timing  of  her  claim  for  asylum.
    Finally whilst the decision considered the evidence of the  appellant's
    membership of the British Tamil Forum, the FtT  did  not  consider  the
    impact of membership of this proscribed organisation on return  to  Sri
    Lanka.

12.  For all of the above reasons there is a material error  of  law  and  I
    have decided to set aside the determination.

13.  In considering what to do next I follow the  Presidential  guidance  as
    regards remitting cases to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.  I am
    satisfied that the nature of the errors are such that the determination
    as a whole cannot stand and none of  the  findings  can  be  preserved.
    Accordingly I remit the matter to the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Hatton
    Cross (excluding Judge Bartlett) with a time  estimate  of  two  hours,
    Tamil interpreter, two witnesses to be called.


Notice of Decision

There is a material error of law in the decision which shall be set aside.
The appeal is to be remitted for rehearing to Hatton Cross (excluding  Judge
Bartlett) on 21st November 2015





An anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 25.6.2015

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.
Signed                                  Date 25.6.2015
GA Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

