
                        [pic]
Upper Tribunal                                Appeal Number: AA/10669/2015
   (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House             |Decision Promulgated          |
|On 19 December 2016              | On 22 December 2016          |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                 A V
                              (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:  Ms Benfield, instructed by Kanaga Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  J.
      J. Maxwell promulgated on the 13 September 2016  in  which  the  Judge
      dismissed the appellants appeal against the refusal of his application
      for a grant of international protection and/or leave to remain on  the
      basis of his human rights.
   2. Permission to appeal was refused by another judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal but granted on a renewed application by Upper Tribunal  Judge
      Perkins who found it to be "reasonably arguable that First-tier  Judge
      has not given lawful reasons for attaching "no weight  whatsoever"  to
      the supporting letter from a Tamil politician".


Background

   3. The Judge sets out a summary of the appellants case at [15-21].  It is
      noted that the alleged risk falls into two areas, that of risk arising
      from the appellants ties with the LTTE whilst he was in Sri Lanka and,
      secondly, risk arising from his sur place  activities  in  the  United
      Kingdom. The Judge sets out his  findings  at  [28-69]  which  can  be
      summarised as follows:


           1. Section 8 Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc)
              Act 2004 is engaged [30].
           2. A number of concerns arise with the report of Dr  Dhumad  [31
              (i)-(iv) and 32].
           3. In light of the criticisms very little weight is given to the
              psychiatric reports [33].
           4.  The  appellants  presentation  at  the  hearing  was  highly
              implausible and appeared  to  be  a  deliberate  exaggeration
              [34].
           5. Had the appellant entered the UK as claimed this  would  have
              been recorded. The fact no record of entry exists casts doubt
              upon not only the manner but also the timing  of  the  entry.
              The account of the claimed entry was found  to  significantly
              undermine the appellants credibility and his account [35].
           6. The photograph of the MV Princess Christina provided  is  not
              the ship the appellant claimed to have served in and does not
              appear to have any evidential  bearing  in  relation  to  the
              appellants case [36]. The photographs  of  the  appellant  on
              board a vessel only demonstrate he was a seafarer. There  was
              nothing in the photographs to show the name of the vessel  he
              was on board, its location, cargo, or ownership [37].
           7. The appellant has been inconsistent in his  account  for  the
              reasons stated. These are matters that were not found  to  be
              lapses  in  memory  or  understandable  errors   but   rather
              inexplicable differences, or at least  differences  which  no
              one had attempted to explain [38].
           8. The letters submitted by the appellants wife  and  mother  in
              Sri Lanka carry little evidential value. It is appropriate to
              look for potential evidence to support the claims made in the
              letters [43].
           9. If, as alleged , the appellants wife  was  having  to  report
              weekly to the police station as a result  of  the  appellants
              escape  from  custody  there  would  have  been   documentary
              evidence of the fact but none has been provided and there  is
              no evidence of any attempt being made  to  acquire  the  same
              [44].
          10. The appellant has failed to prove he was  arrested,  detained
              and  tortured  as  claimed  in  his  asylum  interview.   The
              appellant has failed to prove he was even in Sri Lanka at the
              time these events are claimed to have occurred [47].
          11. The appellant has failed to prove  that  his  claimed  mental
              state is other than malingering or otherwise  exaggerated  in
              an attempt to bolster his claim for asylum in the UK [48].
          12. The letter written by Mr Yogalingam is couched in the vaguest
              terms [49]. No weight is given to the letter [50].
          13. The appellant will not be at risk whether travelling in  Sri
              Lanka or during  initial  questioning  that  might  occur  on
              arrival. The appellant has failed to prove  he  falls  within
              any of the risk categories identified in GJ which might place
              him at  risk  if  returned   to   Sri   Lanka   now   [51].




   4. As the Judge found the appellant had not made out his claim the asylum
      appeal  was  dismissed  [53],  as  was  the  appeal  on   humanitarian
      protection [54], Article 3 (including medical issues), and Article 8
      grounds [55-69].
   5. The grounds of appeal only challenge  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the
      evidence of Mr Yogalingam and the  weight  the  Judge  gave  to  this
      evidence.
   6. The full text of the relevant parts of the decision under challenge
      are as follows:


         49. The appellant seeks to rely on claimed sur place activities  in
         the United Kingdom. Support of this aspect of  his  claim,  he  has
         produced a letter from Mr  Sockalingham  Yogalingam  (a  TGTE  MP),
         dated 29 January 2016.   Mr  Yogalingam  did  not  attend  to  give
         evidence and there was no evidence before me to suggest he had been
         asked to do so.  Bearing in mind there was no intention of  calling
         the appellant himself to give evidence, the absence of some form of
         corroborating  evidence  in  relation  to  the  claimed  sur  place
         activities is significant.  The letter is couched  in  the  vaguest
         possible terms and states as follows:


             "Mr Arulnesan Velichor, is also one of such victims  who  work
             with us. He joined us as a volunteer and volunteer  in  public
             events in the UK in support of creating a free Tamil Eelam  in
             Sri Lanka.  Despite  his  own  traumatising  history,  he  has
             attended meetings, events and public demonstrations.
             He contributes to the  best  of  his  ability  to  campaigning
             against the  ongoing  Genocide  in  Sri  Lanka  and  requiring
             independent investigation against war crimes committed by  the
             former Sri Lankan President Mahinda  Rajapaksha  and  the  Sri
             Lankan Government.
             He is an ardent supporter of our mission and  he  desires  the
             independence of the Tamils in  Sri  Lanka.   He  continues  to
             express his political aspirations publicly."


         50. Thus it  may  be  seen  not  a  single  example  of  sur  place
         activities has been identified by Mr Yogalingam who does  not  even
         go so far as to suggest he  has  even  met  the  appellant.   I  am
         satisfied is that the letter carries no evidential weight  whatever
         and I find the appellant has failed to prove  even  to  the  lower
         standard that he has engaged in  any  sur  place  activities,  that
         alone any that might have come to the attention of the  Sri  Lankan
         authorities.
   7. The appellant asserts that, contrary to the findings made, the  letter
      clearly states that he has been involved in multiple events and is  a
      supporter and person known to the TGTE, making the  finding  that  the
      letter added nothing to the evidence not a finding open the Judge.
   8. It is also argued that the TGTE is a proscribed organisation  in  Sri
      Lanka and in light of the content it cannot be  said  that  no  weight
      could be attached to the same.


Discussion


   9. The grounds have been argued, in the main, as a weight challenge.  In
      Green (Artcile 8-New Rules) [2013] UKUT 254 Blake J, at  paragargh  38
      state:


         38. However  we  are  satisfied  that  this  panel  understood  the
         evidence and its implications and  the  issues,  properly  directed
         themselves and reached a conclusion it was entitled to reach.  This
         was a young offender in need of discipline who  was  vulnerable  to
         the inducements of gang life but who had  now  received  his  first
         substantial  term  of  detention  and  was  well   aware   of   the
         consequences if he reverted to his former way of life. There was no
         error of law on this aspect of the decision entitling us to re-make
         it. Giving weight to a factor one way or another is  for  the  fact
         finding Tribunal and the assignment of weight will rarely give rise
         to an error of law.


  10. This view reflects the position of the Court of Appeal in SS (Sri
      Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ
      155, at paragragh 21, where it is stated:


         "Generally speaking, the weight, if any, to be given to expert  (or
         indeed any) evidence is a matter for the trial judge  (here  Senior
         Immigration Judge Spencer). A judge's decision not to accept expert
         evidence does not involve an error of law on his part, provided  he
         approaches that evidence  with  appropriate  care  and  gives  good
         reasons for his decision. Ultimately, therefore, there are only two
         issues as to  the  Senior  Immigration  Judge's  treatment  of  the
         medical evidence: did he address  that  evidence  with  appropriate
         care and did he give good reasons for  his  conclusion?  Those  two
         questions are interrelated. It is difficult to conceive of  a  case
         in which a judge gives adequate  reasons  for  his  conclusions  on
         expert evidence yet he is held to have exercised insufficient care.
         His reasons demonstrate his care."


  11. Ms Benfield was asked during the hearing whether the appeal would have
      been brought if the Judge had stated in the decision that he attached
      'little', as opposed to 'no', weight  to  the  evidence.  Ms  Benfield
      submitted that the appeal would still have been brought as the  Judge
      had failed to consider the evidence properly.
  12. The fact the TGTE is a procribed organisation and that  it  was  found
      arguable by a judge of the Court of Appeal in UB (Sri Lanka) v  SSHD
      (C5/2016/0753) on 29 July 2015, at the  permission  to appeal  stage,
      that membership of this group could place an individual  at  risk,  is
      only relevent if such membership or association is made out.
  13. The Judge clearly  considered  the  content  of  the  letter  from  Mr
      Yogalingam  and there  is   no   critisism   of   the   summary   of
      the factual content provided. There is no criticism of the finding by
      the Judge that the  witness  did  not attend.  Although  Ms  Benfield
      submitted that the weight given should not be reduced as  the  author
      was a professional person with  other  responsibilities  that  as  a
      general statement does not assist the appellant. The  use  of  written
      evidence is the norm in the Tribunal and whether a person is called is
      a matter for the party seeking to rely upon such evidence.     If they
      are not called and issues arise the witness is unable to assist beyond
      their written word.
  14. In  this  case,  the  Judge  has  for  a  number  of  sustainable  and
      unchallenged reasons found the appellant not to be a witness of truth
      and to lack  credibility  in  relation  to  the core  of  his  claim,
      including his alleged membership of the LTTE. The Judge noted at [21]
      that the appellant claimed to be a volenteer with the TGTE and to have
      attended public events, meetings, events and public demonstrations  in
      support of creating a separate Tamil state.
  15. The appellant did not give oral evidence to assist the Judge either.
  16. If a  person  has  been  shown  to  have  lied  and/or  to  have  been
      contradictory or unreliable in relation to a substantial part of  the
      case relied upon, it  is not unreasonable for a Judge to be  cautious
      when considering the evidence in relation  to  other aspects  of  the
      case. Although the Judge used the phrase that the  letter  carried  no
      evidential weight, it is clear the  content  of  the  letter  and  the
      evidence generally was considered with the required degree of anxious
      scrutiny by the Judge,  both  in  isolation  and in  the  context  of
      the other available evidence. I find  that  rather  than  reject  the
      evidence without proper consideration or reasoning, the Judge did both
      consider the evidence with the required degree of anxious scrutiny and
      has given adequate reasons for the findings made.  It  is  clear  that
      what the Judge is finding is that  the  letter  does  not assist  the
      appellant to prove his claim to have carried out sur place activities
      in the UK, in light of the generalised nature of the text and failure
      to identify or provide a single example of  such  alleged  activities.
      Whilst the use of  the  wording  'no  evidential  weight'  may  admit
      arguable legal error  if  it  can  be  shown  the  evidence  has  been
      effectively ignored, I find this has not been made out in  this  case.


  17. In SS (Sri Lanka) at paragragh 31 the Court found:


         "Lastly, we would caution against  appellants  seeking  to  present
         arguments as to the weight given  to  particular  evidence  by  the
         Tribunal as raising issues of law. This appeal was about the weight
         given by the  Senior  Immigration  Judge  to  the  evidence  of  Dr
         Kanagaratnam. It is because the weight to be given to that evidence
         was a matter for the Judge that on  analysis  this  was  a  reasons
         challenge; and, as  I  have  said,  the  reasons  given  by  Senior
         Immigration Judge Spencer were manifestly adequate."


  18. This is a similar situation to that in this case. The Judge has  given
      adequate reasons for why he chose to place the weight he did upon  the
      evidence, namely that it did not assist in proving the appellants case
      on this issue for want of detail. As such I find the challenge to  the
      reasons element not to be made out.
  19. This Tribunal finds that no arguable legal error material the decision
      to dismiss the appeal is made out. It has not been shown the  decision
      to  dismiss  the  appeal  is   outside   the   range   of   reasonable
      findings available to the Judge when considering the  evidence  as  a
      whole.


Decision

  20. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
      decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


  21. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
      Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
         I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 20 December 2016
