
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10878/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 August 2016                     |On 28th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                  A--- B---
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant did not appear and was not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       appellant. Breach of this order can be punished  as  a  contempt  of
       court. I make this order because the Appellant is the victim of  sex
       trafficking organised by his father. The public have  no  legitimate
       interest in his identity and he is entitled to privacy.

    2. This is an appeal by a young person who is a citizen of Albania.  He
       is 18 years old. He will  soon  be  19  years  old.   He  appeals  a
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  his  appeal  against
       the decision of the Secretary of State that  he  was  a  refugee  or
       otherwise entitled to international protection.

    3. The case was called on  at  approximately  noon  but  there  was  no
       answer. My clerk tried to telephone  the  solicitors  identified  as
       representing the appellant but could not make contact.  This is  the
       second time this appellant's representatives have failed to  appear.
       On an earlier occasion they made a mistake about the date.   As  far
       as I am aware this is  not  a  case  where  there  is  any  skeleton
       argument or bundle served for the Upper Tribunal.

    4. Mr Norton has information suggesting that the appellant is not  able
       to come because he is in custody.  Mr Norton passed that on in  good
       faith to offer an explanation for the appellant's absence.  He  made
       it plain that he did not know it to be right and  I  make  it  plain
       that I have not assumed that that is right or assumed that, if it is
       right, it is for any reason that is to the appellant's detriment.  I
       simply regard it as a further indication that he was  not  expecting
       to attend  the  hearing  and  had  offered  no  explanation  to  the
       Tribunal.

    5. In the circumstances I decided to go ahead in his absence and decide
       the appeal.

    6. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Holmes. He was particularly concerned that it was not apparent  from
       the Decision and Reasons why the appeal had been dismissed.  I  read
       out the last part of his grant in paragraph 3:

  "The judge ought arguably to have then analysed the account in the  light
  of the country guidance on Albania to ascertain from whom  the  appellant
  faced a risk of harm, and whether this was an issue  local  to  his  home
  area or one that could be avoided by  internal  relocation,  and  whether
  this  was  a  risk  of  harm  against  which  there  was  adequate  state
  protection.  It is arguable that the decision fails to do  so,  and  that
  the approach to whether the appellant could be a member of  a  particular
  social group was itself flawed."

    7. I make it plain that I am not persuaded that the First-tier Tribunal
       Judge is right in his analysis of whether the appellant is a  member
       of a particular social group. That is only important if he is  wrong
       to find that the person does not need international  protection.   A
       member of a particular social group is not a refugee unless he risks
       persecution as a consequence.

    8. This is a case where much  of  the  appellant's  evidence  has  been
       believed. Certainly it  is  accepted,  although  it  is  a  shocking
       finding to have to make, that the  appellant  is  a  victim  of  sex
       trafficking and the trafficker was his own father,  although  as  Mr
       Norton has pointed out, the appellant as not  been  trafficked  into
       the United Kingdom but  trafficked  from  Albania  to  Kosovo.   The
       United Kingdom's  obligations  towards  him  as  a  victim  are  not
       necessarily the same in each case.

    9. There are certain findings that are very significant. One of them is
       that the appellant's father has been prosecuted and sent  to  prison
       for an offence of violence.  The First-tier Tribunal took the  point
       that this  suggested  that  the  appellant's  father  did  not  have
       influence with the local police but  was  subject  to  the  ordinary
       criminal law and there is no reason to think that that has changed.

   10. That is a very pertinent finding when deciding whether the person is
       at risk now.  It seems clear that the First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
       there would potentially be a degree of risk if he  came  across  his
       father but also clear from the First-tier Tribunal's analysis of the
       case that the appellant could look to the authorities in Albania for
       effective protection.

   11. I am not sure that the reputation of the authorities in  Albania  is
       such that everybody who might be at risk  in  that  country  can  be
       confident of effective protection.   I  am  certainly  open  to  the
       argument that there may be some source  of  corruption  which  would
       mean that effective protection would not be available.   However,  I
       see no basis for concluding that this is such  a  case  when  it  is
       plain that the person who is the source of risk has  been  convicted
       and sent to prison for criminal behaviour in the past.

   12. I see no basis for undermining the judge's conclusion that there  is
       effective protection available in Albania on the facts of this  case
       for this particular appellant and once that is established there  is
       no basis for deciding he needs international protection.  I  see  no
       material error in the decision complained of.  It follows  therefore
       I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

   13. This appeal is dismissed.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 26 September 2016              |







