
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10625/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 July 2016                               |On 9 August 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     RJA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, of Counsel instructed by Solomon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia who was born on [  ]  1998.   He
    claimed asylum in January 2015.  His application  was  refused  and  he
    appealed.  His appeal was heard by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Thomas on 28 April 2016 and dismissed.  The appellant now appeals  with
    permission to the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The basis of the appellant's claim was that he was of Oromo  ethnicity.
     His family were farmers and he had left home at the age of 10 to  work
    on the family farm.  In 2013 the Tigrayan People's Liberation Front had
    confiscated his father's land.  His father who had been  involved  with
    the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) protested and was  beaten.   When  the
    appellant went to his aid he too was arrested and detained but  he  had
    been released after two weeks.  The appellant claimed that he had  then
    travelled to Addis Ababa and thence to Sudan where he  had  lived  with
    his mother, who had travelled with him,  for  four  months  before  she
    disappeared.  He had then travelled on to Britain.  Once  here  he  had
    taken part in demonstrations  in  London  as  a  member  of  the  Oromo
    community in Britain demonstrating against the forced eviction  of  the
    Oromo people in Ethiopia.   In  particular  he  had  taken  part  in  a
    demonstration in London on 10  December  2015  protesting  against  the
    government's "master plan" to expand the borders of  Addis  Ababa  into
    the regional state of Oromia which would lead to the eviction of  Oromo
    people from their farmlands.  He produced pictures showing him carrying
    a placard in protest which stated "no to Addis Ababa master plan".   He
    stated that he had attended other activities in London such  as  Oromia
    media network events and that he  had  also  spoken  at  meetings.   He
    asserted that, because  of  his  diaspora  activities,  he  would  face
    persecution on return to Ethiopia.

3.   The judge did not find that the appellant's claim of what had  happened
    in Ethiopia  to  be  credible.   She  then  went  on  to  consider  the
    appellant's diaspora activities.  She accepted that there were pictures
    of the appellant at meetings including a media network event but stated
    there was no independent evidence from the Oromo community  to  support
    the appellant's involvement.  She stated that:-

         "Taking this evidence at its highest I find the appellant is not  a
         member of a political  group  and  did  not  organise  any  of  the
         gatherings he attended.  I do  note  however,  that  he  carried  a
         placard at one rally and spoke at another.  Even allowing  for  the
         appellant's involvement being genuine,  there  is  no  evidence  to
         demonstrate the authorities in Ethiopia have the means or  interest
         in monitoring such activities in the United Kingdom  or  that  they
         would be able to identify this  appellant  from  photos.   This  is
         particularly so given that I have found that  neither  he  nor  his
         father were arrested or detained as claimed.  The authorities  have
         no record of him or adverse interest in him as they clearly have no
         interest in his father who continues to live in the  same  home  in
         Ethiopia."

4.   Although she stated that she had considered the country  guidance  case
    of MB (OLF and MTA - risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKIAT she considered that
    whilst the appellant was of Oromo ethnicity he was not a member of  the
    OLF and would not be perceived to be a member  or  sympathiser  of  the
    OLF.  He had  not  been  arrested  or  detained  on  suspicion  of  OLF
    involvement in the past and had no political profile  in  Ethiopia  and
    therefore was not entitled to either  refugee  status  or  humanitarian
    protection.

5.   The appellant was given permission to appeal the determination  of  the
    First-tier Judge by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds on 17 June 2016.  It was
    Judge Reed's view that it was arguable that the judge had not  factored
    in the appellant's sur place activities when considering his  political
    profile and that it was arguable that the reasons given for  dismissing
    the asylum claim had not fully engaged with relevant case law.

6.   At the hearing before me Ms Jegarajah argued that the judge  had  erred
    when considering the appellant's sur place activities -  in  particular
    she had not applied the structured approach which is  set  out  in  the
    determination BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on  return)  Iran  CG
    [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) which, in paragraph 64, set out the various issues
    that should be considered in detail when considering whether or not sur
    place activities might lead to persecution  on  return.   Moreover  she
    referred to the decision in YB (Eritrea)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  360  where
    Sedley LJ had stated, at paragraph 18, that:-

         "Where, as here, the Tribunal has objective evidence which  'paints
         a bleak picture of the suppression of  political  opponents'  by  a
         named government, it requires little or no evidence or  speculation
         to arrive at a strong possibility - and perhaps  more  -  that  its
         foreign legations not only film or photograph their  nationals  who
         demonstrate in public against the regime but have  informers  among
         expatriate oppositionist organisations who can name the people  who
         are  filmed  or  photographed.   Similarly  it  does  not   require
         affirmative  evidence  to  establish   a   probability   that   the
         intelligence services of  such  states  monitor  the  internet  for
         information about opposition groups.  The  real  question  in  most
         cases will be what follows for the individual  claimant.   If,  for
         example, any information reaching the embassy is likely to be  that
         the claimant identified in a photograph is a hanger-on with no real
         commitment to the opposition cause, that will go  directly  to  the
         issue flagged up by Article 4(3)(d) of the Directive."

7.   Ms Jegarajah took  me  to  background  documentation  relating  to  the
    treatment of opposition groups within Ethiopia as well as the  evidence
    that had been set out in the country guidance case of MB (OLF and MTA -
    risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKIAT 00030.  She  argued  that  in  fact  the
    judge had not properly engaged with the  background  documentation  and
    the evidence of the appellant regarding his diaspora activities and the
    likelihood of persecution on return which would result.

8.   I consider that Ms Jegarajah's point is well made.   The  determination
    is brief and in particular the judge, although  she  accepts  that  the
    appellant has taken part in diaspora activities here,  does  not  fully
    engage with that evidence.  It was an error  of  law  for  her  not  to
    engage in more detail with the evidence and indeed apply  the  relevant
    structured approach as set out in the determination  in  BA.   Moreover
    she clearly did not have in mind the guidance given by Sedley LJ in his
    judgment in YB (Eritrea).  I consider that it was an error of  law  for
    the judge not to have considered  in  greater  detail  the  appellant's
    activities and considered those within the context of the nature of the
    background evidence of the Ethiopian regime's  treatment of  opposition
    groups or supporters.

9.   I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Judge and,  having
    borne in mind the directions  of  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals
    regarding the remittal of appeals, remit this appeal to the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard afresh.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted  to  the  First-tier
for a hearing afresh.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
