
                                    [pic]

ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10213/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 November 2016                   |On 14 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hoshi, counsel
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant or his wife.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to
contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The respondent claims to be a Syrian citizen. He appealed  against  the
    decision of the appellant on 10 July 2015 to refuse his asylum claim on
    the grounds that linguistic evidence had shown that  he  was  Egyptian.
    His appeal was decided by First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn ("the  FTTJ")
    who allowed his appeal in a decision promulgated on 14 April 2016.

 2. For ease of reference, I refer  henceforth  to  the  appellant  as  the
    Secretary of State and the respondent as the claimant.

 3. I maintain the anonymity direction made in the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer  on  3
    October 2016 as follows:

         "1.      It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal has  erred  in
            law in placing the burden of proof that the  appellant  is  not
            Syrian upon the SSHD (para 49).


         2. The grounds set out a number of paragraphs from MA (Ethiopia)  v
            SSHD (2009) EWCA 289. It is difficult to see the  relevance  of
            those paragraphs to the instant case. Both  parties  should  be
            prepared to address the burden and standard of proof in a  case
            of disputed nationality by reference to the authorities."


    Thus the appeal came before me.

 5. Mr Norton, for the Secretary of State, relied on the application to the
    FTT for permission to  appeal  and  which  was  renewed  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal. He submitted that the FTTJ was bound by paragraph  67  of  MA
    with regard to the burden of proving risk on return. He submitted  that
    paragraph 42 of the decision contained a clear error which infected the
    findings.  Further, in paragraph 49 the burden had  been  reversed.  He
    submitted the IDI to which the appellant had referred was  "historical"
    but, even if it remained current, the FTTJ had been  bound  by  MA.  He
    further submitted that the decision  lacked  findings  as  to  why  two
    native speakers of Damascene and Cairene Arabic  were  disregarded  and
    the expert evidence of the appellant accepted. The appellant's expert's
    report did not indicate any expertise in  language  variations  between
    the two areas. In any event, the expert  stated  it  was  possible  the
    appellant was from Egypt.

 6. Mr Hoshi, for the appellant, relied on his Rule 24 reply and  submitted
    that the grant related only  to  the  issue  of  nationality,  not  the
    reasons challenge arising from the findings on the expert evidence.  In
    any event, the Secretary of State's challenge to the  findings  on  the
    expert evidence was  merely  a  disagreement  with  the  outcome.   The
    principal issue was the burden and standard of  proof  applied  by  the
    FTTJ with regard to the disputed nationality.  The basic principle  was
    that it was for the appellant to demonstrate  his  nationality  to  the
    lower standard (OI (late reliance on  fresh  evidence)  Somalia  [2004]
    UKIAT 000196). The Secretary of State's own guidance  (published  after
    MA) was that, in the case of disputed  nationality,  the  Secretary  of
    State bore the burden of proof and the  standard  was  the  balance  of
    probabilities. This guidance followed OI. He referred to  Hamza  [2002]
    UKIAT 05185, a starred judgment in which Collins J  said  that,  if  an
    Adjudicator is going to make a positive finding on nationality  against
    an Appellant (as opposed to simply declining to accept the  Appellant's
    claim to the lower standard that he is a particular nationality),  then
    the burden/standard on the SSHD is  a  balance  of  probabilities.   He
    submitted that MA  was  not  relevant  here  (albeit  counsel  for  the
    appellant at the FTT  hearing  had  referred  to  it  in  her  skeleton
    argument).  He accepted the FTTJ had  erred  in  referring  to  MA  but
    submitted this was not a material error. In MA, the appellant had  been
    entitled to Ethiopian nationality but would be refouled to Eritrea;  in
    that case the Court of Appeal had found it was for  the  individual  to
    demonstrate by  making  reasonable  efforts  that  they  would  not  be
    recognized as a national of the country in question.  That was not  the
    situation for this appellant, he submitted.

 7. Mr Norton submitted in reply that because the challenge to the findings
    on the expert evidence had not been  precluded  in  the  grant  by  UTJ
    Plimmer, it was at issue before me.

Findings

 8. The appellant's counsel at the First-tier hearing  specifically  cited,
    in her skeleton argument, the Secretary of  State's  IDI  "Nationality:
    Doubted, Disputed and Other Cases".  That document was last updated  in
    2013 and I do  not  agree  with  Mr  Norton's  suggestion  that  it  is
    historical. It is a statement of the Secretary of  State's  policy  for
    dealing with claims  where  there  are  concerns  over  the  claimant's
    nationality, as is the case here.  The reasons for refusal letter makes
    it clear that the Secretary of State "strongly disputed" (paragraph 45)
    the  appellant's  nationality.  She  made  a  positive  assertion   the
    appellant was from Egypt and removal directions accordingly.  I  am  in
    no doubt therefore that the IDI is of relevance here. Furthermore,  the
    IDI reflects the current authorities on the issue.

 9. I agree with Mr Hoshi  that  MA  is  of  no  relevance  in  this  case.
    Paragraph 34 of RM (Sierra Leone) [2015] EWCA Civ  541  summarises  the
    position:

          "What emerges from those cases - and  would  in  truth  be  clear
          enough even in the absence of authority - is that  what  standard
          of proof applies to the question of  an  applicant's  nationality
          depends on the legal issue to which it  is  relevant.  If  it  is
          relevant to  whether  he  will  suffer  persecution  (whether  by
          reference to the Refugee Convention or  article  3),  the  lesser
          standard will apply. But if it is relevant to some other issue  -
          such as whether it is in fact possible in practice for him to  be
          returned, and any rights that may accrue  if  it  is  not  -  the
          standard is the balance of probabilities.


10. The burden of proving the appellant is at risk of persecution in  Syria
    is on the appellant and the standard is  the  lower  one.  Because  the
    respondent disputed the appellant's nationality having, she said, found
    evidence that he was from  Egypt  (paragraph  42  of  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter), it was for her  to  demonstrate,  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, that he could  be  returned  to  Egypt  because  of  his
    nationality.  This approach accords both with the authorities to  which
    I have been referred by Mr Hoshi, with RM (Sierra Leone) and  with  the
    respondent's own guidance.

11. For these reasons, notwithstanding the FTTJ's inaccurate summary of the
    guidance in MA, I find there is no error of law in  her  decision  that
    the burden of proving  the  appellant's  nationality  rested  with  the
    respondent on the balance of probabilities.

12. The respondent made a reasons challenge in her application to  the  FTT
    for permission to appeal. Whilst  that  application  was  refused,  she
    renewed those grounds in her application to this tribunal. UTJ  Plimmer
    does not state that all grounds are arguable but, by inference, that is
    the case. I therefore consider whether, as claimed by the Secretary  of
    State in the application to the FTT for permission to appeal, "the FTTJ
    materially erred in how she considered the expert evidence relied on by
    the parties; little reasoning is given for placing  no  weight  on  the
    linguistic evidence of the SSHD. This is also  an  error  of  law".  Mr
    Norton did not expand significantly on this ground, save  to  refer  to
    the appellant's expert's lack of specific experience of the Cairene and
    Damascene dialects.

13. While the linguistic report  was  provided  by  Verified,  rather  than
    Sprakab, RB (Linguistic evidence - Sprakab)  Somalia  [2010]  UKUT  329
    (IAC) remains of relevance to the assessment of linguistic reports.  In
    summary, linguistic reports from Sprakab were to be given "considerable
    weight" as a result of the processes used and  the  data  available  to
    Sprakab. However, such reports should not be treated as infallible  but
    evidence opposing them will need to deal with  the  particular  factors
    identified in the report. These findings were endorsed by the Court  of
    Appeal in RB (Somalia) v SSHD [2012]  EWCA  Civ  277.   In  RM  (Sierra
    Leone) [2015] EWCA Civ 541 it was held that RB set out the approach  to
    be taken to linguistic analysis reports. A properly  critical  approach
    was appropriate.

14. The FTTJ rightly considered the expert evidence in the round  with  the
    remaining evidence. She noted the respondent attached "great weight" to
    the conclusions in the LOID report that the appellant  "did  not  speak
    like a Damascene but like a Cairene" (paragraph  43).   She  noted  the
    evidence of the two Verified analysts had not been provided although it
    had been summarised in the LOID report.  She  also  noted  "the  report
    includes few details of the  analysts".   These  were  observations  of
    relevance to an assessment of the evidential weight to be given to  the
    reports pursuant (RB and RM).

15. Professor Matras states in his report that he has reviewed the Verified
    "written and audio material". He had been instructed to give an opinion
    as to whether he agreed with the  report's  conclusions.   He  says  he
    "learned the Palestinian variety of Arabic as an  adolescent"  and  has
    studied "the linguistics  of  the  Middle  East".  He  has  contributed
    entries on Arabic dialects to the Encyclopaedia of Arabic Languages and
    Linguistics. He has also "supervised  a  comparative  investigation  of
    Arabic dialects, working with  a  team  of  seven  native  speakers  of
    Arabic, all postgraduate students working under [his] supervision,  who
    compiled a systematic data comparison on some 15 different varieties of
    Arabic". He referred to having access to this  data  corpus  and  being
    able to  draw  on  it  for  comparison.   He  refers  to  having  close
    familiarity with the research literature on Arabic dialectology and  to
    acting  as  a  consultant  on  the  analysis  of   language   for   the
    determination of origin, with analysis of Arabic in particular.   Given
    this experience, I am  satisfied  the  FTTJ's  finding  that  Professor
    Matras had "substantial expertise", albeit  not  a  native  speaker  of
    Syrian or Egyptian Arabic, is founded on the evidence.

16. The FTTJ described  Professor  Matras'  report  for  the  appellant  as
    "thorough and carefully reasoned". She considered he had "analysed  the
    appellant's speech recording carefully".  I note Professor Matras  gave
    his opinion with regard to the qualifications of the Verified  report's
    author, in particular the absence of training in linguistic analysis or
    dialectology.  His reports makes it clear where  he  agrees  with  some
    conclusions  in  the  Verified  report  and  disagrees   with   others.
    Professor Matras identifies certain findings  in  the  Verified  report
    which refer to forms in the recording which he was unable  to  find  in
    that recording. He also refers to forms which the Verified report  does
    not mention and which are typical of Cairene Arabic, thus displaying  a
    balanced approach to giving his opinion  on  the  Verified  report.  He
    notes various  inconsistencies  in  the  Verified  report.   For  these
    reasons, I am satisfied that the FTTJ's description of the  quality  of
    Professor Matras'  report  as  "thorough  and  carefully  reasoned"  is
    founded on the evidence before her.

17. The FTTJ made a point of ignoring Professor Matras' speculations  about
    reasons for the appellant's mixed pronunciation as  the  appellant  had
    not provided any detail  of  his  family  background.   She  noted  the
    appellant's evidence he did not attend school but  avoided  speculating
    as to whether this explained his failure to speak  standard  Arabic  as
    used in central Syria.  She noted the  respondent  had  not  considered
    whether  the  appellant's  family  originated  from  an  area   outside
    Damascus; this  was  relevant  in  the  context  of  Professor  Matras'
    statement that some of the dialect used by the appellant was widespread
    in northern and eastern Syria.  The FTTJ bore in mind  the  submissions
    for the respondent that Professor Matras was not a  native  speaker  of
    Arabic and that there was no evidence he had spent time in either Egypt
    or Syria (paragraph 48) whereas the analysts were  both  native  Arabic
    speaks and lived, respectively, in Damascus  and  Cairo.   Thus  it  is
    clear from the FTTJ's reasoning that she took into  account  all  those
    issues which, it was submitted before me, had not been given due weight
    by her.  Her findings are based on the evidence before  her;  they  are
    cogent and adequately reasoned.  There  is  no  error  of  law  in  her
    approach to the linguistic evidence.  The respondent's challenge is  no
    more than a disagreement with her findings.

18. For these reasons, the decision of the FTTJ contains no material  error
    of law.

Decision

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

20. I do not set aside the decision and reasons of the First-tier Tribunal.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge                        Dated: 11 November 2016

