
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10415/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7th January 2016                  |On 8th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               SURAFEL KIDANE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr S Sellwood, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant, who claims to be a national of Eritrea, appealed to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against a decision by the respondent of 17 November
    2014 to refuse his application for asylum.   Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Fletcher-Hill allowed the appeal. The Secretary of  State  now
    appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 3.  In summary the background to this appeal is that the appellant came to
    the UK on 19 December 2013 and claimed asylum that day. He claims  that
    he is at risk  on  return  to  Eritrea  because  he  is  a  Pentecostal
    Christian. He claims that he was arrested in March  2007  and  detained
    for one month and released after his uncle paid a bribe. He claims that
    he went to Sudan and Libya and that in December 2013  he  travelled  to
    the UK spending 18 days in France en route. The respondent refused  the
    application saying in the reasons for refusal letter that she  did  not
    accept that the appellant is an Eritrean  national  or  that  he  is  a
    Pentecostal Christian, or that he was arrested and  detained  in  March
    2007. The Secretary of State identified a number of inconsistencies and
    discrepancies in the appellant's account.

 4. In her grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal the Secretary  of  State
    complains of three errors of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision. It is contended that the Judge failed to give any or adequate
    reasons for her  conclusion  that  the  appellant  is  Eritrean  and  a
    Pentecostal Christian; that the  Judge  failed  to  take  into  account
    and/or resolve conflicts material to the outcome  of  the  appeal,  for
    example the discrepancies between the appellant's  screening  interview
    and substantive interview and his claimed birth  certificate;  and  the
    Judge failed to give any or adequate reasons for  allowing  the  appeal
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 5. The first and second  grounds  are  interlinked  and  I  consider  them
    together. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant  and  submissions  from  representatives  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State  and  the  appellant  and  set  those  out  ion  the
    decision. The Judge made her findings in relation to the  asylum  claim
    at paragraphs 7.1-7.5 of the decision.  The  Judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant had satisfactorily explained his failure to claim  asylum  in
    France and  went  on  to  consider  the  substantive  asylum  claim  at
    paragraphs 7.4 and 7.5 as follows;

         "7.4     I have carefully  considered  all  of  the  evidence  both
         written and  oral  and  I  find  the  appellant's  account  of  his
         Pentecostal faith to be credible. I find that he was  cautioned  at
         length and in detail during his substantive asylum interview and  I
         find his account credible and that there is a reasonable degree  of
         likelihood that he is Eritrean as claimed and also  that  he  is  a
         Pentecostal Christian.

         7.5      I accept that the appellant is Eritrean and I accept  that
         he is  a  Pentecostal  Christian  and  that  he  left  his  country
         illegally after his arrest at a prayer meeting and fled to Sudan"

 6. It is clear from these paragraphs that the Judge failed to engage  with
    any of the credibility issues raised in the reasons for refusal  letter
    or by the Presenting Officer in submissions. Further, the Judge  failed
    to give any reasons  for  accepting  the  appellant's  account  in  its
    entirety. It is not enough, as suggested by Mr Sellwood,  to  read  the
    decision as a whole including  the  evidence  and  submissions  and  to
    assume  that  the  Judge  accepted   the   appellant's   evidence   and
    submissions. I take account of the  guidance  given  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in the case of Malaba v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 820 where Dyson  LJ
    said;

         "20.     In my  judgment,  the  existence  of  these  possibilities
         underlines the fact that it was imperative for the  adjudicator  to
         explain how she reached her main conclusion that, having regard  to
         the  response  statement,  the  discrepancies  did  not  completely
         undermine the core of the claim. It was insufficient simply to  say
         that she had had regard to the response statement. She should  have
         identified  the  discrepancies  which  she  considered   had   been
         satisfactorily explained by the appellant and those which had  not,
         giving short reasons for  her  findings,  and  explained  why  such
         discrepancies as had not  been  satisfactorily  explained  did  not
         completely undermine the appellant's  account.  I  agree  with  the
         conclusion of the IAT that the adjudicator did  not  give  adequate
         reasons for her finding that the appellant was a credible  witness,
         particularly in circumstances where she did not give oral  evidence
         beyond the adoption of her witness statement. Even if it  was  open
         to the adjudicator to place any, still less "particular",  reliance
         on the medical report of Dr Pilgrim, her reliance on that report to
         support her finding that the appellant's account was  credible  did
         not absolve her from the duty to provide adequate reasons  for  her
         finding in relation to the discrepancies."

 7. The Judge in this case had a duty to resolve areas  of  dispute  before
    her and to give reasons for her findings and in my view she  failed  to
    do so. That failure amounts to an error of law.

 8. In terms of the third ground of appeal,  at  paragraph  7.7  the  Judge
    appeared to find that the appellant has not established  a  private  or
    family life in the UK yet went on at paragraph 9.3 to allow the  appeal
    under Articles 2,3 and 8 of the ECHR. This amounts to a  further  error
    as, again, no reasons are given for allowing the appeal  under  Article
    8.

 9. In light of the errors identified I set the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal aside decision in its entirety.

10. I am satisfied that the  appellant  has  not  therefore  had  his  case
    properly considered by the First-tier Tribunal.  The  parties  were  in
    agreement with my view that the nature and extent of the judicial  fact
    finding which is necessary in order for the decision to  be  remade  is
    such that (having regard to the overriding objective in Rule 2  of  the
    Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008) it is  appropriate  to  remit  the
    case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The Judge made an error on a point of  law  and  the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.


Signed      Date: 7th January 2016

A Grimes

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

