
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10449/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2 August 2016                          |On 10 August 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss O Taiwo (legal representative), UK Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Tarlow


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia  born  on  [  ]  1995  of  Oromo
    ethnicity.  He left Ethiopia in June 2014 and arrived in  this  country
    on 8 February 2015  and  applied  for  asylum.   This  application  was
    refused on 14 July 2015.

2.   The appellant appealed on 27 July 2015.

3.   The appeal came before a First-tier Judge on 7 March 2016.   There  was
    no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant at the hearing.  In  the
    absence of an explanation for non-attendance the judge gave his reasons
    for dismissing the appeal in the following two paragraphs:

         "14. The burden of proof  in  relation  to  the  facts  arising  in
             connection with this appeal rests upon the appellant.  He  has
             provided no documentation or information or any submissions as
             to why the appeal should be allowed.  Nor  has  he  chosen  to
             attend the appeal hearing or be represented by the  solicitors
             who are still on the record  as  acting  for  him.   All  that
             undermines his credibility.


         15.  Save as to the basic grounds of appeal (which do no more  than
             disagree with the  respondent's  decision),  the  respondent's
             decision  goes  unchallenged.   On  the   face   of   it   the
             respondent's lengthy reasons  for  the  decision  are  clearly
             argued in some detail.  That  puts  the  onus  fairly  on  the
             appellant to answer them and, in the absence of  any  evidence
             to the contrary, the appeal must be dismissed."

4.   The appellant applied for permission to appeal.   It  was  pointed  out
    that the appeal was originally listed for hearing on 11  May  2016  but
    was subsequently brought forward to 7 March 2016.  The  representatives
    admitted their mistake in overlooking the revised date.  It was not the
    appellant's fault.  The appellant had not been informed of the date  of
    hearing - as far as the appellant was concerned the date of hearing was
    11 May 2016.  Under the Rules it was important to have  regard  to  the
    interests of justice.

5.   Miss Taiwo admitted that the representatives were  at  fault.   However
    the appellant like many asylum seekers was dispersed and would not have
    received the revised notice of hearing.

6.   The judge had not properly had  regard  to  the  interview  record  and
    other matters and had relied solely on the  respondent's  decision  for
    finding the appellant to be incredible.

7.   Mr Tarlow agreed with the  submissions  that  the  judge  had  not  had
    regard to the interview record and proper reasons had  not  been  given
    for the decision.  He agreed that the appeal should be remitted  for  a
    fresh hearing to the First-tier Tribunal.

8.   Both the representatives were agreed as to the outcome.   I  note  that
    the representatives had faxed a letter to the Tribunal on 8 March  2016
    as soon as they had been aware of the mistake.  This document did reach
    the First-tier Judge and he had recorded that the decision was  already
    promulgated and accordingly the communication was too late.   The  note
    is dated 10 March 2016.

9.   The decision was in fact promulgated on 14 March 2016.

10.  Of course where a decision has been reached by a Tribunal  and  a  case
    has proceeded in the absence of a party due  to  the  mistake  of  that
    party or the party's representatives, it does  not  necessarily  follow
    that the determination is flawed in law - see Al-Mehdawi v Secretary of
    State [1989] UKHL 7.  However, irrespective of the  point  acknowledged
    by  Mr  Tarlow  that  the  decision  lacked   proper   reasoning,   the
    circumstances can in my view be distinguished from those in Al-Mehdawi.
     In this case the judge was advised very shortly after he had completed
    the decision and before it  was  promulgated  that  there  had  been  a
    mistake on the part of the representatives.  In those circumstances  it
    would have been open to the judge in my view to reconsider  the  matter
    and recall the decision  prior  to  promulgation.   In  the  particular
    circumstances where the appellant had not been at fault in any way  and
    where the blame lay entirely with the representatives, the judge  could
    and in my respectful view  should  have  decided  it  was  not  in  the
    interests of justice to leave matters as they were.

11.  In any event Mr Tarlow does not seek to support the  determination  and
    in my view he was right not to do so.

12.  For the reasons I have given and by agreement between the  parties  the
    appeal is allowed and remitted for a fresh hearing  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal before a different First-tier Judge.

13.  The appeal is allowed as indicated.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none



Signed                                  Date 9 August 2016

G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
