
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10921/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 May 2015                                |On 10 June 2015               |
|Given orally at the  hearing                  |                              |


                                   Before

    THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS sitting AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE UPPER
                           TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                 JAMAL AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss D Qureshi, Counsel, instructed by Taj
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  who  was  born  in  September
    1971.  He came to Britain in 2000 and claimed  asylum.   It  was  found
    that he had claimed asylum in France and he was removed  to  France  on
    third country grounds on two occasions before, on the  third  occasion,
    entering Britain in September 2000 when he made a further asylum claim.

2.   It appears that at that stage he was subjected to bail  conditions  but
    that very quickly he stopped complying with these and was noted  as  an
    absconder.  The reason which Miss Qureshi gives for that  happening  is
    that he did not speak English. He was newly arrived in Britain and  did
    not have any legal advice.  The reality of course is that he says  that
    when he arrived back in Britain he was living with other members of his
    family who presumably had been here for some time and would  have  been
    able to read English and moreover he would have known  that  he  should
    not abscond.

3.   Thereafter there was a delay until 2010 when  he  was  apprehended  and
    the asylum claim was effectively  revived.   He  was  then  subject  to
    reporting conditions which it appears he followed.

4.   What of course is relevant is that during the period between  2000  and
    2010 the appellant did nothing to ask the Home Office  how  his  asylum
    claim was progressing.  There is a duty on a claimant to keep in  touch
    with the respondent and ensure that their claim is not forgotten.

5.   The appellant was in due  course  refused  in  November  2014  and  his
    appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Farmer on 10 March
    2015 and dismissed in a determination promulgated on 16  March.   Judge
    Farmer  noted  the  appellant's  immigration  history,  noted  relevant
    country guidance regarding asylum claims from  Bangladesh  and  reached
    the conclusion that the appellant's asylum  claim  could  not  succeed.
    That decision has not been challenged.

6.   The judge, however, did go on to consider the rights of  the  appellant
    under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  in  paragraphs  30  onwards  of   his
    determination.  He found that the decision would not cause  the  United
    Kingdom to be in breach of its obligations under the  1950  Convention.
    He noted the basis of the appellant's claim and  first  turned  to  the
    Rules in paragraph 276ADE.  He  found  that  the  appellant  could  not
    qualify under the Rules.   He  stated  in  paragraph  39  that  clearly
    neither paragraph 276ADE nor Appendix FM is as explicit  as  the  Rules
    relating to deportation but he said that the respondent put a gloss  on
    this by adopting the policy  set  out  in  Nagre  which  made  specific
    reference to the instructions of  the  respondent  given  to  officials
    considering cases that did not meet the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules.  He then set out those circumstances.

7.   He then turned to relevant case law setting out the principles  in  the
    House of Lords judgment in Razgar [2004] UKHL  27  and  other  relevant
    case law such as that in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31  which  makes  it
    clear that, generally speaking, the relationship between adult siblings
    is not one that leads  to  a  right  to  family  life  which  would  be
    infringed.

8.   He then considered the judgment of the House of Lords  in  EB  (Kosovo)
    [2008] UKHL 41 and said that delay in decision making  might  cause  an
    individual to lose specific advantage of  opportunities  and  it  might
    create circumstances which strengthened an individual's claim to family
    or private life, spouse, work or community ties.

9.   He looked at the decision in MM (Serbia and  Montenegro)  [2005]  UKAIT
    00163 and noted the guidance therein that delay without more cannot  be
    determinative on its own; that delay might led to a claim being  "truly
    exceptional"  only if it would lead to a conclusion that   there  would
    have been a free standing claim which could have lead to  an  extension
    of stay which had been lost because of the delay; and  that  the  delay
    should not have been acquiesced in by the applicant - an  applicant  is
    not entitled to sit back and enjoy whatever this country has to  offer,
    relying  on  no  more  than  the  administrative  incompetence  of  the
    authorities.

10.  He went on to say he accepted that there had been some  delay  in  this
    case. He did not find the delay assisted the appellant's claim  in  the
    circumstances and he relied on the speech of Lord Brown of Eaton-Under-
    Heywood in EB (Kosovo) at paragraph 42 where Lord Brown had  said  that
    if the public interest otherwise demands that a claim fails  it  should
    not succeed merely because it might have  been  stronger  had  it  been
    determined earlier. Judge Farmer therefore went on to dismiss the human
    rights appeal.

11.  Lengthy grounds were submitted which referred to a considerable  amount
    of case law but they in effect  boiled  down  to  the  point  on  which
    permission to appeal was granted which was that of delay.   It  was  on
    that point that Miss Qureshi has argued that the judge  erred  in  law.
    We accept that she was at some disadvantage on her  first  point  which
    was that the  appellant  had  lived  at  his  brother's  house  without
    interference or questioning by the Home Office and that there  were  no
    conditions with which he had not complied  as it appears from documents
    on the file which Mr Nath has that in fact the appellant,  although  on
    bail conditions,  did not comply with those  conditions albeit that  it
    is claimed that he went on living at the same house.

12.  The reality is that it was the duty of the appellant to keep  in  touch
    with the Home Office and certainly to comply with the  conditions  that
    were imposed upon him.

13.  Miss Qureshi emphasised that since  2010  the  appellant  has  complied
    with reporting conditions and that this shows that he had had  no  wish
    to evade  being  detected.   She  emphasised  the  delay  as  being  an
    unconscionable delay because the appellant had built  up  private  life
    rights.  While we note the judgment in EB (Kosovo) which does emphasise
    that delay can lead to private life rights being built up,  for example
    when an appellant  marries,  has  children  and  so  on,  Judge  Farmer
    correctly pointed out that has not happened in this case.

14.  It appears in any event that the appellant is no longer living  in  the
    house with other members of his family.  He is working  and  living  in
    Preston.  He is not exercising  in  any  way  family  life  with  other
    members of his family.  There is nothing  in  the  evidence  before  us
    which indicates that he has had a family or  private  life  here  which
    effectively could not be continued in Bangladesh.  He could work there.
     He could form friendships and so on.

15.  Moreover, it is evident that Judge Farmer  was  correct  to  point  out
    that the appellant could not benefit from the provisions of the  Rules,
    and the reality is that Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 sets out relevant factors to take into  account  in  an
    Article 8 assessment, the principal of  which  is  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control.

16.  This is a case of a man who has no basis  for  stay  here.  He  is  not
    entitled to asylum. He has not built up any family  relationships  here
    nor indeed is there any particular evidence of his  exercising  private
    life here.

17.  In these circumstances we can only conclude that the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was correct and that he made no error of  law
    in his determination and  we  find  therefore  that  his  determination
    dismissing this appeal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

