
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal number: AA/10647/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London           |Determination Promulgated |
|On 3 December 2014                     |On 5 December 2014        |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                     AF
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER CONTINUED)

                                                        Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                     Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms P Solanki, instructed by Asylum Aid
For the Respondent: Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Iran, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against the decision by the Secretary of State of 15 November  2013  to
    refuse his application  for  asylum.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  C  M
    Phillips dismissed the  appeal  and  the  appellant  now  appeals  with
    permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the  appellant  claims  to  be  a
    minor with a date of birth of 13 March 1997.  The  respondent  disputes
    this and considers his date of birth to be 13 March  1995.  In  summary
    the appellant's case is that in 2009 he attended  three  demonstrations
    in Iran with his brother who was involved in the  Green  Movement.  The
    appellant went to join his sister for the summer  holidays.  Whilst  he
    was there his brother was arrested and has not been seen since. He says
    that there were photographs of him  in  green  clothing  taken  at  the
    demonstrations on his brother's camera which the authorities must  have
    seen and that the family home  was  raided  and  the  authorities  were
    looking for him. The appellant went  from  his  sister's  home  to  the
    tribal area to stay with his grandfather's tribe. He stayed there for 1
    year and three months. His family arranged for him to leave  Iran  with
    an agent and he left in 2010. Ten days later he arrived in Italy  where
    he was arrested and fingerprinted on 31 December 2010. The  appellant's
    account is that the group travelled onwards and  he  was  raped  by  an
    agent. They spent a long time in the forest and the  appellant  arrived
    in the UK and claimed asylum on 30 March  2011.  The  appellant  claims
    that he attended a meeting of the United Iranian Party in  the  UK.  He
    produced a photograph from a magazine which he claims shows him  there.
    The appellant claims to have converted to Christianity in the  UK.  The
    appellant's sister came to the UK  in  January  2014  and  has  claimed
    asylum.

Error of law

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the appellant was born  on  13
    March 1995 as assessed in the age assessment carried  out  by  City  of
    London Department of Community and Children's Services. The Judge  also
    took into account that the appellant had withdrawn his judicial  review
    challenge to the age assessment 'which on the face of  it  demonstrates
    that he has accepted the assessment' [36]. The grounds of appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal challenge this finding because it is contended that only
    the last page of the age assessment was before the First-tier  Tribunal
    and that the Judge could not therefore have been satisfied that the age
    assessment was compliant with the decisions  in  R  (B)  v  Merton  LBC
    [2003] EWHC 1689 (Admin) and R (T) v Enfield [2004] EWHC 2297  (Admin).
    At the hearing Ms Solanki relied on Home Office guidance  on  assessing
    age, she referred to paragraph 5.3 which says that case  owners  should
    request a full copy of the age  assessment.  She  also  submitted  that
    there could be a number of  reasons  why  the  appellant  withdrew  his
    challenge to the age assessment.

 4. Mr Shilliday submitted that it is for the appellant to prove that he is
    a child and not for  the  respondent  to  prove  that  he  is  not.  He
    submitted that in challenging the age  assessment  the  appellant  must
    have seen the full assessment and that the Secretary of State has  not.
    He submitted that the Judge considered all of the other evidence before
    him in reaching his conclusion as to the appellant's age including  the
    birth certificate.

 5. I accept that the full age assessment was not before the Judge. However
    Mr Shilliday made a valid submission that the appellant must have  seen
    the assessment if he sought to challenge it by way of judicial  review.
    If there were aspects of it which  made  it  unreliable  the  appellant
    could, and perhaps should, have produced it for the  Judge  to  support
    those submissions. Also, the Judge took into account the fact that  the
    appellant had withdrawn his challenge to the age assessment. Whilst  Ms
    Solanki submitted that there could have been a number  of  reasons  for
    doing so there was no  evidence  before  the  Judge  as  to  why  those
    proceedings were withdrawn. Had they been withdrawn for  reasons  other
    than reasons relating to the merits of the challenge evidence  to  that
    effect could have been put before the Judge. The Judge was entitled  in
    these circumstances and in the context of all of the evidence  to  draw
    the inference she did from the fact that the  appellant  had  withdrawn
    the challenge to the age assessment.

 6. The Judge also relied on  the  issues  highlighted  by  the  expert  in
    relation  to  the  birth  certificate  and  the  conflict  between  the
    appellant's claimed age and the evidence of his sister [36]. The  Judge
    also relied on the conflicting evidence as to the appellant's  date  of
    birth such as the fact that his year of birth was given as 1990 when he
    was fingerprinted in Italy and as 1995 and 1996 in medical records  and
    medical reports [35]. Whilst the Judge wrongly states that the onus  of
    proof in relation to this matter was on the respondent in  relation  to
    the appellant's age [36], I am satisfied that this is  not  a  material
    error as the Judge properly weighed all of the evidence before her  and
    concluded that the appellant's year of birth is 1995, making him 18  at
    the date of decision and 19 at the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing.

 7. The second ground of appeal is that the Judge erred in failing to  make
    a specific finding on the appellant's claim that he was  raped  on  the
    journey to the UK. However I am satisfied that the Judge did accept the
    appellant's claim in relation to this matter. Whilst it would have been
    clearer had the Judge specifically said  that  she  accepted  it  I  am
    satisfied that it is sufficiently clear that  she  did  so.  The  Judge
    referred to it in the context of the human rights grounds. She referred
    to the appellant's 'traumatic experience' and 'trauma' that occurred as
    a result of a 'criminal act during his journey' [62] and his 'traumatic
    life experience' [63]. I am satisfied that this demonstrates  that  the
    Judge did accept the appellant's account  that  he  was  raped  on  the
    journey to the UK.

 8. Ms Solanki submitted that  the  Judge  did  not  consider  the  medical
    evidence in the light of this finding. She submitted that  there  needs
    to be an assessment as  to  whether  the  treatment  identified  in  Dr
    Fairweather's report should be carried out in the UK. However, I accept
    Mr Shilliday's submission that Dr Fairweather's report states only that
    any treatment should be carried out in a stable  and  safe  environment
    [6.9.1, 6.9.4]. There was no evidence before the Judge  as  to  whether
    such treatment was available in Iran so she cannot be criticised for so
    finding [61].

 9. In terms of the medical evidence the Judge set out  a  summary  of  the
    reports before her and concluded that the report  from  Dr  Fairweather
    commissioned by his  representatives  was  'different  in  content  and
    scale' from the other medical evidence and conflicted  with  the  other
    reports and the evidence of Rev Nodding who described the appellant  as
    a  'self-confident,  enquiring  and  capable  young  man'.  The   Judge
    concluded that the medical evidence did  not  support  the  appellant's
    evidence that he had been getting therapy for  his  mental  health  and
    that there was no evidence of a  deterioration  in  his  mental  state.
    These were all findings open to the Judge on the evidence before her.

10. The third ground of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  that  the  Judge
    erred in her assessment of the appellant's credibility. The Judge found
    that the appellant's sister's claim not to have been at  risk  in  Iran
    because of her political activities was used to  explain  why  she  was
    able to remain in Iran and not to have been of adverse interest to  the
    authorities. Ms Solanki submitted that the Judge  did  not  distinguish
    the activities of the appellant from those of his sister who said  that
    her activities were not  the  same  as  the  appellant's.  However  the
    sister's witness statement describes her activities as working  on  the
    Mousavi campaign, distributing leaflets and  putting  up  posters.  She
    said that she did not attend demonstrations. It is clear that the Judge
    did not find this distinction to be a  real  or  significant  one.  The
    Judge heard from the appellant and his sister and found this aspect  of
    their evidence  to  be  contrived  and  designed  to  explain  how  the
    appellant's sister was able to remain in Iran until 2014 without coming
    to the attention of the authorities. This was a conclusion open to  the
    Judge on the evidence.

11. Ms Solanki challenged the findings made by the Judge at paragraph 38 in
    relation to the photographs of the  appellant.  Mr  Shilliday  accepted
    that the Judge may have mistakenly noted that the witnesses  said  that
    there were photographs  of  the  appellant  at  the  demonstrations  on
    display on the table in the family home. However he submitted that even
    if paragraph 38 was taken out of the  determination  the  rest  of  the
    findings  could  still  stand.  I  agree  that  paragraph  38  is   not
    determinative of the Judge's credibility findings. However  on  reading
    the appellant's sister's statement (paragraph 11) and the note  of  her
    oral evidence in the determination  [20]  it  is  not  clear  that  the
    Judge's conclusion about the photographs at paragraph 38 is wrong.

12. Ms Solanki submitted that the Judge erred in her consideration  of  the
    magazine from January 2012 which was said to show the  appellant  at  a
    United Iranian Party event. She submitted that the original  photograph
    was available at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal  but  that  the
    Judge did not view it yet she  found  that  the  photographs  were  not
    reproduced well in the photocopy.  However  this  is  a  misreading  of
    paragraph 43 which says that the appellant is not otherwise  identified
    and that even if this publication was available on the internet it  was
    not enough to place the appellant in one  of  the  categories  of  risk
    identified in BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on  return)  Iran  CG
    [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC). This was a finding open to the  Judge  given  her
    finding that the appellant had attended a meeting of the UIP  and  that
    his involvement was 'minimal'.

13. Ms Solanki submitted that the Judge had not made a proper finding as to
    whether the appellant was in hiding when he was living  in  the  tribal
    area before leaving in Iran and whether that impacted on him not  being
    found by the authorities and whether it would be reasonable for him  to
    have continued to live  there  in  those  circumstances.  Mr  Shilliday
    submitted that the circumstances of this case  could  be  distinguished
    from the self-confinement described in  EH  (blood  feuds)  Albania  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC). I accept that the Judge in this  case  made  a
    finding about the appellant's time with the tribes in  the  context  of
    his credibility. She relied on inconsistencies between the  appellant's
    evidence and that of his sister in relation to this issue [39].  It  is
    clear that the Judge did not accept the appellant's account that he was
    being sought by the authorities during this time.

14. Ms Solanki submitted that the Judge  erred  in  her  finding  that  the
    appellant's account of his conversion to Christianity was not  credible
    because the Judge failed to take account of the witness statement of an
    Iranian member of the Church.  She submitted that this statement  dealt
    with the Judge's doubts as to the appellant's ability to understand the
    Bible because  of  the  language  issue.  However  the  Judge  attached
    significant weight to the timing of  the  appellant's  claimed  resumed
    church attendance and baptism [47]. In any event I do  not  agree  that
    the witness statement adds to the appellant's claim on this issue as it
    says that the witness had met the appellant one  month  previously  and
    that he had attended one class for baptism.

15. The final ground raised by Ms Solanki  is  that  the  Judge  failed  to
    consider the risk to the appellant on return  to  Iran.  She  contended
    that the appellant is at risk of being questioned on return because  of
    his illegal exit, the fact that he claimed asylum in  the  UK  and  the
    duration of his absence. However the guidance in  BA  (Iran)  does  not
    support the contention that the appellant is at risk because  of  these
    factors alone. The Judge found that the appellant's account  of  events
    in Iran and his conversion to Christianity was  not  credible  and  his
    account of activities sur  place  to  disclose  no  more  than  minimal
    involvement. There is nothing  more  the  Judge  could  have  found  in
    relation to risk on return.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

Signed
                         Date: 3 December 2014


A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).

Signed
                     Date:  3 December 2014


A Grimes
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal































