
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10260/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 November 2016                   |On 30 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                           GAID AHMED GAID BUDAWI
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Smyth, instructed by R P Crawford & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  A  Grimes,  dismissing  his  appeal  under   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against  the  respondent's
    decision made on 30 June 2015 to refuse his claim for protection.

 2. The appellant's case is that he is a  Somalia,  and  a  member  of  the
    Ashraf clan from Haaway in the Lower Shabelle  Region  which  is  still
    under Al-Shabaab control. He was, however,  born  in  the  United  Arab
    Emirates that his parents had lived until 2009. In 2006 he had gone  to
    the Philippines to study nursing and lived there for nine years but had
    not be allowed to work there as a nurse on completion of his  training.
    He did, however, work in Manila from March 2012 until October 2014 when
    his  visa  was  cancelled  and  he  had  to  leave   the   Philippines.
    Applications for a Visa to return to the UAE  were  refused  and  on  7
    November 2014 he travelled to Somalia despite a warning not  to  do  so
    from his parents; his father had been killed by Al Shabaab on 21  April
    2014.

 3. On return to Somalia, the appellant went to live in his  home  village,
    Haaway, where he met his wife for the first time; his case is that they
    were married prior to that  by  proxy.  On  24  November  2014  he  was
    approached by members of Al Shabaab to join them as they  knew  of  his
    medical skills agreed to do so but said that he  needed  some  days  to
    look after his sick mother to which they agreed after the  intervention
    of village elders but the following day he left the village, travelling
    to Mogadishu, where he travelled to Belfast via Dubai.

 4. The respondent accepted that the appellant is a Somali  national;  that
    he had lived in Abu Dhabi as claimed; and, that he spent time  studying
    in the Philippines. She did not, however, accept that he was  a  member
    of the Ashraf clan or  that  he  had  returned  to  Haaway  village  in
    November 2014 or that Al Shabaab had made any attempt to  recruit  him.
    She considered that, even if his  claim  were  accepted,  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect him to return to Mogadishu.

 5. The judge found that: -

      i) the appellant's credibility was  damaged  by  his  entry  into  the
         United Kingdom with a passport which was not his [12];

     ii) the appellant had returned to Somalia in November 2014 [15];

    iii) the appellant had failed to establish that he is a  member  of  the
         Ashraf claim as claimed [16];

     iv) it was not credible that the appellant had not been in contact with
         his mother since his departure  from  Somalia  in  the  context  of
         previous contact over a period of nine years while she was  in  the
         Philippines;

      v) That there are a  number  of  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
         account which damaged his credibility [18]:

     vi) The appellant had not demonstrated that his father had been  killed
         by Al Shabaab as claimed [19];

    vii) The appellant had not given a credible explanation for the decision
         to give medical treatment in the manner claimed; and, she  was  not
         satisfied that the appellant had returned to his  parents'  village
         or that had been approached and threatened there by Al  Shabaab  as
         claimed [20], [21];

   viii) having had regard to MOJ & Ors (return  to  Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG
         [2014] UK UTD 00442 (IAC) [24], she was not satisfied, even if  the
         appellant claimed to be accepted, that it would be unduly harsh  to
         expect him to relocate to Mogadishu [23], as  he  may  have  family
         members there  [26],  may  have  clan  associations  to  call  upon
         Mogadishu [26], bearing in mind the findings of fact already made [
         28]; a significant factor in this case being that he would have the
         prospects of securing a livelihood Mogadishu is a healthy young man
         who is educated, is a qualified nurse and  has  experience  working
         abroad and he had not turned he could not access the economic  boom
         in Mogadishu in the circumstances;

 6. The judge then dismissed the appeal concluding that there was  no  risk
    of the appellant suffering serious harm in Somalia contrary to articles
    2 and 3 of the  Human  Right  Convention  or  article  15  (c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred: -

      i) In concluding that the appellant is not from the  Ashraf  clan,  in
         that she had not given due weight to  the  appellant's  answers  at
         interview in which he had given about the clan  [1];  and,  it  was
         procedurally unfair to hold the errors made  at  interview  against
         the appellant when he was questioned about these in court [2];

     ii) In attaching weight to a  number  of  inconsistencies  which,  when
         properly viewed, were not in fact inconsistencies [3];

    iii) In improperly attaching weight to the appellant not  mentioning  in
         his Screening interview that his father  had  been  killed  by  Al-
         Shabaab [4];

     iv) in improperly speculating as to the  appellant's  circumstances  on
         return to Mogadishu, contrary to the requirement  provided  for  in
         MOJ for a careful assessment of all the circumstances [5] - [7];

      v) and, had she found that the appellant is a  member  of  the  Ashraf
         clan, she would have been as a matter of law, bound to find that it
         would be unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect  the  appellant  to
         return to Mogadishu.

 8. I heard submissions from both representatives.

    Consideration of the grounds of challenge

 9. In addressing the grounds, I note that certain of the adverse  findings
    as to credibility are not challenged. These are findings made  at  [12]
    in respect of entering the United Kingdom using a  passport  which  was
    not his; and, at [17] in respect of a lack of candour in respect  of  a
    lack of contact with his mother.  I deal with the grounds in turn.

    (i)  Findings in respect of membership of the Ashraf clan

10. While it is correct that the judge did not at [16] address directly the
    correct information about  the  Ashraf  which  the  appellant  give  in
    interview, it is evident from the decision at [6] - [10] that the judge
    was aware of the appellant's case, and [11] that the respondent did not
    accept he was from the Ashraf. More particularly at  the  beginning  of
    [16], she noted that the appellant had  answered  questions  about  the
    Ashraf in interview. There is nothing sufficient  to  demonstrate  that
    she was not aware of the correct answers.

11. It was open to the judge to make specific references to the error about
    which  group  of  the  Ashraf  were  dark  skinned,  and  to  note,  in
    particular, the failure to address the issue about the Ashraf's special
    religious status. Given that this was raised in the refusal letter,  it
    was incumbent on the appellant to address it.  It was also open to  the
    judge to note the appellant's explanation - that they spoke very little
    about the tribe - and to reject it  as  inconsistent  with  the  father
    speaking out against Al- Shabaab. That answer is also inconsistent with
    the appellant being able to name lots of the sub- clans  in  interview,
    yet be unable to explain the descent from the Prophet which is core  to
    the Ashraf as a clan.

12. Contrary to what is submitted in the grounds at [1] and [2],  there  is
    no failure to give due weight, nor is there any procedural  unfairness;
    the issues about the two errors was identified clearly in  the  refusal
    letter. It was for the appellant to address them.

    (ii) The inconsistencies with regard to the marriage

13. There is some merit in Mr Smyth's submission that the  judge  erred  in
    respect of the details of the marriage, but only on the basis  that  it
    is submitted that the marriage was carried out by proxy.  It is, in  my
    experience, relatively common for  Islamic  marriages  to  be  made  by
    proxy, and that is implicit in what he said at [63] - that he  had  not
    needed to be present at the marriage.  The  judge's  comments  at  [18]
    about how long it had been since he had married must  be  seen  in  the
    context of that apparent mistake of  fact,  and  are,  to  that  extent
    infected by that error.

    (iii)    improperly attaching weight to a failure to mention facts in a
    Screening Interview

14. It is correct that the judge noted [19]  that  the  appellant  had  not
    mentioned in his Screening Interview that his father had been killed by
    Al-Shabaab. As Mr Smyth submitted, the appellant  did  mention  in  his
    screening interview at [9.7] that his father was deceased.  He  did  in
    his interview at Q.117 that Al-Shabaab had killed his father, but  that
    his mother had not told him exactly why (Q.118), and that (Q.120)  that
    he just knew that his father was talking to people, trying to help them
    in the village, and that Al-Shabaab are against people who do the right
    things. I consider that the judge was entitled to  consider  that  this
    explanation was vague, and to draw inferences adverse to the  appellant
    from his oral evidence that his  father  had  spoken  out  against  Al-
    Shabaab [19]. I do not consider that it can be said that the judge,  in
    reaching that conclusion, drew inferences adverse to the appellant from
    a failure to mention in his screening interview  that  his  father  had
    been killed; it is simply part of the narrative of how the  account  of
    the father's death developed. It is sufficiently clear that the adverse
    inference flows from the embellishment, and not any failure to  mention
    the killing in a Screening Interview.

15. It is to be noted that the grounds do not  challenge  all  the  adverse
    findings made by the judge. There is no effective or  proper  challenge
    to the adverse credibility findings made at [17] and [20].




    (iv) improper speculation as to family and clan support

16. While I accept that the judge may have  erred  in  respect  of  drawing
    inferences adverse to the appellant in respect of  his  marriage,  that
    was only one factor which lead to the adverse credibility finding,  and
    as noted above, several of those factors were not challenged.  Further,
    the findings in respect of  which  I  find  no  error  in  the  judge's
    findings go to the core of the  claim.  That  cannot  be  said  of  the
    marriage chronology,  and  there  is  insufficient  indication  in  the
    decision to show it affected the overall finding materially.

17. While I accept,  as  Mr  Smyth  submitted,  that  large  parts  of  the
    appellant's  account  of  living,  studying  and  working  abroad  were
    accepted, it does not follow that the judge erred in disbelieving other
    parts of the claim, and she gave adequate and sustainable  reasons  for
    those conclusions.

18. With respect to the challenges made to the  judge's  findings  at  [28]
    with respect to availability of funds to the appellant, it  is  notable
    that the judge found that the appellant had not be truthful  about  his
    contacts with his mother. It was thus open to her to conclude that  the
    appellant had not, given her other findings, been truthful about  which
    funds were available to him.

19. In these circumstances, it was open to the  judge  not  to  accept  the
    appellant's claim that he had neither family nor clan on whom  to  rely
    if returned to Mogadishu.  It was for him to prove that aspect  of  his
    claim to be at risk on return, given the guidance given in MOJ.

20. It cannot be argued that, in this context, the  judge's  assessment  of
    the risk was insufficient or unlawful. The grounds fail to identify any
    real error in the assessment of risk, and there is no direct  challenge
    to the finding at [29] that the appellant would have  the  prospect  of
    securing a livelihood in Mogadishu, given that he is  a  healthy  young
    man, is a qualified nurse, and has experience of working abroad.   That
    was, and is, in the context of MOJ, an  important  factor,  capable  of
    bearing significant weight.   In that context the judge was  manifestly
    entitled to conclude that the appellant could be expected  to  relocate
    to Mogadishu where he would not be at risk, and that it was  reasonable
    to expect him so to do.  She  was  also  entitled  not  to  accept  the
    appellant's claim to be of Ashraf ethnicity.

    (v)   Ashraf  ethnicity  is  determinative  of  the  reasonableness  of
    relocation to Mogadishu

21. Given that, for the reasons set out above, I find that the  judge  gave
    adequate and sustainable reasons for not accepting that  the  appellant
    is Ashraf, this ground requires little independent consideration.

22. Further, and in any event, and following the findings in MOJ, it cannot
    be argued that being  of  Ashraf  ethnicity  is  determinative  of  the
    reasonableness of relocation to  Mogadishu.  That  is  particularly  so
    where, as here, the appellant in question has valuable skills,  and  it
    has not been shown he would be  without  support.  In  any  event,  the
    latter is not determinative; what is required is a proper  analysis  of
    the factors which would indicate that a person returning would  not  be
    able to avail himself of the positive changes, as is required by MOJ.

    Conclusions

23. For the reasons set out above, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    did not involve them making of an error of law and I uphold it.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error of law. I uphold it.


Signed   Date:  29 November 2016
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

