
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10615/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 4 September 2017             |On 19 September 2017            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     a i
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms B Asigo of R O C K Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a Bangladeshi national  born  on  [  ]  1991  who  seeks
asylum on the grounds of his sexuality. He arrived here as a Tier 4  Migrant
on  13  November  2009  and  subsequently  obtained  further  leave  but   a
subsequent application was refused due to irregularities with  his  language
test. He was asked to take another but does not appear to have done  so.  On
19 December 2014, he was notified that the licence of his sponsor  had  been
revoked and he no  longer  had  a  valid  CAS.  On  13  February  2015,  the
appellant claimed asylum.
Procedural background

2. There is a long procedural history to the case which I  shall  summarize.
After the asylum claim was rejected  by  the  respondent,  the  appeal  came
before First-tier Tribunal Judge Isaacs at Hatton Cross on  28  April  2016.
She  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  another  witness  and  then
dismissed the appeal in a determination promulgated  on  10  May  2016.  The
decision was challenged. Judge Pooler refused permission to appeal but  this
was granted on renewal by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul  on  the  basis  that
the judge had commenced her assessment of the claim with findings on s.8  of
the 2004 Act.  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hill  then  heard  the  legal
arguments on 31 August 2016 and by way of a determination dated 5  September
2016 set aside the decision. The matter  was  then  re-heard  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Kimnell  on  13  March  2017.  He  heard  evidence  from  the
appellant and four witnesses but did not find them  credible  and  dismissed
the appeal. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Deans
sitting as a First-tier Tribunal judge on 22 May 2017 and on  29  June  2017
the appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor  who  set  aside  Judge
Kimnell's decision on 6 July 2017  on  the  basis  that  he  had  not  given
adequate reasons for his adverse conclusions. The appeal  then  came  before
me for a fresh hearing on 4 September 2017.

The hearing

3. The appellant and three witnesses  gave  evidence  before  me.  All  were
assisted by the use of a Bengali interpreter.

4. The appellant began by confirming his current address as [ ]  Springfield
Road. He said he had lived  there  since  June  2016.  When  asked  for  his
previous address, he stated it was [ ] Govier Close but he  then  said  that
was where he had lived from 2011-2015. He  claimed  to  have  forgotten  the
address he lived at prior to Springfield Road. After some thought,  he  gave
it as Plashet Road. It was put to him that [ ] Griville Lodge was  given  in
his statement. He then agreed that was where he  had  lived.  He  now  lived
with his boyfriend, KM at the Springfield Road address.

5. The appellant was referred to his statement (in Bundle 2).  He  confirmed
he had signed it. When asked to adopt the statement, he said he  would  like
to read it again as he could not recall the contents. He stated that he  had
last been to see his  solicitors  two  weeks  ago,  when  he  signed  a  new
statement but on being told no new statement had been submitted, he said  it
was his friend's statement and not his. He had not  been  read  his  witness
statement in preparation for the hearing and could not recall its  contents.
I, therefore, took an early lunch  break  so  that  the  appellant  and  his
witnesses could be reminded of the contents of their  respective  statements
with the assistance of the interpreter if required.
6. On resuming the hearing, the appellant adopted  his  two  statements.  He
repeated that he lived at [ ] Springfield Road with his  boyfriend  and  had
been there since June 2016. He was then tendered for cross examination.

7. The appellant confirmed he lived with KM. Sometime in May 2016, they  had
jointly made the decision to move in together.  They  had  the  use  of  two
rooms in a house as well  as  a  kitchen  and  toilet.  Other  people  lived
upstairs. There was a common entrance.

8. The appellant stated he met  KM  at  the  Way  Out  Club  in  Aldgate  in
September  2012.  They  exchanged  telephone  numbers  and  then  started  a
relationship.

9. The appellant confirmed that his family was aware  of  his  sexuality.  A
friend called T travelled to Bangladesh and notified his  family.  When  his
family confronted him, he denied it because he knew they would  disown  him.
Then  in  November  2013  another  friend,  SR,  showed  the   family   some
photographs he had of the appellant at the club and they  told  him  not  to
return. The appellant said his uncle was the imam at the local  mosque.  The
appellant had known T in Bangladesh. He  came  here  in  2009/2010.  He  had
known SR in Bangladesh too. The photographs  showed  the  appellant  and  KM
hugging. They were "those type of photographs". He said that SR had  somehow
transferred the photographs from the appellant's laptop or mobile phone.  SR
had not known that he was gay before he saw the photographs.  He  then  said
that he was not sure if SR had known or suspected but he had not  told  him.
SR returned to Bangladesh in 2013. When asked how SR had reacted  to  seeing
the photographs, the appellant said SR had not "disclosed anything".

10. The appellant said he had no family in the UK. He had  not  had  contact
with his family in Bangladesh since 2013.

11. When asked why he delayed claiming asylum, the  appellant  said  he  had
been studying and his life had been flowing smoothly. He had no  idea  about
the asylum process. After his family stopped contact with him, he  spoke  to
some friends and some of them who had applied for asylum themselves  advised
him. This was 7-8 months before he made his application.

12. The appellant said that KM moved to the UK in 2011.

13. There was no re-examination.

14. The next witness was MRH. He adopted  his  statement  and  confirmed  he
lived at [ ] Plashet Grove. After providing a post code, he  said  that  was
wrong and gave another  one.  He  produced  ID.  In  cross-examination,  the
witness stated that he met the appellant at Disco  Rani,  a  gay  club.  The
appellant now lived with KM. They had been  together  since  June  2016.  He
visited them. They occupied a one bedroom unit on the ground  floor  but  he
did not know who lived upstairs. There was no re-examination.

15. In response to my questions, the witness confirmed that he had  obtained
asylum on the grounds of his sexuality. He did not have an  appeal  himself.
He had  given  evidence  at  the  appeals  of  three  others  excluding  the
appellant.   There were no questions arising from mine.

16. I them heard evidence from KM. He gave his address as  [  ]  Springfield
Road. He adopted three statements and showed his ID. He said he had  been  a
classical dancer for 16 years in Bangladesh and seven years in the UK.

17. The witness was cross-examined. He stated  that  he  and  the  appellant
started to live together from  1  June  2016  so  that  he  could  help  him
financially and because he felt love and affection for him. They decided  to
live together about a month earlier. They occupied a bedroom and  a  sitting
room. The appellant had told him about the problems he had with his  family.
They knew about his sexuality because two friends had  gone  to  Bangladesh,
told them and shown  them  photographs.  The  appellant  was  no  longer  in
contact with his family. There was no re-examination.

18. The last witness was MR. He gave his address as  [  ]  Middle  Road.  He
adopted three statements and  produced  his  ID.  In  cross-examination,  he
stated that the appellant had told him that a friend had gone to  Bangladesh
and shown photographs to his family that revealed he was gay. There  was  no
re-examination. That completed the oral evidence.

19. I then heard  brief  submissions.  Mr  Wilding  relied  on  the  refusal
letter. He confirmed that if the appellant were found to be  gay,  then  the
respondent conceded that there would  be  a  real  risk  of  persecution  on
return to Bangladesh.

20. Ms Asigo submitted that although the previous  judges  had  doubted  the
appellant's credibility, he and his witnesses  had  been  consistent.  There
were no inconsistencies in the oral evidence and he had not been  questioned
as to how he knew he was gay. It was clear he was homosexual and the  appeal
should be allowed.

Discussion and Findings

21. I have considered all the evidence before me as a whole.  I  have  three
bundles from the appellant, the  respondent's  bundle,  the  oral  testimony
before me as well as that recorded in the  previous  determinations  of  the
First-tier Tribunal and the submissions made. I apply the lower standard  of
proof in assessing the evidence and bearing in mind that the  burden  is  on
the appellant to make out his case.

22. Whilst the respondent, in  her  decision  letter,  considered  that  the
appellant would be able to relocate or seek protection from the  authorities
if he was found to be gay but  removed,  it  was  conceded  at  the  hearing
before Judge Kimnell that if the  claim  of  sexuality  was  made  out,  the
respondent would accept that he had  established  a  real  risk  of  serious
harm. That concession was confirmed by Mr Wilding. The crux of the case  is,
therefore, whether the appellant has  demonstrated  to  the  lower  standard
that he is gay. I now assess the evidence and set  out  my  findings  in  no
particular order of priority.

23. I would state at  the  outset  that  the  preparation  for  this  appeal
hearing  was  disappointing.  There  has  been  no  compliance  with   Judge
O'Connor's direction for a consolidated bundle to be  filed  and  served  by
the appellant with the result  that  the  documentary  evidence  was  poorly
presented over three bundles  with  much  duplication.  No  explanation  was
offered for this failure to  comply.  Furthermore,  it  was  plain  that  no
attempt had been made to re-familiarise  the  appellant  and  his  witnesses
with their statement which resulted in wasted court  time.  The  photographs
relied on as part of the evidence were presented in as  photocopies  in  the
bundles. They were unclear and no attempt was made to clarify the people  in
the pictures, the dates they were  taken  or  where  they  were  taken.  The
originals were not made available.

24. There  were  also  shortcomings  in  the  presentation.  Whilst  several
credibility issues are raised  in  the  respondent's  decision  letter,  and
whilst this decision letter was relied on by Mr Wilding in his  submissions,
no attempt was made by Ms Asigo to address these in oral evidence or in  her
submissions before me. I did not consider that I was  required  to  put  all
these matters to the appellant as they were part of  the  evidence  and  the
appellant and his representatives have known about  them  for  a  number  of
years.  They  are,  however,  matters  that  I  am  obliged   to   consider,
particularly as they were still relied on by the  respondent.  In  assessing
the issues highlighted, I have had regard  to  the  oral  evidence,  to  the
evidence previously given to Judges Isaacs and Kimnell as recorded in  their
determinations and to the witness statements of the appellant where  he  has
made some attempt to offer explanations for the  problems  set  out  by  the
respondent.

25. At his asylum interview the appellant gave contradictory and  incoherent
answers in response to questions asked about when and how he had  discovered
he was gay. He initially stated he realised he was gay when he came  to  the
UK. Although he knew about homosexuality  from  magazines/newspapers  whilst
in Bangladesh, he had not considered  himself  as  gay.   He  then  gave  an
account of having had sexual relations with a male neighbour  and  with  3-4
other men on many occasions in Bangladesh from the age of 12. He  has  given
different ages elsewhere which vary from 10  to  15  (in  oral  evidence  to
Judge Isaacs, at interview  and  in  his  statement).  He  also  claimed  at
interview to have had a sexual and  emotional  relationship  with  his  male
cousin, MJ. When this matter was pursued,  he  somewhat  confusingly  stated
that he realised he was gay once in the UK but that he  knew  he  liked  men
whilst still in Bangladesh. These inconsistencies were  highlighted  in  the
decision letter and the appellant tried to resolve it in  his  statement.  I
do not consider the attempt at resolution to  be  satisfactory  and  indeed,
the statements further confuse the issue. The appellant denied providing  an
incoherent account and maintained that "there are things we do not know"  in
Bangladesh although this is then contradicted  by  his  claim  in  the  same
document that he was aware he was into gay relationships  in  Bangladesh  as
he had heard about them in the mosque. He has also explained  that  he  knew
he was gay before arriving in the UK but that he had been unable to  express
his sexuality in Bangladesh. Elsewhere, he stated that he  realised  he  was
gay in the UK at the end of 2010. There  is  a  difference  between  knowing
one's sexuality and publicly expressing it.  The  fact  that  the  appellant
maintains that he had to be circumspect in Bangladesh does not  explain  the
inconsistent  answers  given  about   where   he   discovered   his   sexual
inclinations.  Whilst I accept that the appellant cannot  be  precise  about
the discovery, it is reasonable to expect him to be able to  say  with  some
certainty whether he was in Bangladesh or in the UK when  it  was  made.  It
cannot be said that  he  did  not  understand  homosexuality  in  Bangladesh
because his evidence was that he was aware of it,  had  seen  gay  magazines
and heard sermons about it at the mosque.  I accept there  would  have  been
confusion perhaps  when  the  appellant  was  a  child  engaging  in  sexual
relations but I would have expected that confusion or ignorance to  pass  as
he grew older. I would also have expected  him  to  be  more  certain  about
whether he commenced his sexual life at the age of 10 or at 15. There  is  a
big difference between the two.

26. The appellant also gave  contradictory  evidence  with  respect  to  his
relationship with MJ, when it came to an end and when  MJ  developed  mental
health problems. At interview the appellant stated that MJ had  been  forced
to marry in  2008  but  had  divorced  later  that  year  or  in  2009.  The
relationship came to an end when the appellant travelled to the  UK  because
his cousin then became "mental" and did not have a telephone. He  then  said
that they had continued to  speak  for  a  year  but  that  his  cousin  had
subsequently developed a mental illness  and  so  no  longer  had  a  mobile
phone. In his January 2015 statement, the appellant  said  the  relationship
continued until December 2010 via the  phone  but  that  MJ  became  a  drug
addict, an alcoholic and mentally ill before he left Bangladesh; indeed,  he
stated that he decided to leave because of that.  A statement  from  another
cousin, MA, dated 28 January 2015, confirmed the  latter  claim,  maintained
that MJ had become mentally ill before the appellant left Bangladesh and  it
was that which prompted his departure.  There  is  therefore  an  unresolved
discrepancy over whether MJ fell ill  whilst  the  appellant  was  still  in
Bangladesh or whether that occurred when the appellant was in the UK.  Given
that the appellant claimed  MJ was his first love,  I  would  have  expected
him to be clearer about MJ's unfortunate fate.

27. There were also inconsistencies between the appellant's accounts of  how
his family discovered he was gay. The appellant's evidence to me and at  his
interview was that two friends had  betrayed  him.  One,  T,  had  told  the
appellant's family he was  gay  but  as  there  had  been  no  evidence  the
appellant was able to deny it.  Another  friend,  SR,  had  however  somehow
managed to transfer photographs from the appellant's  phone  or  laptop  and
showed them to the appellant's relatives  in  Bangladesh.  The  evidence  to
Judge Kimnell, as recorded in his determination, was, however, that  it  was
T who had shown the family the photographs; there is no reference at all  to
SR. this is repeated in the representations from the appellant's  solicitors
of 22 June 2015 (in Bundle 2). Prepared on the appellant's instructions,  it
is claimed that T showed the  photographs  to  the  appellant's  family.  In
cross-examination, before me the appellant stated that SR did not  know  the
appellant was gay before he came across the  photographs  but  elsewhere  he
stated that SR had discovered his sexuality when he  saw  the  appellant  on
the street with KM. The appellant has been unable to explain how his  friend
obtained access to his device (whether the phone  or  the  laptop),  why  he
accessed it in the first place without  the  appellant's  knowledge  or  the
circumstances in which this occurred.

28. The contradictory account of the appellant's family discovering  he  was
gay only when shown photographs by a friend, whether  it  be  T  or  SR,  is
further undermined by the appellant's evidence that he had  been  beaten  up
on two occasions in his village for being gay. It  is  simply  not  credible
that such incidents would not have come to the attention of  his  family  or
to his imam uncle.

29. Further difficulties arose over the claimed relationship  with  KM  with
whom the appellant is said to live.  In  response  to  my  query,  Ms  Asigo
confirmed that no documentary evidence relating  to  cohabitation  had  been
adduced. I was  not  given  any  explanation  for  this  deficiency  in  the
evidence. The appellant's evidence at interview in respect to KM,  described
as his best gay friend and regular  sexual  partner,  is  unimpressive.  The
appellant claimed to have met KM  in  September  2012,  nearly  three  years
prior to the interview (on 12 June 2015), but  was  unable  to  provide  any
details about where he lived, where he worked, whether he had completed  his
studies or was still a student, what he studied or where. He  did  not  know
for certain what family he had. He thought KM had come to  the  UK  in  2012
but was not sure. He did not know KM had obtained asylum two years prior  to
the interview. In his witness statement  the  appellant  seeks  to  put  the
blame on the interpreter for the shortcomings in  his  evidence  but  at  no
point  during  the  interview  did  he  raise  any  complaints   about   the
interpretation; he stated that he understood the  interpreter  both  at  the
start and the conclusion of  the  interview.  Moreover,  as  a  student  who
presumably therefore was reasonably fluent in English, he  would  have  been
able to spot any errors and bring them to the attention of the  interviewing
officer.  More  importantly,  his  representatives,  when   making   written
representations following the interview, made  no  complaint  at  all  about
interpretation. Finally, on this point even if the  interpreter  had  failed
to explain that the appellant knew where the house was even if  he  did  not
know the address, this does not explain his lack of  knowledge  about  other
basic facts about KM. KM, in  his  statements,  confirms  that  he  obtained
refugee status in January 2014 and has leave  until  9  May  2018.  He  also
refers in two statements  (22  January  2015  and  14  April  2016)  to  the
appellant's family forcing him into marriage but this is  not  a  claim  the
appellant has made himself.

30. There are several inconsistencies over when the appellant began to  lead
an openly gay life in the UK. He has stated that he began to do so (1)  from
the time of his arrival, (2) from  the  end  of  2010  (over  a  year  after
arrival) and (3) since the end of 2012. No reasons  are  offered  for  these
contradictory statements. According to a friend's statement,  the  appellant
led an openly gay life from 2009 (the year of his arrival). The  appellant's
representatives in their representations of June 2015 maintained the  second
option and explained it was when he attended a  gay  club.  The  NAZ  letter
confirms option 1. Other than the letters and evidence from his  friends,  I
have seen no evidence that the appellant frequents any  clubs.  Moreover,  I
note that whereas the appellant claimed that the Aldgate club was  right  by
his college, he studied at Blackhall College in Surrey Quays  which  is  not
in the Aldgate area.

31. The supporting letters adduced are  all  from  fellow  Bangladeshis  who
claim to be gay. Some have been recognised  as  refugees.  Three,  including
KM, attended the hearing. The letters contain substantial similarities  even
to the point of the same grammatical errors. The appellant is  described  as
"seeking for asylum as a gay" and  "one  of  the  best  gay  friend".   Some
letters are unsigned. All recount the story of friends telling tales on  the
appellant but none of the individuals have first hand knowledge of this  and
they reiterate only what the appellant has told them. They do not appear  to
have ever  met  the  treacherous  friends  and  indeed  some  only  met  the
appellant well after he had been 'outed'  by  T.  Only  three  attended  the
hearing. Whilst they  were  consistent  in  what  little  they  said,  their
testimony does not  address  the  numerous  problems  with  the  appellant's
evidence.

32. The appellant relies on a  letter  dated  5  January  2014  from  a  gay
organisation by the name of NAZ. The difficulty with  this  letter  is  that
the writer refers to an event the appellant is  said  to  have  attended  in
August  2014,  a  date  which  post  dates  the  letter.  This  problem  was
identified by Judge Kimnell. Had it been  a  typographical  error,  I  would
have expected the appellant to obtain an amended letter from the  writer  in
support of his appeal but he has not done  so.  I  am  unable  therefore  to
place any weight on this plainly  bogus  letter.  It  does  not  assist  the
appellant that he continues to rely on it.

33. The asylum claim was made on 13 February 2015 over five years after  the
appellant's arrival, seven months after he was  notified  of  irregularities
in his English language test and of the  cancellation  of  his  scores,  two
months after he was informed he had no valid CAS  following  the  revocation
of his sponsor's licence and just before the expiry of the extra 60 days  he
was given to obtain a fresh CAS.

34. The appellant gave various explanations for the  lengthy  delay  in  the
making of his claim in his  statements,  interview  and  oral  evidence.  He
stated: (1) he was not aware of the asylum procedure until 7-8 month  before
he made his claim; (2) he had no need to  claim  asylum  because  he  had  a
student visa, which implies he was aware of the process but felt it did  not
apply to him at that stage; (3) that he did not need to seek asylum  because
his family did not know about his sexuality and that  the  need  arose  only
when they found out in November/December 2014 and (4) that he no longer  had
permission to work and needed to be able to support himself.  The  appellant
does not explain why so many different explanations have been  put  forward.
I do not accept the first explanation because  it  is  the  appellant's  own
evidence that he has many gay  friends,  it  would  appear  all  exclusively
Bangladeshis, who have been through the  asylum  process  themselves.  Given
that he allegedly told them he feared death on return, and  indeed  that  he
had such a fear even at the time he left  Bangladesh  in  2009,  it  is  not
credible that they would have failed to discuss the asylum process with  him
at an earlier stage. Nor is it credible that fearing return  as  he  claims,
he would not have sought legal advice. The appellant does  not  explain  how
he believed he would  return  to  Bangladesh  after  his  studies  had  been
completed  if  he  was  already  aware  at  the  point  of  his  arrival  of
Bangladeshi society's homophobic attitude. This undermines  the  second  and
third explanations. The fourth suggests that the timing of his asylum  claim
was economically motivated. I note in his witness  statement  (at  paragraph
13) he refers to problems for gays in Pakistan but as return  to  Bangladesh
is proposed that is of course immaterial.

35. Although the appellant claimed to have been a genuine student  prior  to
the making of his claim, and although he claimed he had retaken the  English
language test and had not cheated, he  could  not  recall  the  test  centre
where he had taken the disputed test  and  he  has  failed  to  provide  any
evidence of the new certificate or of any qualifications  he  has  obtained.
He also failed to explain why he never  obtained  a  fresh  CAS  as  he  was
advised  to  do.  His  reliance  upon  an  irregular   certificate   further
undermines his integrity.

36. For all the reasons set out above, having assessed all the  evidence  in
the round and bearing in mind the lower standard of proof, I  conclude  that
the appellant has not established that he is gay. I cannot say  whether  his
witnesses are genuinely gay but even if they  are,  their  brief  supporting
testimony does not overcome the difficulties with the  appellant's  evidence
that have been highlighted. I accept they want to assist the  appellant  but
as I have found he has been untruthful about his sexuality, their  integrity
is clearly undermined by  their  claims  of  intimacy  with  him.  Ms  Asigo
submitted that the  appellant  is  "clearly  homosexual"  but  she  did  not
clarify  the  basis  for  that  assertion  and  the  claim  has   not   been
demonstrated. Wearing a necklace and an earring does not mean a man  is  gay
and there are too many deficiencies in the evidence for a finding  that  the
claim has been made out. The appellant  has  had  several  opportunities  to
make out his case but has still failed to do so.

37. The appellant was inconsistent about the age when  he  commenced  sexual
relations with males, whether he was in Bangladesh or  in  the  UK  when  he
realised he was gay, when his  relationship  with  MJ  terminated,  when  MJ
became mentally ill, how his family discovered he was gay, when he began  to
lead an openly gay life and why he did not make  an  earlier  asylum  claim.
These problems go to the heart of the claim.

38. The claim is not assisted by  the  production  of  a  wholly  unreliable
letter from NAZ and the absence of any independent documentary  evidence  of
cohabitation or of the appellant's involvement with the gay scene. I do  not
accept that the appellant is gay. I do not accept that  he  engaged  in  any
same sex activities in Bangladesh or in the UK. I do not accept that he  was
beaten up in Bangladesh. I do not accept that  his  family  have  threatened
him. I do not accept that he leads an openly gay life in the UK.  Whilst  he
may share accommodation with KM, I do not accept they are  sexual  partners.
I find that the appellant has  manufactured  his  claim  in  an  attempt  to
remain after he was found to have used a  false  language  test  certificate
and not granted a student extension. He has brought along  friends  who  are
no strangers to giving evidence in asylum  courts  and  who  have  tried  to
assist him to present his bogus claim. I do not accept that  he  would  have
any difficulties on return to Bangladesh and I conclude  it  would  be  safe
for him to return there.

39. No article 8 claim was pursued.

Decision

40. The appeal is dismissed.








Anonymity

41. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.

    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge
       Date: 19 September 2017
