

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10406/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                 Decision and Reasons|
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 8 September 2015                   |                 On 25 September 2015|
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                     A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Mukit, Counsel, instructed by Kanaga Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born  on  26  April  1985.   He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent on 6 November  2014  to
    refuse his asylum  claim  but  his  appeal  was  dismissed  on  asylum,
    humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights  grounds  and  under   the
    Immigration Rules in a decision by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew
    Davies ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 13 March 2015.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal and this was granted by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson on 17 April 2015. He noted that "contrary
    to the judge's comments at paragraph 23, Dr Martin [the medical  expert
    on scarring] indicated that the scars were not simply 'consistent' with
    infliction by a third party but rather than an  intentional  cause  was
    the only likely explanation and it was 'extremely unlikely'  that  they
    had been self-inflicted by the  appellant  himself.  ...  Moreover,  as
    ground 1 points out, Dr Martin said that there was 'not' (presumably he
    meant 'no') presenting fact making infliction  by  proxy  more  than  a
    remote possibility. ... It is arguable in the circumstances that,  when
    accepting Dr Martin's report at paragraph 23, the judge did  not  fully
    appreciated that Dr Martin was not simply saying that  the  scars  were
    'consistent' with infliction by  a  third  party  -  he  said  that  an
    intentional cause was the only likely explanation and effectively ruled
    out self infliction by the appellant himself.  It is also arguable that
    the judge proceeded on the basis that Dr Martin was simply saying  that
    it was scientifically impossible to  differentiate  proxy  injury  from
    torture related injury,  without  fully  appreciating  that  Dr  Martin
    thought there was no more than a remote possibility of proxy injury."

 3. Thus the appeal came before me today.

Submissions

 4. Mr Mukit relied on the detailed grounds of appeal which I summarise  as
    follows:

      i) The approach to Dr Martin's medical report on scarring  is  flawed;
         he had not applied the guidance in KV (scarring - medical evidence)
         Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC); material parts  of  Dr  Martin's
         opinion had not been taken into account including his opinion  that
         the cause of scarring was consistent with the appellant's  account.
         This  evidence  should  have  been  treated  as  positive  to   the
         appellant's case rather than neutral. Given Dr Martin's opinion  it
         was not open to the FTTJ to find the  scars  were  caused  in  ways
         other than those described by the appellant.

     ii) The FTTJ's approach to the report of Dr Dhumad was flawed  in  that
         although  the  FTTJ  accepted  the  appellant  had   the   symptoms
         reflective of  mental  health  vulnerabilities,  he  had  not  been
         treated as a vulnerable witness in  accordance  with  the  relevant
         practice direction. This was an error of law (JL (medical reports -
         credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC).

    iii) The reasoning at paragraphs 18 and 19 ignored  the  principle  that
         the actions of perpetrators are not to be measured by the yardstick
         of reason.

     iv) The reasoning ignored material evidence, country information  about
         the use of agents and offended the guidance in GJ.

      v) No reasons were given  for  discounting  the  significance  of  the
         appellant's participation in UK Tamil  activities  (albeit  it  was
         accepted that these activities did not amount  to  involvement  "in
         politics")

 5. In addition, Mr Mukit made the point that the first occasion  when  the
    medical evidence was addressed by the FTTJ was at  paragraph  23.  This
    was contrary to the guidance in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367.

 6. Mr  Avery  submitted  that  the  order  of  considering  the  evidence,
    including the medical evidence, was not relevant; the  important  point
    was that the FTTJ had taken it into account. It should be considered in
    the round when making findings of fact.

 7. Mr Avery noted Dr Martin's opinion as set out in the final sentence  of
    paragraph 23 of the FTTJ's decision, namely that  "He  makes  it  clear
    that scientifically it is impossible to differentiate the proxy  injury
    from the torture related injury".  There was no reasoning given  by  Dr
    Martin for his conclusion at page 6 of his  report  that  there  is  no
    presenting fact making it more than a remote possibility.  The guidance
    in KV, he said, was that it was not possible to  differentiate  between
    torture and self-infliction by proxy (SIBP). That was  the  case  here.
    The medical report of Dr Martin was deficient for  failure  to  justify
    the assertions made.

 8. I invited Mr Avery to make submissions on the second ground, namely the
    failure of the  FTTJ  to  take  into  account  the  vulnerable  witness
    guidance. He submitted that the appellant had been represented  at  the
    hearing and this guidance should have  been  drawn  to  his  attention,
    notwithstanding the psychiatric report which was before the FTTJ at the
    time.

 9. Mr Mukit submitted that the FTTJ had misconstrued Dr Martin's evidence;
    Dr Martin had addressed the issues raised by  the  guidance  in  KV  by
    looking at the presenting facts. There had been no  allegation  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter that the injuries were SIBP;  there  was  no
    presenting fact to suppose SIBP was at issue.  On clinical analysis  he
    had discounted the alternatives.

The Hearing

10. Having read the papers and heard the parties' submissions  I  indicated
    that I would find there were material errors of law in the decision and
    reasons of the FTTJ, albeit I reserved that decision at the hearing.  I
    invited submission on disposal and both Mr Mukit and Mr Avery  were  in
    agreement that the appropriate course was for the matter to be remitted
    to the First-Tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing  by  other  than  FTTJ
    Andrew Davies.

Decision on Error of Law

11. The FTTJ failed to address the medical evidence (which took the form of
    reports by Dr Martin on scarring  and  Dr  Dhumad  on  the  appellant's
    mental health) until paragraph 23 onwards in  his  decision.   This  is
    despite the fact that he made negative credibility  findings  prior  to
    paragraph 23, including findings at paragraph 20  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's evidence on the cause of scarring.

12. My attention was drawn to the guidance in Mibanga [2005] EWCA  Civ  367
    and I bear in mind that this was distinguished in S v SSHD [2006]  EWCA
    Civ 1153 where the Court of Appeal said that an error of law only arose
    in this  type  of  situation  where  there  was  artificial  separation
    amounting to a structural failing, and not where there was a mere error
    of appreciation of the medical evidence; Mibanga was distinguished. The
    Court of Appeal said that Mibanga was not to be regarded as laying down
    a rule of law as to the order in which judicial fact  finders  were  to
    approach evidential material before them.  In that case an  explanation
    as to why the medical evidence did not carry weight had been  given  by
    the Immigration Judge.

13. In the present case the FTTJ accepts the evidence  of  Dr  Martin.  The
    FTTJ notes Dr Martin's conclusion recording it thus: "the scars on  the
    back and upper limb are consistent with an intentional beating. ...  He
    makes it clear that scientifically it is  impossible  to  differentiate
    the proxy injury from the torture related injury." Whilst  that  is  an
    accurate reflection of Dr Martin's opinion, it is only part of  it  and
    the FTTJ has failed to engage with Dr Martin's opinion (on  page  6  of
    his report) with regard to certain of the scars: he says this:  "It  is
    important to notice the significant number of scars and the severity of
    the injuries and although SIBP is a possible cause cannot be  discarded
    [sic] and I considered, there is not [sic] presenting  fact  making  it
    more than a remote  possibility."    By  these  words,  Dr  Martin  has
    engaged with the guidance in KV (scarring - medical evidence) Sri Lanka
    [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC).  He has considered all possible causes of  the
    scarring. This is despite the fact that SIBP  was  not  raised  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter as a possible  cause.    KV  states  in  the
    headnote at (iv) that "a  lack  of  correlation  between  a  claimant's
    account and what is revealed by a medical examination of  the  scarring
    may enable a medico-legal report to shed some  clinical  light  on  the
    issue of whether SIBP is a real possibility". In the present  case  the
    opinion of Dr Martin is that the relevant scars  are  "typical  of  the
    event described by the claimant  of  being  intentionally  beaten".  Dr
    Martin concluded by saying "overall my expert opinion  the  scars  were
    typical of intentionally caused injuries  and  that  there  is  a  high
    likelihood that the injuries were caused by a third party as  described
    by the claimant".  It was for the FTTJ to make findings on the basis of
    all the evidence before him but he did so  without  engaging  with  the
    totality of Dr Martin's material evidence as to causation; nor  did  he
    take into account the lack of any positive case by the respondent  that
    the injuries were SIBP.  The FTTJ's findings are inadequate insofar  as
    the  cause  of  scarring  (which  is  relevant  to  the  issue  of  his
    credibility) is concerned.

14. There is no reference, in the reasoning  for  the  adverse  credibility
    findings at paragraphs 19-21, to Dr Martin's opinion or the opinion  of
    Dr Dhamash, the  psychiatric  expert.   The  latter  is  of  particular
    relevance because the FTTJ accepted his opinion that the appellant  was
    suffering from symptoms relating to Moderate Depressive Episode,  Post-
    Traumatic Stress Disorder  and  an  adjustment  disorder.   Whilst  the
    latter was triggered  by  the  refusal  of  his  asylum  claim,  it  is
    nonetheless the case that the appellant should have been treated  as  a
    vulnerable witness because of his mental health issues and the lack  of
    appropriate medication (according to the psychiatric report).  This was
    a procedural error.  I do not accept the submission of Mr Avery that it
    was appropriate for the FTTJ to ignore the Joint Presidential  Guidance
    Note No 2 of 2010: Child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive  appellant
    guidance simply because the vulnerability of the appellant had not been
    specifically drawn to his  attention:  the  psychiatric  evidence  made
    clear the appellant's mental health issues. The failure of the FTTJ  to
    treat the appellant as a vulnerable witness according to that  guidance
    is a procedural  error  amounting  to  a  material  error  of  law;  it
    undermines  the  fairness  of  the  proceedings.   In  particular,   at
    paragraphs 14 and 15, the guidance sets out issues to be considered  in
    relation to determinations.

       "14.Consider the evidence, allowing for possible different degrees of
       understanding by witnesses and appellant compared to  those  are  not
       vulnerable, in the context of evidence from  others  associated  with
       the appellant and the background evidence  before  you.  Where  there
       were clear discrepancies in the oral evidence, consider the extent to
       which the age, vulnerability or sensitivity of  the  witness  was  an
       element of that discrepancy or lack of clarity.

       15.The decision should record whether the Tribunal has concluded  the
       appellant (or a witness) is a child,  vulnerable  or  sensitive,  the
       effect the Tribunal considered the identified  vulnerability  had  in
       assessing the evidence before it and thus whether  the  Tribunal  was
       satisfied whether the appellant had established his or  her  case  to
       the relevant standard of proof. In asylum appeals, weight  should  be
       given to objective indications of risk rather than necessarily  to  a
       state of mind".

      The FTTJ did not apply with this guidance.

15. I find that the decision  of  the  FTTJ  is  fundamentally  flawed  for
    failure to take into account the totality of the expert evidence  which
    is material to the issue of the appellant's credibility  and  to  apply
    the guidance on  dealing  with  vulnerable  witnesses.  These  failures
    impact on the  sustainability  of  the  findings  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's credibility and the risk on return. The  decision  must  be
    set aside.

16. It was agreed by Mr Mukat and Mr Avery that the appropriate way forward
    was for the matter to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh hearing.

17. Given my references to  the  appellant's  scarring  and  mental  health
    issues  an  anonymity  direction  is  appropriate  and   I   make   one
    accordingly.



Decision

18. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

19. The decision is set aside.

20. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with
    afresh, pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunal  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v),  before  any  judge
    apart from Judge Andrew Davies.


Signed A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black


Anonymity Direction
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) we make an anonymity order. Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings. We do so in  order  to  avoid  a  likelihood  of  serious  harm
arising to the appellant from the contents of his protection claim.


Signed A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



