
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10286/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th October  2016                          |On 6th October, 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                 DELRAN [M]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jagedesham (instructed by Bury Law Centre)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
      Appellant in relation to a Decision  and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge Lever) promulgated on 25th September 2014.


   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  who  claimed  asylum  on  the
      basis that he had unwittingly assisted the LTTE  prior  to  2007.  His
      wife and two children are his dependents.

   3. It is regrettable that it has taken so long for this  case  to  appear
      before the Upper Tribunal. It is even more regrettable that this was a
      rehearing of the case in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  it  having  been
      previously remitted from the Upper Tribunal.

   4. The main ground relied upon on the Appellant's  behalf  and  on  which
      permission to appeal was granted was that the Judge had erred  in  his
      treatment of the medical evidence.

   5. It was asserted that the Judge speculated as to alternative causes  of
      lesions on the Appellant's feet from those provided by Dr Smith of the
      Helen Bamber Foundation. In that regard I find the Judge did  not  err
      as the part of the decision criticised on the  Appellant's  behalf  is
      actually taken  from  the  medico  legal  report  itself  and  is  not
      something that the Judge has speculated for himself.

   6. However, there was one crucial part of the medical evidence  that  the
      Judge did fail to take into consideration,  capable  of  corroborating
      his claim and that is at paragraph 61 of the medical report. There the
      doctor finds the scarring to the Appellant's right foot to be  typical
      of the attribution  given  in  which  the  Appellant  was  subject  to
      multiple, forceful episodes of falaka. What the judge failed  to  take
      into account was that the Appellant's claim was that falaka  had  been
      practised against him only during his second period  of  detention  in
      2010. He had made no such claim in relation to the period of detention
      in 2007.

   7. The judge found his claim to have been detained in 2010  not  credible
      and in misunderstanding the contents of the medical report and failing
      to take it all properly into account in his assessment of  credibility
      I agree that he made an error.

   8. The Judge, having found the Appellant was  detained  and  tortured  in
      2007 but not since and  not  on  his  return  to  Sri  Lanka  in  2010
      concluded that the authorities were not interested  in  him  then  and
      would not be now.  He did not  fit  in  any  of  the  risk  categories
      identified in GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG
      [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

   9. To cut short the hearing to  decide  whether  or  not  the  First-tier
      Tribunal had made a material error of law I  asked  Mr  Jagadesham  to
      identify what factors about this Appellant would place him at risk  on
      return; taking his claims at their highest.

  10. Mr Jagadesham said that he had been detained on two occasions, once in
      2007 and once in 2010 and also his death had been  faked  and  a  fake
      death certificate produced and shown to  the  authorities  to  mislead
      them and put them off visiting his mother in Sri Lanka to  enquire  as
      to his whereabouts. He argued that the fact that he had  inadvertently
      assisted the LTTE prior to 2007 and that he had been detained  on  two
      occasions and released the second time on payment of a bribe would  be
      discovered when he was questioned on return and would lead to  a  real
      risk of further persecution.  He argued that the fact that he had been
      detained in 2010, after his return, indicated ongoing interest in him.

  11. Initially, I had real concerns that this  did  not  establish  a  risk
      factor outside those identified in the country guidance  case  of  GJ.
      However, an examination of the most recent  "Country  Information  and
      Guidance on Sri  Lanka:  Tamil  Separatism"  updated  in  August  2016
      indicates that matters have arguably moved on since GJ was decided and
      there is evidence that it is not only people active in the diaspora or
      actively working against the Sri Lanka government who are at  risk  of
      arrest, detention and torture. That being the case it may be that this
      Appellant can establish that he would be at risk  notwithstanding  the
      fact that he has never been a member of the LTTE and has  carried  out
      no diaspora activities in support of the LTTE.  He  was  a  low  level
      supporter. It is  thus  possible  that  a  Tribunal  hearing  all  the
      evidence and  taking  it  all  into  account,  including  the  medical
      evidence, may conclude that the Appellant would be at risk on  return.
      For that reason the errors in the assessment of credibility and in the
      treatment of the medical report are  material  such  that  I  set  the
      decision aside.

  12. Reluctant as I am to remit a case to the First-tier Tribunal  for  the
      second time, the number of findings that  need  to  be  made  and  the
      complexity  and  volume  of  evidence  in  this  case  make  that  the
      appropriate way forward.

  13. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore  allowed  to
      the extent that the First-tier Tribunal's decision is  set  aside  and
      the matter remitted to that Tribunal for a full rehearing.

  14. There was no application for an  anonymity  direction  and  I  see  no
      justification for making one.


Signed                              Date 5th October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
