
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10189/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3 June 2013                                  |On 12 June 2013            |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                                 ABDUL QUDOS
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Barry, Harehills & Chapeltown Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Shimmin
    made following a  hearing at Bradford on 10th December 2012.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 1st January 1993.  He
    arrived in the UK on 13th November 2008 and applied  for  asylum.   His
    application was initially refused on non-compliance  grounds  and  then
    substantively on 26th October 2012.

 3. The judge found that there was no truth in the Appellant's  claims  and
    dismissed the asylum appeal. There is no challenge to  that  aspect  of
    his decision.

 4. In September 2011 the Appellant met a  Miss  Tyler  and  they  began  a
    relationship together.  By the date of the  hearing  she  was,  it  was
    accepted by all parties, expecting his child.  The judge found that the
    couple did not enjoy family life in the UK and dismissed the appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.

The Grounds of Application

 5. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge's consideration of the Article 8  issue  was  not  adequate,  and
    permission was granted on that basis by  Judge  Grant  on  9th  January
    2013.

 6. At the hearing Mr Diwnycz conceded that the judge had erred in law.

 7. The judge's decision with respect to Article 8  is  set  aside  on  the
    grounds that the judge did not give adequate reasons for dismissing the
    appeal in the context of the accepted evidence before him.

 8. The decision must be remade.

The Hearing

 9. The Appellant gave oral evidence.  He confirmed that he had moved in to
    live with his partner, with whom he has undergone an  Islamic  marriage
    ceremony, in January   2013.   They  lived  together  with  their  baby
    daughter who was born in March 2013 and with the  Sponsor's  two  sons,
    one of whom is in the army, returning at weekends and the other of whom
    attends college.  Mr Qudos said  he  initially  moved  in  because  his
    partner developed gestational  diabetes  whilst  pregnant  and  had  to
    administer four injections to herself on a daily basis.  The injections
    stopped after she had given birth but he now helps her with  the  baby,
    getting up at night, helping with feeding and winding her.

10. Terri Tyler also gave oral evidence and confirmed that  what  Mr  Qudos
    had said with respect to child care  was  true.   She  also  gave  more
    detail about their attempts to get married in the UK.   She  said  that
    she had contacted the Registry Office on a couple of occasions and  had
    been told her  that  she  needed  certain  documents  from  the  Afghan
    Embassy. The couple had been down to London but were unable  to  obtain
    an Afghan ID card as required because they  did  not  have  the  proper
    evidence.  She said that it was important for the  Appellant  that  the
    couple married Islamically before the baby was born, but she wanted  to
    have an English marriage.

11. Miss Tyler said that she had a job but was presently on maternity leave
    and would return in September.  The Appellant would then take over full-
    time care of the baby. She said that she could not possibly go and live
    in Afghanistan because she had never been abroad but in any  event  had
    strong family commitments here, not only to her two sons  but  also  in
    helping to care for her father who was disabled.  When asked what would
     happen if the Appellant was returned to Afghanistan  she  became  very
    upset and said that she would be devastated.

12. Mr Diwnycz made no submissions.

13. Mr Barry submitted  that  there  was  clear  family  life  between  the
    Appellant and Miss Tyler and their daughter. It would not  be  possible
    for the family to relocate to Afghanistan because of their  substantial
    ties to the UK and it would be disproportionate to break this family up
    by removing the Appellant.

Findings and Conclusions

14. The unchallenged  evidence  is  that  this  couple  enjoy  family  life
    together. They live together and have a daughter and the  Appellant  is
    heavily involved in her care.

15. Removal would be an interference with the Appellant's  right  to  enjoy
    family life but would be in pursuit  of  a  legitimate  aim  since  the
    Appellant has no other basis of stay in the UK.

16. However it would not be proportionate.  The  unchallenged  evidence  is
    that the Appellant is presently in a committed relationship with  a  UK
    citizen and they  have  a  British  citizen  child  together.   If  the
    Appellant were to be removed to Afghanistan those  relationships  would
    be severed.  Miss Tyler could  not  be  expected  to  go  and  live  in
    Afghanistan, not only because it is a country which is wholly alien  to
    her but, more importantly, because  of  her  ties  and  commitments  to
    people in the United Kingdom.  She has  two  sons,  one  an  adult  who
    returns to the family home at weekends but the other  is  only  16  and
    presently at college.

17. The issue which  concerned  the  previous  Immigration  Judge  was  the
    quality of the relationship between the Appellant and  Miss  Tyler.  At
    the time of the previous  hearing the  couple  were  living  separately
    because of the effect which the  Appellant's  presence  in  the   house
    would have on Miss Tyler's tax credit  claim.  This  situation  changed
    when the Appellant's presence became necessary to care for  Miss  Tyler
    during the last month of her pregnancy.

18. Whilst I can understand the reservations which the Respondent may  have
    had, and indeed the previous judge clearly had,  in  relation  to  this
    couple's future, the oral evidence today was compelling and undisputed.
    Miss Tyler was visibly upset whilst giving  evidence  when  asked  what
    would happen if  Mr  Qudos  was  removed.  Of  course  nothing  can  be
    guaranteed and any period of discretionary leave which the Appellant is
    granted will be only for a period of  two  or  three  years  -  if  the
    situation has changed at that point no doubt the Respondent  will  make
    the decision which she sees fit.  However on  the  present  evidence  I
    conclude that the couple are in a loving and committed in relationship.



Decision

19. The original judge erred in law and  his decision is set aside.  It  is
    remade as follows. The Appellant's  appeal  is  allowed  on  Article  8
    grounds. The appeal was dismissed on asylum grounds.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


