
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/10811/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 February 2015                   |On 23 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                      MR MOHAMED NISMATH MOHAMED RAFEEK
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Miss P Young of Counsel
For the respondent:    M R Petersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka  born  on  23  May  1986.   He
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal against the determination of  [First-tier
    Tribunal] Judge Ian Howard dated 19 November 2014 refusing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent dated 4 December  2013  refusing
    him asylum and humanitarian protection  and  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom pursuant to section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act
    1999.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by [First-tier Tribunal] Judge RA  Cox
    on 16 December 2014 stating that it was arguable  that  the  First-tier
    Judge failed to properly assess the appellant's profile, failed to make
    clear and adequate findings on material matters and  failed  adequately
    to engage with the relevant country guidance.

The first-tier Tribunal's findings

 3. The Judge in his determination made  the  following  findings  which  I
    summarise.

       . The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  27  February  2010
         with a student visa valid until 4 December 2012. He made his  claim
         for asylum on 13 November 2013.

       . The appellant and his family are from Kandy in  central  Sri  Lanka
         and they own two properties. One of the properties was rented  from
         April 2006 until May 2008 to 3 men known to the appellant as  Jana,
         Suresh and Surya who were all from  Jaffna.  Sometime  after  these
         tenants left the  property,  they  were  arrested  and  accused  of
         serious acts of violence. During their interrogation they named the
         appellant and he was arrested on  6  May  2008  and  detained.  The
         police informed the appellant that his name had  been  used  during
         telephone calls and to buy Sim cards that were used  in  connection
         with  the  tenant's  violent  crimes.  During  the  detention   the
         appellant was tortured.

       . The appellant's father with the help of a wealthy  and  influential
         friend, Zoorak secured the appellant's released with no  conditions
         by paying a bribe of eight lakh rupees. Following his  release  the
         appellant relocated to his uncle's home in Kandy.  The  police  who
         did visit the appellant's home and were also unable to  locate  him
         at his uncle's house. Zarook's influence helped the  appellant  not
         to be found. In September 2009 the  appellant  returned  home  upon
         assurances given to him by Zarook.  In  December  2009  the  police
         obtained  a  summons  for  the  appellant  to  attend   the   Kandy
         Magistrate's Court on 8 December 2009. This was the second  summons
         and the first summons issued was in August 2008.

       . The appellant was arrested on 20 November 2009 before  the  summons
         was issued and he was detained and tortured for the same reason  as
         previously. 15 lakh rupee bribe was paid to secure his  release  on
         21 January 2010. The appellant applied for  a  visa  to  enter  the
         United Kingdom on 8 February 2010.

       . In support of his claim the appellant has  submitted  original  and
         translated copies of two summons, a psychiatrist report and  copies
         of prescriptions for medication prescribed in the UK. At the  heart
         of the appellant's  claim  is  the  suggestion  that  he  has  been
         implicated in very serious acts of violence that have  resulted  in
         the deaths of a number of MPs in  Sri  Lanka.  That  evidence  came
         initially from the disclosures of the  alleged  perpetrators  under
         interrogation and secondly by Sim  cards  that  were  used  in  the
         attacks been bought in the appellant's name.

       . Reliance upon evidence obtained by torture by  the  authorities  in
         Sri Lanka is well known and well  documented.  If  the  authorities
         consider that they have  evidence  which  in  their  estimation  is
         reliable and which implicates the  appellant  in  serious  acts  of
         violence directed against members  of  the  government  and  it  is
         against this background  that  the  appellant  claim  that  he  was
         arrested, detained and tortured is considered.

       . Given  that  the  authorities  consider  that  they  have  reliable
         evidence of the appellant's involvement in the more  serious  crime
         offences such as murder directed towards members of government,  it
         is questionable that a bribe, even one facilitated when influential
         friend, would secure his release in the way claimed.

       . Even if he is wrong in this finding, he must go on to consider  the
         events  of  which  the  appellant  subsequently  speaks  about  his
         release. The appellant claims that his father and Zarook bribed the
         police to release him. He however was persuaded by assurances  from
         Zarook to return home. Once home he was again detained for the same
         alleged crimes and reliant upon the same  evidence.  He  was  again
         detained and tortured and a  second  bribe  was  paid  and  he  was
         released. This gives rise to the original concern  that  given  the
         egregious nature  of  the  crimes  with  which  the  appellant  was
         implicated, for him to be able to secure his release twice  by  the
         payment of bribes, even by an  influential  friend  is  simply  not
         credible. Given the evidence he alleges that the  authorities  hold
         against him, there is  no  reason  why  he  should  not  have  been
         prosecuted.

       . It is acknowledged that the appellant's points to the alleged  fact
         that Zarook has influence with the government. On  the  appellant's
         own evidence that influence is limited. Firstly, it did not prevent
         two summons being issued against the appellant. The second of which
         is that at the time,  Zarook  was  giving  the  appellant's  family
         assurances about the appellant safety and the appellant  was  still
         arrested, it can only reasonably be inferred from  that  that  such
         influence is  in  reality  limited.  Notwithstanding  this  limited
         influence, the appellant maintains he was twice able to  facilitate
         his release, notwithstanding the nature of the allegations and  the
         evidence held by the authorities.

       . The appellant relies on two  police  summons  in  support  of  this
         claim. It is impossible to know whether they are  genuine  or  not.
         However, on the basis they  are  genuine  documents,  they  do  not
         specify the reason why the appellant  is  required  to  attend  the
         magistrate's court in Kandy. In his statement the appellant asserts
         that the attack carried out by the  three  tenants  took  place  in
         Colombo. These are the crimes in which the appellant is implicated.
         But summons state that  the  crimes  for  which  the  appellant  is
         accused took place in the Kandy division. For each of these reasons
         the judge was not satisfied, even to the lowest standard, that  the
         events of which the appellant speaks are credible.

       . The appellant also relies upon a psychiatrist report prepared by Dr
         Robin Lawrence dated 18 April 2014. At page 15 of the  report,  the
         doctor sets out his "impressions and conclusions". The  finding  is
         that the appellant is describing as  showing  the  signs  of  major
         depression secondary to post-traumatic stress  disorder  which  the
         Judge accepts.

       . The question is whether there is to be found in the  diagnosis  any
         support for the appellant's claim to be at risk of  persecution  on
         his return. The appellant provided the same  narrative  history  to
         the doctor. The Judge noted that at page 8 the  appellant  revealed
         for the first time that his  torture  included  sexual  abuse.  The
         doctor was asked to consider whether any other  trauma  other  than
         that spoken of is a possible cause of the condition  diagnosed.  He
         states it is extremely unlikely any sets out his three reasons  for
         so concluding.

       . The Judge was satisfied that  the  correct  interpretation  of  the
         doctors reported is that the appellant  has  been  the  subject  of
         physical and sexual abuse. The doctor however cannot say  at  whose
         hands. The Judge rejected the appellant's claim that it is  at  the
         hands of the Sri Lankan  authorities  given  his  findings  and  in
         particular the fact the  summonses  appear  to  relate  to  alleged
         criminal activity in Kandy and not that perpetrated  by  the  three
         tenants in Colombo. Whether the alleged criminality alleged in  the
         summons lies behind his present condition the Judge  said,  I  know
         not. The judge  was  not  satisfied  that  matters  for  which  the
         appellant claims is the cause of his condition.

       . For each of the reasons set out  above,  he  rejected  the  account
         advanced by the appellant and was satisfied that the  appellant  is
         not  of  any  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  for  any
         involvement with the LTTE.

       . That he may be the subject of unrelated alleged  criminal  activity
         in Kandy  is  possible.  However,  the  evidence  advanced  by  the
         appellant does not permit the conclusion that these allegations  of
         those he claims are political in nature. As the  appellant  has  no
         links to the LTTE, he does not come within any of the  risk  groups
         identified in GG and others (post-Civil War: returnees)  Sri  Lanka
         CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

       . In respect of his human rights, the appellant relies upon the  same
         factual matrix. Having found him not credible it  follows  that  to
         return the appellant to Sri Lanka would not subject him to the risk
         of inhuman and degrading treatment and so for the same reasons  his
         claim for subsidiary protection is rejected.

       . The appellant at paragraph 21 of his grounds of appeal advances his
         depression and PTSD for founding a claim under  Article  3  of  the
         1950 Convention. It is suggested that his mental  health  condition
         will  deteriorate  at  the  point  of  removal  and  that  adequate
         treatment will not be available to him in Sri Lanka.

       . It has also been submitted but half of the appellant that he  comes
         from a family who have property in  affluent  Kandy.  As  such  the
         appellant's family is not without means and  indeed  the  appellant
         was able to demonstrate access to sufficient funds to  successfully
         obtain a student visa in 2010.

       . The only evidence of the non-availability of treatment in Sri Lanka
         come from Dr Lawrence. He states that nine years ago  when  in  Sri
         Lanka the drugs and therapy at the National Institute for  Clinical
         Excellence guidelines advise to  treat  the  appellant's  condition
         were not available in Sri Lanka and such drugs are  only  available
         to the expatriate community.  There  was  no  evidence  as  to  the
         availability of these drugs Sri Lanka today whether provided by the
         state or paid by privately. The only evidence on the effect of  the
         appellant of the withdrawal of his "treatment is that his  symptoms
         would undoubtedly be made worse by his return to Sri Lanka".

       . In the case of N v United Kingdom 26565/05, [2007] ECHR  746  gives
         the test to be applied in medical cases. The  appellant's  case  is
         not compelling as to meet the requirements of the test in N.

The grounds of appeal

 4. The appellant in his grounds of appeal states  the  following  which  I
    summarise. The Judge has materially erred in law in his  assessment  of
    the appellant's profile. This is that the appellant is  Tamil  speaking
    Muslim, he was formally arrested on suspicion of  having  assisted  the
    LTTE and was of continuing interest to the authorities. He  forced  his
    release from detention on payment of a bribe. The  appellant  considers
    that he will be arrested and detained on his return to Sri Lanka and he
    will be deemed a threat to the Sri Lankan  authorities'  concept  of  a
    unitary state. There is an outstanding warrant for his arrest as of  26
    August 2008. He submits that he will be questioned at the  airport  and
    refer the Tribunal to appendix C of GJ Sri Lanka at paragraph 4-15  and
    paragraph 308- 310.

 5. The Judge's findings commence at paragraph 14 of the determination  but
    it is respectfully submitted that there are no clear findings  of  fact
    as to whether the appellant was actually arrested and detained  in  May
    2008 on suspicion of LTTE involvement. At paragraph 28 the Judge  makes
    a number of observations and opinions that if what the appellant speaks
    of had taken place, this would not have been remarkable in Sri Lanka.

 6. The Judge in the early sentences of this paragraph considers  that  the
    appellants claim when placed on the factual background is plausible but
    considers that the  appellant's  account  of  being  released  was  not
    credible.  What  is  troubling  about  the  Judges  assessment  of  the
    appellant's core claim is, the fact that there are no clear findings as
    to  the  circumstances  giving  rise  to  the  appellant's  arrest  and
    detention, no assessment of the ill-treatment that he had  endured,  no
    assessment of paragraph 399K of the Immigration Rules and  no  findings
    as to why reference to bribery and corruption  in  Sri  Lanka  was  not
    considered when the judge reached a conclusion as to  the  plausibility
    of the appellant's release from detention.

 7. The Judge materially erred in law by failing to make any clear  Tanveer
    Ahmed findings pertaining to the summons issued against the  appellant.
    The appellant provided detailed written and oral evidence pertaining to
    the manner in which the summonses were issued and whilst the offence is
    not specified in the summons, the fact of the matter is that whilst the
    Judge considers that the account  provided  by  the  appellant  is  not
    credible, there is  no  clear  assessment  of  this  claim  or  of  the
    documentary evidence.

 8. At paragraph 41 the Judge's findings that the appellant is not at  risk
    on return due to his claim being predicated  on  non-political  grounds
    and further that he is not credible is irrational. The judge has failed
    to adequately engage with the  country  guidance  decision  of  CJ  Sri
    Lanka.

 9. The appellant relies on the Court of Appeal decision of  MP  Sri  Lanka
    [2011] EWCA Civ 362 where the court held that it would normally  be  in
    error of law not to adequately follow relevant country guidance. It was
    held that the claimant was entitled to a hearing and a  decision  which
    addressed the material risk factors and the  significance  attached  to
    this country guidance, with proper reasoning as to how  they  apply  to
    the facts in the particular case. The Judge's findings of  fact  as  to
    the appellant's risk on return is materially deficient due to the above
    material errors in law.

The hearing

10. On behalf of the appellant, Miss Young adopted the  grounds  of  appeal
    and her skeleton argument. She further argued that no clear findings of
    fact were made as to whether  the  tenants  of  his  house  linked  the
    appellant to the atrocities committed. It is commonplace for bribery to
    be used in Sri Lanka. There were also no findings of fact for  why  the
    appellant is not a LTTE supporter. In GJ it was found that  anyone  who
    has been previously detained is at real risk of harm. The Judge did not
    consider the summons provided by the appellant  in  line  with  Tanveer
    Ahmed and did not take account of the evidence in the round. The  Judge
    accepted that the appellant gave the same narrative to the doctor about
    his injuries. The doctor carefully interpreted that the  appellant  has
    been subject to physical abuse but said he cannot say at  whose  hands.
    The Judge gave no weight to the medical evidence  report  and  did  not
    undermine it at all.

11. On behalf of the respondent,  Mr  Peterson  adopted  the  Secretary  of
    State's Rule 24 response. Although the Judge did not refer to the  case
    Tanveer Ahmed,  he  applied  the  legal  principles  in  the  case.  He
    submitted that at paragraph 32, the Judge stated that it is  impossible
    to know whether the documents are genuine or not. He  was  entitled  to
    rely on the fact that the summons refers to crimes committed  in  Kandy
    but the offences were in fact committed in Colombo. At page  6  of  the
    summons refer to Chapter 15 of the Penal Code of Sri  Lanka  and  there
    was no evidence before the Judge as to  what  chapter  15  states.  The
    appellant did not have any links to LTTE so he  would  not  be  on  the
    watch list at the airport. The Judge was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    appellant did not have a political profile in Sri Lanka.

Error of law findings

12. I have given anxious scrutiny to the determination of Immigration Judge
    B Dawson and have taken into account the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
    documents provided by the appellant's previous solicitors.

13. As to the first ground of appeal, the Judge, at paragraph 17 considered
    the evidence relating to the appellant's scars  and  acknowledged  that
    the medical report stated that the injury on the appellant's  anus  was
    highly consistent with been caused by an object such as a  screwdriver.
    The Judge however said at paragraph 18 that "even on the lower standard
    there is the possibility that they were other reasons for these  scars.
    The Judge said that the Dr Josse in his report does not state the  time
    when the injuries to the appellant's anus  occurred.  Dr  Josse  simply
    said that the scars are well healed which the  Judge  said  brings  the
    timeframe into question. The Judge stated that he 'bears  in  mind  the
    medical evidence in his assessment of the account but in isolation,  it
    is by no means decisive of the appellant's claim'. It is clear that the
    Judge made a typographical error by omitting that  would  "not"  before
    "in isolation" in the sentence. The Judge clearly meant to say that she
    bears in mind the medical evidence in the assessment of the account but
    not  in  isolation.  I  find  that  it  is  clear  from   reading   the
    determination in the round that  she  took  into  account  the  medical
    evidence in the round and not in  isolation.  This  is  an  unfortunate
    typographical error but I find that it is not a material one.

14. The Judge did not refer to the Istanbul protocol but it is  clear  from
    her reasoning that she found that there was a  possibility  that  there
    could have been other reasons for the scars. Dr Josse  in  the  medical
    report did not refer to the Istanbul Protocol in his Report. The report
    states at paragraph 3 that "the injury would have  resulted  from  some
    sort of penetrating wound. It is not possible to indicate how deep that
    was but it is well healed. It would be highly consistent been caused by
    an instrument such as a screwdriver". Dr Josse  did  not  consider  any
    other possible causes for the injuries, which he was bound  to  do  and
    nor did he say that it was intentionally caused under torture. Dr Josse
    in his report stated that the appellant had stitches in that region but
    failed to exclude any other possibilities such as that the  injury  was
    due to a cut with a knife during an operation which would have required
    stitches. The Judge was therefore entitled to find that she  could  not
    rely on the medical  evidence  on  its  own  to  demonstrate  that  the
    injuries were caused as a result of torture.

15. This is equally true of the injury to the appellant's right  leg  which
    Dr Josse said was caused following a blunt trauma and would be  "highly
    consistent with having been caused by an instrument such as the butt of
    a rifle". Dr Josse did not  consider  if  there  may  have  been  other
    possible causes for this injury in line  with  the  Istanbul  protocol,
    which was his duty to do. The I Judge was entitled to find  that  there
    may be other reasons for this blunt trauma.

16. I find that the Judge was entitled and required to reach her conclusion
    based on her consideration and evaluation of the evidence as  a  whole.
    I find that the Judge did take into account Dr Josse's report of  which
    she made no criticism. However, an expert report is simply evidence  in
    the case, which must be considered and assessed together  with  all  of
    the other evidence in the case.  This is what the Judge  did.   I  find
    that the Judge was entitled to find and to take into account  that  the
    appellant gave inconsistent evidence and his account was  not  credible
    or plausible and was entitled to consider the  expert  report  together
    with the appellant's own account in reaching a conclusion as to whether
    the scarring was consistent with the appellant's account.  I  therefore
    reject the appellant's ground of  appeal  in  respect  of  the  medical
    evidence.

17. The appellant relied on two police summons in support  of  this  claim.
    The Judge properly noted that  the summons do not  specify  the  reason
    why the appellant is required to attend the Magistrate's Court in Kandy
    when the appellant's evidence is that the attacks were carried  out  by
    his three tenants in Colombo. She was entitled to find that  there  was
    no credible explanation for this inconsistency  in  the  evidence.  The
    summons refer to Chapter 15 of the Penal Code of Sri  Lanka  and  there
    was no evidence before the Judge as to  what  chapter  15  states.  The
    Judge was entitled to find that the appellant may  be  the  subject  of
    unrelated alleged criminal activity in Kandy.

18. The appellant's remaining  grounds  of  appeal  are  that  the  Judge's
    findings are flawed and unsustainable and that she has failed  to  take
    the explanations of the appellant into account. I find that  the  Judge
    considered the evidence in the round gave sustainable reasons  for  her
    finding  that  the  appellant's  evidence  is  not  credible   in   her
    determination. The Judge has given details of specific  inconsistencies
    and implausibility's in the evidence which led to the  Judge's  finding
    that the appellant's evidence was not credible and that  the  appellant
    did not leave Sri Lanka because he fears persecution  from  the  Karuna
    group. The Judge was entitled to find that it is not credible that  the
    Karuna group waited for two years before they decided to  extort  money
    from the appellant. I find that the grounds of appeal are no more  than
    a quarrel with the Judge's findings. I find that the Judge's  reasoning
    is understandable, and not perverse.

19. For each of these reasons the judge was  not  satisfied,  even  to  the
    lowest standard, that the events of  which  the  appellant  speaks  are
    credible

20. In R (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 982 Brooke LJ commented on that analysis as follows:

         "15.     It will be noticed that the Master of the Rolls  used  the
         words "vital" and "critical" as synonyms  of  the  word  "material"
         which we have used  above.  The  whole  of  his  judgment  warrants
         attention, because it reveals the anxiety of an appellate court not
         to overturn a judgment at first instance unless  it  really  cannot
         understand the original judge's thought processes when  he/she  was
         making material findings."

21. I find that I have no difficulty in understanding the reasoning in  the
    Judge's determination for why she reached her conclusions. I find  that
    the grounds of appeal and no more than a disagreement with  the  Judges
    findings of fact and the conclusions that she drew from such findings.

22. I find that no error of law has been established in Judge Ian  Howard's
    determination. I find that  she  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant is not entitled to be  recognised  as  a  refugee  or  to  be
    granted humanitarian protection in this country. I uphold the  decision
    of Judge Ian Howard.

DECISION

Appeal dismissed


                                            Dated this 6th day of March 2015
Signed by,

Mrs S Chana
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
