
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10387/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decisions and Reasons           |
|                                |Promulgated                     |
|On 10 January 2017              |On 12 January 2017              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                   Mr M N
                         (ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Bayati, Counsel
      (instructed by S Satha & Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting    Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant  appealed  with  permission  granted  on  strictly
           limited grounds by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on 30 November
           2016 against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Plumptre
           made in a decision and reasons promulgated on 7  September  2016
           which dismissed the Appellant's asylum, humanitarian  protection
           and human rights appeals.  As will be noted below, permission to
           appeal had been refused in the First-tier Tribunal.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka,  born  on  17  January
           1987.  He  had  appealed  the  Respondent's  decision  dated  18
           November 2014 to  remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom.   The
           Appellant had entered the United Kingdom on  18  September  2013
           using a false passport      The Appellant claimed asylum  on  26
           September 2013.   He stated that he  feared  to  return  to  Sri
           Lanka because of being suspected of LTTE involvement.


      3.    Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam described the grounds of  onwards
           appeal as being in the main a blatant attempt  to  re-argue  the
           case and a disagreement with the findings, very unhelpful.   The
           determination was  described  as  detailed  and  thorough,  with
           findings grounded in the evidence and adequately reasoned.   The
           judge was manifestly entitled to take into account the fact that
           the Appellant had given evidence before the TAG and to  conclude
           that speaking of traumatic events had not been as traumatic  for
           him as the medical evidence had suggested.


      4.    Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam went on to say that the judge had
           accepted that the Appellant had been arrested  and  detained  in
           2009 and that he had been visited in detention by the ICRC.  The
           fact that he had been visited by the ICRC did  not  advance  his
           case because many people were  visited  by  the  ICRC  and  such
           visits did not prove that a person was a  combatant.  The  judge
           was entitled to comment on the lack of  detail  in  the  letter.
           There was no arguable perversity.  The judge was aware that  the
           Appellant was on bail when in the insecure accommodation and did
           not proceed on the basis that he was detained in the house.  The
           judge had correctly understood the Appellant's  account,  namely
           that he was bailed after three months  in  detention  after  his
           first arrest.


      5.    The findings which the judge had made about the documents  which
           the Appellant had produced in support of his claim were open  to
           her, i.e., that the  document  issued  by  Colombo  Magistrates'
           Court contained information at odds with the  substance  of  the
           Appellant's claim.  That did not establish that  the  judge  had
           arguably misunderstood the evidence.  Nor was it  necessary  for
           the judge to identify each piece of evidence and  make  findings
           on them.  As the judge did not accept  the  Appellant's  claimed
           involvement with the LTTE, or that he was arrested for a  second
           time, the judge was entitled to conclude that the Appellant  was
           not at risk on return and was not in a risk category  identified
           in GJ (Sri Lanka) CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).


      6.    Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam stated that she  did  not  accept
           that the judge had misunderstood the evidence and  rejected  the
           assertions to such effect in the onwards grounds.  It was  clear
           that Article 8 ECHR had  not  been  pursued  at  the  First-tier
           Tribunal hearing.


      7.    The sole point which Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam permitted to
           go forward related to the Home Office's DVR dated  6  June  2016
           relating to the alleged  police  message.   The  Respondent  had
           indicated that the  author  of  the  report  had  contacted  the
           officer in charge of the police station, who had stated that  no
           messages could have been received or sent by the police  station
           on 21 February 2012, because the station was  not  opened  until
           May 2012.   The  issue  raised  at  the  hearing  was  that  the
           Respondent had breached confidentiality by giving  full  details
           of his name when  seeking  verification  even  though  the  Home
           Office  had  a  duty  not  to  release  information  that  would
           incriminate an asylum seeker.  It was arguable  that  the  judge
           made no finding on the issue. Whether or not there were an error
           of law on this point did not have any  material  impact  on  the
           judge's findings in respect of credibility, but it might be that
           risk on return  needed  to  be  reconsidered.   Judge  McWilliam
           stated that it was expected that the  parties  would  produce  a
           copy of the DVR and  that  the  Respondent  would  give  a  full
           account of the communication and confirm whether the Appellant's
           identity was revealed.


      8.    The Respondent filed notice under rule 24 dated 19 December 2016
           indicating that the appeal  was  opposed.  The  judge  had  made
           adequate findings of fact supported by  adequate  reasons.   The
           DVR had been considered at [30] and [31]  of  the  decision  and
           reasons.  Further findings had been made about  the  Appellant's
           documents at [65] to [71].


      9.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal  and  the  appeal
           was listed for adjudication  of  whether  or  not  there  was  a
           material error of law.




      Submissions


      10.   Ms Bayati for the Appellant relied on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal and on the grant of permission to  appeal  by  the  Upper
           Tribunal.  The DVR was produced for the  tribunal's  inspection.
           The application to verify some of the Appellant's documents  had
           come from the Home Office  but  had  not  been  opposed  by  the
           Appellant's solicitors as verification had potential  to  assist
           the Appellant.   Hence  the  judge's  reference  to  unfortunate
           repeated adjournments, which had  been  caused  by  Home  Office
           delays.  Counsel submitted in summary that it had not been clear
           what information had been provided when the  checks  were  done.
           The Magistrates Court record had not been verified.  All of this
           amounted to an  obvious  breach  of  confidentiality  which  had
           placed the Appellant at risk on return.  The  appeal  should  be
           allowed and the decision remade in  the  Appellant's  favour  on
           that basis, given the elements of his account  which  the  judge
           had accepted.


      11.   Mr Avery for Respondent also produced a copy of the  DVR.   Only
           one document could be checked, as it was  not  policy  to  check
           court records and the  other  document  provided  had  not  been
           legible.  The work was undertaken by RALON on the Home  Office's
           behalf and no personal information was released.  The results of
           the DVR were clear: the police station which the  Appellant  had
           alleged sent the message was not open at the time.  The document
           was not genuine.  There was nothing which could have placed  the
           Appellant at risk on any basis as the result  of  the  enquiries
           made since he was of no interest to the authorities for  any  of
           the reasons he had claimed.  The decision and reasons  disclosed
           no error of law and should stand.


      12.   Ms Bayati in reply submitted that insufficient information about
           the DVR process had been provided by the  Home  Office  to  show
           that the Appellant had not  been  put  at  risk.   It  had  been
           accepted by the First-tier Tribunal judge that the Appellant had
           given evidence to the TAG.  He had been identified  as  an  LTTE
           supporter.  The Home Office accepted as of August 2016 that past
           historical inks could be a risk factor, which was  post  GJ  (as
           above).  The appeal should be allowed.








      No material error of law


      13.   At the conclusion of submissions the tribunal indicated that  it
           found that there was no material error of law and  that  reasons
           would be contained in a reserved determination, as follows.


      14.   Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam provided a comprehensive decision
           on in response to the very lengthy onwards  grounds  of  appeal,
           which response has already been set out above and  which  it  is
           not necessary to repeat here.  It is also useful to recall Upper
           Tribunal Judge Martin's conclusions when refusing permission  to
           appeal in the First-tier Tribunal:


            "The decision and reasons is a detailed and thorough  assessment
           of the Appellant's claim.  The judge was careful  to  point  out
           that she made no findings based on the Appellant's inability  to
           give oral evidence.  The judge was entitled to  express  concern
           that she was being told that the Appellant was  too  traumatised
           and frightened to give an account of his  mistreatment  when  he
           had done so in late 2015 to the TAG.


            "The judge found for detailed reasons  that  the  Appellant  had
           been detained in 2009 but had not been detained and  ill-treated
           in 2013 as claimed.  She found that even if he had  been  forced
           to work for the LTTE he would no longer be at risk.


            "Despite the length of the grounds, the Appellant's  claim  does
           not come close to placing him in any of the risk  categories  in
           GJ (as above).  There was  nothing  else  about  this  Appellant
           which from that source.  Indeed, despite the defeat of the  LTTE
           on 17 May 2009, soon  to  become  8  years  ago,  asylum  claims
           continue to be made in the  United  Kingdom  in  what  might  be
           thought to be surprising numbers.  Some claims are recognised as
           well founded by the Home Office and  hence  are  never  seen  on
           appeal, so that judges see only the contested claims which as  a
           group are likely to be much weaker.  It is beyond  dispute  that
           Sri Lanka is an endemically corrupt country with  low  standards
           in public life.  False official documents are readily available,
           as the "police message" produced in present appeal  illustrates.
           The DVR showed it to be false  but  Judge  Plumptre  gave  other
           sustainable reasons for rejecting its reliability.  There was no
           evidence produced to the judge to show that  the  Appellant  had
           been somehow put at risk because of RALON's enquiry process.  It
           was simply an inference which she was in effect invited to draw,
           and declined to do.


      15.   It is possibly too trite to say, but  asylum  claimants  in  the
           United Kingdom have little or nothing to lose from pursuing  the
           process as far as they can.  The worst that can happen  is  that
           they might be returned to their home country at  no  expense  to
           themselves at the end of what is all too often a long drawn  out
           appeals process, during which time they  are  supported  by  the
           state if unable to work.  Establishing the truth of a claim  (or
           rather, the level of  risk  on  return  to  the  standard  of  a
           reasonable  likelihood)  can  often  be  a  difficult   process.
           Technicalities  are  frequently  urged  on  appellants'  behalf,
           rather than a frank and realistic evaluation of the merits.


      16.   Experienced First-tier Tribunal judges such  as  Judge  Plumptre
           would be expected to recognise certain over familiar elements to
           an appeal such as that advanced by  the  present  Appellant,  of
           which post asylum interview inability to give evidence based  on
           a recently obtained medical report is but  one.   Despite  those
           familiar  and  unpromising  elements  noted  above,  the   judge
           examined the case put forward by the  Appellant  in  the  round,
           with evident anxious scrutiny.  The tribunal considers that  the
           police message and the other documents produced by the Appellant
           were examined by the First-tier Tribunal judge (see [28],  [30],
           [31], [65] to [71] of the decision) and full and proper  reasons
           were  given  for  finding  that  the  police  message  form  was
           unreliable.   The  only  matter  which  Upper   Tribunal   Judge
           McWilliam considered justified a grant of permission  to  appeal
           was the potential effect of the DVR enquiries.


      17.   The explanation of the steps taken by the Home Office to  verify
           that police message were given by  Mr  Avery  and  the  tribunal
           considers that the explanation provided shows conclusively  that
           appropriate safeguards were taken to avoid placing the Appellant
           at risk.  The verification process (which the  Home  Office  are
           under no obligation to undertake) is well  established  for  Sri
           Lanka and it  is  frankly  absurd  to  suggest  that  additional
           grounds of claim would be generated by revealing the Appellant's
           identity. Data protection is these days something of an official
           obsession and is the subject of extensive  regulation.  That  no
           doubt is behind the  policy  in  relation  to  court  documents.
           Moreover, and above all, as Mr Avery submitted,  the  judge  had
           found for sustainable reasons that the Appellant had long ceased
           to be of any interest to the Sri Lanka authorities: see [73]  to
           [78], and [81] onwards of the decision and reasons.  An  enquiry
           as here made without revealing the Appellant's  identity  cannot
           have placed him at risk and the judge was  right  not  to  infer
           that it might have done in  the  absence  of  positive  evidence
           suggesting otherwise.


      18.   The "historical interest" point which Ms Bayati, ever seeking to
           reargue the entire appeal, sought to raise takes  the  claim  no
           further.  The judge found that any  interest  in  the  Appellant
           ceased in 2009 and that all claims of subsequent interest in him
           by the authorities were in effect a fabrication: see [90] of the
           decision and reasons. The judge's decision was  a  comprehensive
           reflection on the various issues raised in  the  appeal.   There
           was no material error of law in relation to the DVR or any other
           matter.  There was no further real risk to the Appellant  caused
           or created by the Respondent in relation to the  enquiries  made
           about the  police  message  document  in  Sri  Lanka,  the  only
           document  in  fact  investigated.   There  is   no   basis   for
           interfering with the judge's decision to dismiss the Appellant's
           appeal, which dismissal must stand.




      DECISION


      The tribunal finds that there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
original    decision, which stands unchanged




      Signed                                  Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell

