
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/10992/2015
                                                               AA/10985/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th May 2016                     |On 7th June 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                    APDS
                                     PSR
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr V P Lingajothy, Counsel instructed by Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka and are husband and wife.  The
    second Appellant is the dependant of the first and his  appeal  depends
    on whether the first Appellant succeeds in  her  claim  for  asylum.  I
    shall  therefore  refer  to  the  first  Appellant  as  the   Appellant
    throughout.

2.   The Appellant was born on 21st October 1976.  Her  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent to remove her from the  UK  and  refuse  her
    asylum claim was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Bowler  in  a
    decision promulgated on 15th March 2016.

3.   The Appellant came to the UK on 11th July 2011 on a  Tier  4  (General)
    student dependent partner visa, her husband having come to  the  UK  in
    March 2011 on a student visa.  The Appellant's leave was  extended  and
    an application for leave  as  an  extended  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national was refused.  On 23rd  January  2015,  the  Appellant  claimed
    asylum and attended a screening interview.  She was served with removal
    directions as an overstayer.

4.   The Appellant attended the first appeal hearing on 30th November  2015,
    but this was adjourned to enable the  Appellant  to  obtain  a  medical
    report from the Medical Foundation. The hearing was adjourned  to  25th
    February 2016 on the basis that the report  would  be  ready  for  16th
    January 2016.  When the matter came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Bowler the medical report was not available.   The  judge  refused  the
    application for the adjournment on the basis that the Appellant had had
    plenty of time to obtain the report and it was clear from  the  Medical
    Foundation's letter that the delay was caused at least in part  by  the
    Appellant's representatives.

5.   The judge stated at paragraph 13: "In any event a medical report  about
    the alleged ill-treatment of the Appellant in Sri Lanka and  its  after
    effects was not the determining factor in this case."  The judge stated
    that if she concluded that the Appellant had been ill-treated she would
    have to apply the country guidance case of GJ [2013] UKUT  319  and  MP
    [2014] EWCA Civ 829 in any event.

6.   The judge heard evidence from the Appellant  and  found  that  she  was
    generally credible about her detention and ill-treatment in Sri  Lanka,
    in spite of the delay in making  her  asylum  application  and  certain
    minor inconsistencies. The judge  gave  several  reasons  for  why  she
    accepted the Appellant's general credibility.

7.   The judge found that since the Appellant left  Sri  Lanka  her  parents
    had not had any problems with the authorities. The Appellant  left  Sri
    Lanka in July 2011 and her parents were visited by the  authorities  in
    September 2011, but they had not been threatened and  no  threats  have
    been made in relation to the Appellant after her departure for the UK.

8.   The judge found the Appellant's evidence  in  relation  to  the  arrest
    warrant to be insufficient to show that one had in  fact  been  issued.
    There was no mention of an arrest warrant when the authorities  visited
    the Appellant's parents in 2011 and the Appellant was assuming that one
    had in fact been issued.

9.   The judge considered the country  guidance  cases  of  GJ  and  MP  and
    concluded that the risk categories which were potentially  relevant  to
    the Appellant were:

         "(7)(a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to
                the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single  state  because  they
                are, or are perceived to have a significant role in relation
                to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or
                a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka; and

         (7)(d)   A person whose name appears on a computerised 'stop'  list
                accessible at  the  airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                against whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on  a  'stop'  list
                will be stopped at  the  airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                appropriate Sri Lankan authorities,  in  pursuance  of  such
                order or warrant."

10.   The  judge  considered  whether  the  Appellant's  activities  may  be
    expected to have led her to be placed on a watch list  or  whether  the
    activities were sufficient for her to fall within paragraph (7)(a). She
    made the following findings:

         "45. [The] Appellant claims that she was told by her  parents  that
             she is on the 'stop list'. This was apparently on the basis of
             someone else telling her parents that. Even applying the lower
             test of proof I find that this assertion  is  insufficient  to
             find that the Appellant is on the stop list.  She said at  her
             asylum interview that she thinks there is  an  arrest  warrant
             for her because she has left the country and therefore  broken
             the terms of her release, but I have found above that there is
             insufficient evidence to find that an arrest warrant has  been
             issued. Her parents have not been visited by  the  authorities
             since September 2011. She managed to leave the country without
             any problems despite using her  own  passport.  That  was  six
             months after leaving detention, plenty of time for her name to
             be on a stop list at the airport as  someone  who  should  not
             leave the country, yet she managed to travel without  problem.
             Even if she was not on a list of people who should be  stopped
             from leaving the country, there  is  little  evidence  of  the
             authorities actively looking  for  her  after  she  failed  to
             report to the police station.  I  therefore  find  that  [the]
             Appellant is not on a stop list.

         46.  [The] Appellant was not involved herself in Tamil  separatism.
             Her only link was via her boyfriend whom she stopped seeing in
             2008 and lost contact with shortly after. I  find  that  [the]
             Appellant does not  have  'elaborate  links'  with  the  LTTE.
             Neither she nor her family have been members of  the  LTTE  or
             otherwise directly involved with the  LTTE.   This  is  not  a
             person with high level involvement. [The]  Appellant  has  not
             provided evidence that Siva was a  significant  figure  within
             the LTTE and the Appellant did not know what Siva did for  the
             LTTE and I find that Siva knew about a bombing  and  therefore
             warned the Appellant not to go out but  that  is  insufficient
             for me to find that Siva was a significant figure  within  the
             LTTE.

         47.  In the UK I find that the Appellant has not been  involved  in
             any diaspora activities. She attended one Heroes Day event  in
             November 2015.  She said that this was just to watch  and  she
             was not involved in the events. I find that attendance at  one
             such event is insufficient to constitute activity likely to be
             perceived by the Sri Lankan government as activity threatening
             the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state.

         48.  I recognise  that  following  the  analysis  in  MP,  diaspora
             activities are not a prerequisite of risk, but that  is  where
             there  is  other  evidence  showing  particular  grounds   for
             concluding that the Sri Lankan  government  might  regard  the
             Appellant as posing a current threat to the integrity  of  Sri
             Lanka as a single state. There is no  such  evidence  in  this
             case. Mr Lingajothy submitted that the fact that the Appellant
             is Sinhalese means that because of  her  previous  involvement
             with an LTTE member she would be seen as a threat as the  LTTE
             would need Sinhalese  help  if  they  were  to  restart  their
             activities.  This is highly speculative  and  the  Appellant's
             limited links to the LTTE via Siva ended in 2008. I find  that
             the fact that she is a Sinhalese person who previously  worked
             for the government and who had a  relationship  with  a  Tamil
             involved with the LTTE in 2008  is  insufficient  to  conclude
             that the Sri Lankan government might regard the  Appellant  as
             posing a current threat to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka  as  a
             single state.

         49.  I have considered whether the Appellant would be at risk as  a
             result of failing to comply with the terms of her  release  in
             2011. However, the Appellant confirmed that  the  release  was
             unofficial. Given the lack of interest in  her  shown  by  the
             authorities and the unofficial nature of the release  terms  I
             find there is insufficient likelihood (even applying the lower
             burden of proof) that she would be at  real  risk  five  years
             after the release if she returns to Sri Lanka.

         50.  I  have  considered  whether  the  Appellant  is  entitled  to
             protection  under  the  ECHR  as  a  result  of  her   medical
             conditions now. She is not receiving any treatment in  the  UK
             for medical problems.  Her physical problems are described  by
             her as joint pain,  headaches,  vomiting,  dizziness,  hearing
             loss in her right ear and problems with her  right  eye.   She
             treats her pain by  taking  paracetamol  which  she  buys  for
             herself. There is no evidence of mental health needs.  It  may
             be that such evidence would have been provided by the  Medical
             Foundation  report.   However,  the  Appellant  has  seen  the
             Medical Foundation at least twice  with  the  first  visit  in
             October 2015 and  another  in  December  2015.   There  is  no
             evidence that the Medical Foundation concluded that her mental
             health was so impaired that she required medical attention.  I
             would expect that if she had been assessed as  needing  mental
             health  treatment  because  of  suicidal  ideation  or   other
             significant mental  health  problems  the  Medical  Foundation
             would have referred her for such treatment, or it  would  have
             been recommended, before the report  was  finalised  and  this
             information would have been available at the hearing."

11.  The Appellant appealed on five grounds:

    (i)  The  judge  should  have  adjourned  the  hearing  to  enable  the
         Appellant to submit  the  medical  report  and  it  was  unfair  to
         continue the hearing given that such a report would have been ready
         a couple of months later;

    (ii) There was evidence to show that the Appellant was currently wanted
         by the  authorities  given  that  her  house  was  visited  by  the
         authorities, who were looking for her. The judge accepted that  the
         Appellant  had  been  detained  and  ill-treated   and   that   the
         authorities  had  looked  for  her  after  she  left   Sri   Lanka.
         Therefore, there was a presumption in favour of the Appellant  that
         the authorities when searching for her had arrived at her home with
         an arrest warrant;

    (iii)    The Appellant was able to travel to  Colombo  Airport  without
         incident because it was well-known that this could be done  through
         an agent without immigration officials. The fact that the Appellant
         was able to leave Sri Lanka without difficulty or incident was  not
         probative of a lack of adverse interest in her;

    (iv) Bribery and corruption amongst Sri Lankan officials was widespread
         and having accepted the Appellant's detention, torture and rape  it
         was incumbent on the judge to find that the authorities would  have
         an adverse interest in the Appellant. The Appellant's detention  in
         Sri Lanka would have been recorded and therefore  if  returned  she
         would be of adverse interest and it was highly likely she would  be
         detained and tortured.  Because every  detention  is  recorded  the
         Appellant's details  would  be  known  to  the  authorities  as  an
         absconder and therefore she would appear on a stop  list  or  watch
         list:

    (v)  The Appellant does not need to be a high profile LTTE activist  or
         member to be at risk on return because the procedure at the airport
         even if the Appellant was not on the stop list did  not  reduce  or
         eradicate the risk of harm because the authorities were  interested
         in the Appellant or would become interested in  her  when  she  was
         returned as a failed asylum seeker.  If she was not arrested at the
         airport it was likely that she would be arrested because she had to
         verify her arrival with the CID or the police in her own home area.

12.  In summary, the Appellant fell within the risk  categories  of  GJ  and
    there was a reasonable degree of likelihood that she was  on  the  stop
    list because there would be a record of her previous detention and ill-
    treatment and the fact that she had absconded.

13.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McDade
    on 7th April 2016 on the ground that it was  arguable  that  the  judge
    should not have proceeded with the hearing in the absence of a  medical
    report from the Medical Foundation because the  Appellant  stated  that
    she  was  suffering   from   serious   medical   conditions   including
    psychological conditions and that a finding or otherwise in this regard
    would impact upon the weight that could be  given  to  the  Appellant's
    evidence at the hearing. The lack of a medical report may have been the
    fault of  the  legal  representatives  but  was  not  a  fault  of  the
    Appellant, who should not be prejudiced as a result.

14.  Mr Lingajothy submitted that the medical report went into great  detail
    about the Appellant's mistreatment, in particular the fact that she had
    been raped on several occasions. There was also a  clear  diagnosis  of
    PTSD, depression  and  suicidal  ideation.  The  medical  evidence  was
    relevant to the extent of the mistreatment the Appellant  had  suffered
    and this was relevant to whether the authorities would have a continued
    interest her. If a person was perceived as acting against Sri Lanka  or
    a high profile member of the LTTE then she would fall within one of the
    risk categories in GJ.

15.  The medical evidence was relevant to the judge's findings at  paragraph
    45 and 48.  The type of torture was indicative of the perception of the
    regime, namely the Appellant  was  severely  tortured  and  accused  of
    breastfeeding the Tamil Tigers.  Therefore, they perceived her to  have
    some high level involvement with the  LTTE  which  would  make  her  of
    interest on return to Sri Lanka.

16.  The medical history set out  at  paragraph  9  of  the  medical  report
    clearly showed that the Appellant was  not  a  low  level  member.  The
    judge's finding at 48 was unsafe because, from the ill-treatment  meted
    out by the authorities, it was clear  that  there  was  such  animosity
    towards the Appellant that they were certain she was involved with  the
    LTTE. The treatment the  Appellant  received  in  detention,  which  is
    disclosed in the medical report, shows that the Appellant is  perceived
    to be a high profile member of the LTTE and therefore she would  be  of
    interest if returned. She came within risk category (7)(d) of GJ. There
    would be a record of the Appellant's detention and therefore there  was
    a reasonable degree of likelihood that she would be  on  some  form  of
    'stop' or 'watch' list.

17.  Further, the medical report was relevant to the judge's  assessment  of
    her current mental and physical wellbeing. The  judge's  findings  were
    not open to her given the material in the medical report and the  judge
    had acted unfairly in failing to adjourn  the  hearing  to  enable  the
    Appellant to submit such a report.

18.  Mr Tufan submitted that the medical report did  not  take  matters  any
    further because the judge  accepted  the  Appellant's  account  in  its
    entirely.  The  submission  that  the  Appellant's  ill-treatment   was
    proportionate to her perceived LTTE  activity  was  misconceived.  Ill-
    treatment depended on the mind-set of the perpetrator. The  Appellant's
    connection to the LTTE was through a Tamil  boyfriend  which  ended  in
    2008.

19.  Risk category (7)(d)  of  GJ  was  qualified  by  paragraph  (9)  which
    stated:

         "The authorities maintain a computerised  intelligence-led  'watch'
         list.  A person whose  name  appears  on  a  'watch'  list  is  not
         reasonably likely to  be  detained  at  the  airport  but  will  be
         monitored by the security services after his  or  her  return.   If
         that monitoring does not indicate that such a  person  is  a  Tamil
         activist working to destabilise the unitary  Sri  Lankan  state  or
         revive the internal armed conflict, the individual in  question  is
         not, in general, reasonably likely to be detained by  the  security
         forces. That will be a question of fact in each case, dependent  on
         any diaspora activities carried out by such an individual."

20.  The Appellant had come to the UK as a Tier 4 Student dependant and  she
    had later  claimed  asylum.   She  had  failed  to  produce  sufficient
    evidence that she was on a 'stop' list  and  the  judge's  findings  at
    paragraph 45 were not irrational. There was no material error of law.

21.  In response, Mr Lingajothy submitted that,  had  the  judge  known  the
    level of torture the Appellant had experienced,  the  judge  would  not
    have come to the conclusion that she was not  on  a  'stop'  list.  The
    medical evidence was highly relevant to the risk on return and enhanced
    the Appellant's case. There  would  be  a  record  of  the  Appellant's
    detention and ill-treatment on two occasions and this was sufficient to
    satisfy paragraph (7)(d) of  GJ.  There  was  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that she was on a 'stop' list.



Discussion and Conclusion

22.  The judge found that the Appellant was arrested and  severely  tortured
    by the Sri Lankan authorities on two occasions in 2009/2010  and  after
    she returned from India in 2010/2011.  The Appellant was released  from
    detention on payment of a bribe and she left Sri  Lanka  in  July  2011
    using her own passport.  Her travel had been arranged by an  agent  who
    had prepared her visa application and accompanied her to  the  airport.
    The agent had spoken to people at  checkpoints  and  they  allowed  her
    through having checked  her  passport.  The  Appellant's  parents  were
    visited by the authorities in September 2011.

23.  The Appellant was arrested  and  detained  because  her  boyfriend  was
    involved in Tamil separatism. Neither the Appellant nor her family were
    involved and the Appellant did not have elaborate links  to  the  LTTE.
    Her boyfriend was not a high level member even though he knew  about  a
    bombing and had warned the  Appellant  about  it.  However,  there  was
    insufficient  evidence  before  the  judge  to  show  that  he  was   a
    significant figure. The Appellant had not been involved in any diaspora
    activities and had attended Heroes Day just to watch the events.

Ground 1

24.  The Judge accepted the Appellant's account that she had  been  detained
    and ill-treated. The medical evidence showed that her scars were highly
    consistent or consistent with the ill-treatment  she  described.  Given
    the judge's acceptance that the Appellant was detained and  ill-treated
    on two occasions the medical report in that respect  takes  matters  no
    further.

25.  There is also a portion of the medical  report  which  deals  with  the
    interpretation of  psychological  evidence.  The  Appellant's  evidence
    before the judge was that she was not receiving treatment  because  she
    did not want to tell the doctor about her problems in the past.

26.  The  medical  report  from  the  Medical  Foundation  states  that  the
    Appellant's symptoms confirm a diagnosis of severe depression  and  her
    GP had recently commenced the Appellant on anti-depressants. There were
    also symptoms congruent  with  a  diagnosis  of  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder and that the Appellant's suicidal ideation  was  a  matter  to
    monitor should she be removed, but that she had not made any  plans  or
    suicidal attempts.

27.  Given the information in the medical report, the  judge's  decision  to
    continue with the hearing without the report was not unfair. The  judge
    accepted  the  Appellant's  claim  at  its  highest  and  accepted  her
    detention and ill-treatment.  There was nothing  in  the  report  which
    would have altered the judge's finding in that respect.

28.  Mr Lingajothy submits that the report would have been relevant  to  the
    judge's assessment of risk on  return  because,  had  the  judge  fully
    appreciated the  serious  level  of  ill-treatment  the  Appellant  had
    suffered, which she disclosed in the report in great detail, the  judge
    would have made a finding that she  was  of  adverse  interest  to  the
    authorities. I am not persuaded by this submission. It does not  follow
    that the level of ill-treatment was  proportionate  to  any  continuing
    adverse interest in the Appellant.

29.  In relation to the Appellant's physical and  mental  wellbeing,  again,
    there was nothing in the report which would render the judge's  finding
    at paragraph 50 unsafe, namely that the Appellant was not  entitled  to
    protection on ECHR grounds as a result of her medical  conditions.  The
    fact that she suffered from depression and PTSD and had  some  suicidal
    ideation was insufficient to engage Articles 3 or 8.

30.  Accordingly, I find  that  there  was  no  unfairness  in  the  judge's
    refusal to adjourn the hearing in order for the Appellant to  submit  a
    medical  report.  Having  accepted   the   Appellant's   account,   the
    Appellant's current mental state would not put her at  risk  and  there
    was nothing in the medical report that supported her  claim  to  be  of
    adverse interest to the authorities or to be on a  'watch'  list.   The
    level of ill-treatment was not indicative of  any  future  interest  on
    return.

Ground 2

31.  Ground 2 is  misconceived  and  amounts  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's findings which were open to her. The  judge's  conclusion  that
    the Appellant's evidence of an arrest warrant was insufficient to  show
    that one had in fact been issued was open to her on the  evidence.  The
    fact that she had been detained and ill-treated did not give rise to  a
    presumption that the authorities would come searching for  her  at  her
    home and therefore an  arrest  warrant  would  have  been  issued.  The
    evidence which was before the judge was that  the  authorities  visited
    the Appellant's parents in 2011.  There was no arguable error of law in
    the judge's finding that the Appellant had failed to  show  that  there
    was an outstanding arrest warrant.

Ground 3

32.  Although it is possible to leave Sri Lanka  through  official  channels
    on payment of a bribe, that was not in fact the  Appellant's  evidence.
    The Appellant stated that she had left Sri Lanka with the assistance of
    an agent who prepared her visa application and accompanied her  to  the
    airport. The agent had spoken to people at checkpoints and she had been
    allowed through using her own passport with a visa obtained in her  own
    name.

33.  Accordingly, although leaving  Sri  Lanka  without  any  difficulty  or
    incident was not necessarily probative of a lack of  adverse  interest,
    the judge's finding that looking at the evidence as a whole, there  was
    no interest in the Appellant was a finding which was open to the  judge
    on the evidence before her.  There was no  material  error  of  law  in
    relation to the judge's finding that the Appellant was of  no  interest
    to the authorities when she left Sri Lanka in July 2011.

34.  The judge accepted that the Appellant  was  detained  and  ill-treated.
    There was also evidence that there  would  be  a  record  of  any  such
    detention, but this did not necessarily lead  to  a  finding  that  the
    Appellant would be at  risk  on  return.   The  judge  was  obliged  to
    consider the country guidance and the risk categories set out in GJ, in
    particular paragraph (7) (d) in respect of this Appellant.   The  judge
    specifically dealt with  whether  there  was  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that the Appellant was on a 'stop' list and, for the reasons
    she gave at paragraph 45, she concluded that there  were  not.  I  find
    that the judge's findings at paragraph 45  were  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence before  her  and  she  has  given  adequate  reasons  for  her
    conclusion that there was little evidence of  the  authorities  looking
    for the Appellant after she failed to report  to  the  police  station.
    Further, there was insufficient evidence to find that an arrest warrant
    had been issued and therefore she did not accept that the Appellant was
    on a 'stop' list.

35.  The Appellant's involvement with the LTTE was not  sufficient  to  show
    that she would be  perceived  as  someone  who  was  a  threat  to  the
    integrity of Sri Lanka or perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
    relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism. She had not taken  part  in
    any significant activities  since  she  left  Sri  Lanka  and  although
    returning as a failed asylum seeker, there  was  nothing  in  the  risk
    categories set out in GJ which would indicate she would be at  risk  on
    return.  There is no arguable error of law in the judge's  findings  at
    paragraph 48.

Ground 5

36.  Ground 5 submits that, even if the Appellant was  not  a  high  profile
    LTTE activist or member, and even if she was not on a 'stop' list, then
    she would be at risk on return because all those returning to Sri Lanka
    were likely to be detained at the airport or  shortly  thereafter  when
    they registered with the authorities. There would be a  record  of  her
    previous detention and  severe  ill-treatment  which  would  result  in
    further detention and torture on return.

37.  I find that the final ground is not made out and  is  contrary  to  the
    country guidance case of GJ.  It is not sufficient for the Appellant to
    establish the risk on return on the basis of previous detention and ill-
    treatment. According to GJ there had to be something  more  than  that,
    either a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka or  evidence  that  there
    was an outstanding arrest warrant or that an individual's name appeared
    on a 'stop' list.

Summary

38.  The judge's factual findings were open to her on  the  evidence  before
    her. The judge properly applied the country guidance cases of GJ and MP
    to the facts as she found them. I conclude that there was  no  arguable
    error of law in the decision dated  15th  March  2016.   Accordingly  I
    dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 27th May 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 27th May 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
