

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/10849/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at:  Field House                   |  Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th June 2016                        |  On 27th July 2016               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                     AD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Yeo, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
                       Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Zimbabwe born in 1982. He is subject to
    a Deportation Order and as such would not ordinarily  benefit  from  an
    order for anonymity.  This case does however involve minor children and
    having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity
    Orders I consider it appropriate to make  an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Matters in Issue


 2. The Respondent came to the United Kingdom in 2002 with valid  leave  to
    enter as a visitor.  He was subsequently granted leave to remain  as  a
    student until the 30th August 2004. He has had not  had  any  leave  to
    remain since then.  On the 5th January 2004 he was convicted of driving
    a motor vehicle without insurance, of drink-driving and  a  minor  road
    traffic offence. In the four years which followed  the  Respondent  was
    convicted, in a further six court appearances, of  at  least  11  other
    offences, almost all of which arose from his apparent inability to stay
    away from cars. He was successively and repeatedly convicted of driving
    whilst uninsured, drunk and disqualified.   Over a period of five years
    he received an aggregate sentence of over 15 months imprisonment.  This
    behaviour prompted the Secretary of State to issue, on  the  11th  June
    2008,   a  notice  informing  the  Respondent  of  his  liability   for
    deportation.  The Respondent claimed asylum but by the 30th April  2009
    this claim had been refused, he had lost his appeal and the deportation
    order had been signed.

 3. The Respondent was not deported.   On  the  10th  August  2010  he  was
    granted permission to work. He made a series of representations  during
    the course of 2011 and 2012;  these were not addressed until  the  20th
    November 2014  when  the  Secretary  of  State  decided  to  treat  the
    representations as a fresh claim  and  an  application  to  revoke  the
    Deportation Order. Both applications were refused and the decision  was
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The Respondent's case before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  the
    Deportation Order should be revoked. He  put  forward  two  alternative
    cases as to why. First,   he  relied  upon  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ('the Regs'). He submitted that he  was
    in a durable relationship with an EEA national and that the decision to
    remove him had therefore to be considered under Regulations 19  and  21
    of the Regs. In the alternative he submitted that his appeal should  be
    allowed with reference to Article 8 ECHR;  in  this  regard  he  relied
    primarily on his relationship with his  three  minor  children  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal  allowed  the  appeal  on  both  grounds.   The
    Secretary of State  now  has  permission  to  appeal.  In  a  grant  of
    permission dated 28th April  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davidge
    considered it arguable that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains the following errors of law:

              i) It was not  open  to  the  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appeal
                 'outright' under the Regs. If the  Tribunal  was  satisfied
                 that AD was in a durable relationship with an EEA  national
                 the proper course should have been for  the  matter  to  be
                 remitted to the  Secretary  of  State  so  that  she  could
                 consider how to exercise her  discretion  under  Regulation
                 17(4). Reliance is  placed  on  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -  meaning)
                 Nigeria [2011] UKUT 340.


             ii) The findings on Regulation 21  are  inadequately  reasoned.
                 It is alleged that the  Tribunal  improperly  narrowed  its
                 assessment to whether there was a risk of reoffending.

            iii) In respect of Article  8  the  determination  contains  two
                 discrete errors. First it is submitted  that  the  Tribunal
                 was  wrong  in  law  to  have  found  that  AD  was  not  a
                 "persistent offender" and  therefore  a  foreign  criminal.
                 Second, the Tribunal erred in applying section  117B(6)  of
                 the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 since that
                 section did not apply to person subject to deportation.


      My Findings

      The EEA grounds

 6. Mr Yeo for the Respondent accepted that the broad point made in  Ground
    (i) was a good one. The finding that AD was an extended  family  member
    under the terms of Regulation 8 could only have led to the matter being
    'remitted' to the Secretary of State in order  that  she  exercise  her
    discretion under Regulation 17(4).  He did  not  believe  however  that
    there was any error in the determination  concluding  simply  with  the
    words "this appeal is allowed". It was plain from  the  foregoing  text
    what that meant. It was up to the Secretary of State what she wanted to
    do upon receipt of the determination.  For the sake  of  clarity  I  am
    satisfied that Ground 1 is made out. The clear findings that AD  is  an
    extended family member are preserved and the appeal is allowed  as  the
    decision was "not in accordance with the law".


 7. In respect of ground (ii) Mr Yeo argued that there  was  nothing  wrong
    with the reasoning on Regulation 21. He submitted that the decision  to
    maintain the  Deportation  Order  could  not  be  sustained  under  the
    Regulations.


 8. The legal framework for the deportation  of  EEA  nationals  and  their
    family members is set out at Regulation 19(3)(b) of the Regs. A  person
    who has acquired a right to reside in the United Kingdom may be removed
    if the Secretary of State has decided that his removal is justified  on
    the grounds of public policy,  public  security  or  public  health  in
    accordance with Regulation 21. The  relevant  parts  of  Regulation  21
    read:


         Decisions taken on public policy, public security and public health
         grounds

         This section has no associated Explanatory Memorandum
           21.-(1) In this regulation a "relevant decision"  means  an  EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
         public health.

           (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

           ....

           (5) Where a relevant decision is  taken  on  grounds  of  public
         policy or public security it shall, in addition to  complying  with
         the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken in accordance
         with the following principles-

         (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

         (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct
         of the person concerned;

         (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must represent a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of
         the fundamental interests of society;

         (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
         relate to considerations of general prevention do not justify the
         decision;

         (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions do not in themselves
         justify the decision.

         (6) Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
         in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin.


 9. The First-tier Tribunal found as fact that this was a man who was in  a
    durable relationship with an EEA national. His  partner  is  exercising
    treaty rights. They both make "strenuous efforts" to  maintain  regular
    contact with AD's three children who live a short  distance  away  from
    their home in the south of England. The children see them at least once
    each week and stay with them on alternate weekends.  AD enjoys  a  good
    relationship with the  children's  mother  who  gave  evidence  on  his
    behalf. She was "very emotional" and  "genuinely  concerned  about  the
    impact that his deportation would have on the children.  She  described
    AD as a "good father".  One of the  children  is  unwell  and  requires
    regular hospital visits.  Against these matters was the  fact  that  AD
    had been convicted of numerous criminal offences,  some  of  which  had
    resulted in custodial sentences.  In  addition  to  the  motor  vehicle
    related charges he had also been convicted of common  assault  in  2013
    and had been fined �160.  As to this offending behaviour  the  Tribunal
    found AD to have been "frank and honest in his assessment  of  his  own
    previous conduct and he admitted that he was young  and  moving  around
    with the wrong people at the time and this led him to his convictions".
     Having weighed those matters in the balance the Tribunal found that it
    was "not of the view that the appellant's continuing presence  in  this
    country constitutes a serious threat to society" and that "there  is  a
    low risk of the appellant re-offending in the  future  on  balance  and
    deportation would not be justified".  Those findings seem to me  to  be
    perfectly clear,  and  sustainable.  The  Tribunal  did  not  base  its
    assessment simply on the (uncontested) finding that  there  was  a  low
    risk of re-offending. It conducted a  holistic  evaluation  of  all  of
    these relevant factors, all obviously pertinent given the framework  in
    Regulation 21.


10. The Tribunal's reasoning on Regulations 19 and 21 is therefore  upheld.
    It is now for the Secretary of State to consider  those  findings.  The
    'EEA' decision is remade to that extent only.



    Article 8

11. The question of Article 8 is not so  straightforward.  Mr  Yeo  accepts
    that it was a clear error of law for the Tribunal to invoke, as it does
    at paragraph 23, section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act,  a  sub-section  that
    expressly does  not  apply  to  persons  subject  to  deportation.  The
    Tribunal can perhaps be forgiven for being led astray by AD's  skeleton
    argument which wrongly relies on that provision and the decision of the
    President,  McCloskey J in Treebhowan v SSHD (section  117B(6))  [2015]
    UKUT 674 (IAC), but in any  event  it  was  a  misdirection.   Mr   Yeo
    submits however, that any error is not material: that  is  because,  on
    any analysis, this  appeal  fell  to  be  allowed.  Before  I  consider
    materiality, I must first consider the remaining grounds.


12. The Secretary of State contends that the determination is flawed in its
    analysis of whether the Rules  on  deportation  at  paragraphs  398-399
    applied at all to this revocation matter.

13. The deportation order was imposed long before the present regime was in
    place,  being  made  simply  on  the  grounds  that  AD's  removal  was
    "conducive to the public good".  The First-tier Tribunal was  therefore
    asked to assess whether that "old" order should be revoked in light  of
    the "new" Rules.

14. As to what those new Rules might be  the  refusal  letter  itself  only
    refers to the revocation provisions in paragraphs 390 to 391A:
         390. An application for revocation of a deportation order will be
         considered in the light of all the circumstances including the
         following:
           (i) the grounds on which the order was made;
           (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
           (iii) the interests of the community, including the maintenance
           of an effective immigration control;
           (iv) the interests of the applicant, including any compassionate
           circumstances.
         390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary of State will
         consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
         it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public
         interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by
         other factors.
         391. In the case of a person who has been deported following
         conviction for a criminal offence, the continuation of a
         deportation order against that person will be the proper course:
           (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the
           person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4
           years, unless 10 years have elapsed since the making of the
           deportation order when, if an application for revocation is
           received, consideration will be given on a case by case basis to
           whether the deportation order should be maintained, or
           (b) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the
           person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4
           years, at any time,
         Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary to the
         Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating to
         the Status of Refugees, or there are other exceptional
         circumstances that mean the continuation is outweighed by
         compelling factors.
         391A. In other cases, revocation of the order will not normally be
         authorised unless the situation has been materially altered, either
         by a change of circumstances since the order was made, or by fresh
         information coming to light which was not before the appellate
         authorities or the Secretary of State. The passage of time since
         the person was deported may also in itself amount to such a change
         of circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order
    The analysis which follows  is  not  terribly  helpful.   Having  found
    sufficient change in circumstances to treat AD's representations  as  a
    fresh claim the decision maker rejects them  on  the  basis  that  they
    cover matters which have already been decided. Rejecting  the  evidence
    about this family life in 2014 because it had already been rejected  in
    2008 was plainly a nonsensical  position  to  take.   Furthermore,  the
    letter itself makes no reference to the remaining provisions of Part 13
    of the Rules.

15. When the matter came before Judge Abebrese the  Respondent  appears  to
    have made no submissions about how the "new" Rules might be applied  to
    an "old" conductive deport. The submissions recorded  at  paragraph  15
    are confined to the EEA matter.  It was Mr Yeo  for  AD  who  gave  the
    Tribunal some direction. He pointed to the conclusions  in  SSHD  v  ZP
    (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 1197 in which the Court of  Appeal  considered,
    in a different context, the revocation provisions. Noting the  "vexing"
    language of paragraphs 390-391A the Court held that  the  reference  to
    the "Human Rights Convention" at the end of 391  must  be  read,  where
    Article 8 is invoked, as a reference  to  paragraphs  398-399A  of  the
    Rules, which represent a "complete code" for the purpose  of  the  UK's
    obligations under that Article of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights:
         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
         Convention, and
           (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
           the public good and in the public interest because they have
           been convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;
           (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
           the public good and in the public interest because they have
           been convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12
           months; or
           (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
           the public good and in the public interest because, in the view
           of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious
           harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a particular
           disregard for the law, the Secretary of State in assessing that
           claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,
           if it does not, the public interest in deportation will only be
           outweighed by other factors where there are very compelling
           circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399
           and 399A.
         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
         if -
           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
           relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is in
           the UK, and
                 (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
                 (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                 least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the
                 immigration decision; and in either case
                       (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in
                       the country to which the person is to be deported;
                       and
                       (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                       in the UK without the person who is to be deported;
                       or
16. The proper approach was therefore to consider where AD's case  fell  to
    be determined within that framework. Having led the Tribunal thus  far,
    Counsel invited the Tribunal to find that these provisions did  not  in
    fact apply to AD because he was not a "foreign criminal" as defined  in
    s117D(2) of the 2002 Act:


         (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

           (a)who is not a British citizen,

           (b)who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence,
         and

           (c)who-

                 (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
              least 12

                 months,

                 (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused
            serious harm, or

                 (iii) is a persistent offender.


    The First-tier Tribunal  accepted,  and  the  Secretary  of  State  now
    appears to concede, that AD did not fall within either (i) or (ii). Any
    argument that his aggregate sentence  of  15  months  could  bring  him
    within (i) was scotched not only by  common  sense  but  by  the  fully
    reasoned decision in OLO & Ors (paragraph  398  -  "foreign  criminal")
    [2016] UKUT 00056 (IAC).  The obvious inference that might be drawn  as
    to (iii) was dealt with by AD's skeleton argument as  follows:  "he  is
    not a persistent offender (the present tense applies)".  This  argument
    was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal [at 22].  Having found  AD  not
    to be a "foreign criminal"  the  Tribunal  appeared  to  consider  that
    paragraphs 398 to 399A could be ignored in  favour  of  the  revocation
    provisions at 390-391A simpliciter.

17. The Secretary of State now submits  that  to  have  been  an  error  in
    approach. Whether or not it  was  raised  in  the  refusal  letter  the
    question as to whether AD was a "persistent offender"  was  "clearly  a
    live issue before the First-tier Tribunal" which needed to be appraised
    fully.   I am bound  to  agree.   If  the  term  were  to  be  strictly
    construed in the present tense so as to mean someone who  continued  to
    be a persistent offender it would arguably only ever apply  to  persons
    who carried on offending whilst being subject to the decision  and  the
    appeals regime: see Chege v SSHD ("is a  persistent  offender")  [2016]
    UKUT 00187 (IAC).  There  had  been  a  clear  finding  by  an  earlier
    tribunal that AD was a 'persistent offender'  and  applying  Devaseelan
    principles the Tribunal was bound to treat that as its starting  point.
     This was a man who had committed at least 12 offences over the  period
    2004 to 2008 and had received a further conviction as recently as  2013
    for assault.  There is merit in the  Secretary  of  State's  submission
    that this was a matter which should have been considered more fully  by
    the Tribunal.


18. It is here that  I  return  to  Mr  Yeo's  materiality  submission.  At
    paragraph  27  of  his  First-tier  Tribunal  skeleton  he   makes   an
    alternative case: even if AD did fall within 398(c)  as  a  "persistent
    offender" he could bring himself  within  the  exception  at  399(a)(i)
    because of his genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  his
    children.


19. The evidence accepted by the First-tier Tribunal was, as summarised  at
    paragraph 19 above, that AD and  his  current  partner  see  his  three
    children regularly. The children were aged 7, 5 and 4 at  the  date  of
    the appeal and had all grown up with close  and  regular  contact  with
    their Dad.  The unchallenged finding of the Tribunal was that  AD  does
    enjoy a genuine and subsisting relationship with these  children,  they
    are all under 18 and living in the UK, and they are  all  British.  The
    remaining questions were therefore whether it would be unduly harsh for
    the children to go with their father and live in Zimbabwe, and  whether
    it would be unduly harsh for them to live without him here.

20. The meaning of the term "unduly harsh" has recently been considered  by
    the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) & Anor v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  450.
    The Court favoured the approach taken in KMO  v  SSHD  (section  117  -
    unduly harsh) [2015] UKUT 00543 (IAC), that is to  say  that  the  term
    "unduly" invites a proportionality balancing exercise  into  the  Rule.
    The removal of a parent will very often be harsh for a  child,  whether
    it is unduly so will depend on a combination of factors, not limited to
    the impact on the individual.  The  whole  scheme  of  Part  V  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 invites the decision maker
    to weigh in the public interest:
      1. I turn to the interpretation of the phrase "unduly harsh". Plainly
         it means the same in section 117C(5) as in Rule 399. "Unduly harsh"
         is an ordinary English expression. As so often, its meaning is
         coloured by its context. Authority is hardly needed for such a
         proposition but is anyway provided, for example by VIA Rail Canada
         [2000] 193 DLR (4th) 357 at paragraphs 35 to 37.
      1. The context in these cases invites emphasis on two factors, (1) the
         public interest in the removal of foreign criminals and (2) the
         need for a proportionate assessment of any interference with
         Article 8 rights. In my judgment, with respect, the approach of the
         Upper Tribunal in MAB ignores this combination of factors. The
         first of them, the public interest in the removal of foreign
         criminals, is expressly vouched by Parliament in section 117C(1).
         Section 117C(2) then provides (I repeat the provision for
         convenience):
         "The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the
         greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal."
      1. This steers the tribunals and the court towards a proportionate
         assessment of the criminal's deportation in any given case.
         Accordingly the more pressing the public interest in his removal,
         the harder it will be to show that the effect on his child or
         partner will be unduly harsh. Any other approach in my judgment
         dislocates the "unduly harsh" provisions from their context. It
         would mean that the question of undue hardship would be decided
         wholly without regard to the force of the public interest in
         deportation in the particular case. But in that case the term
         "unduly" is mistaken for "excessive" which imports a different
         idea. What is due or undue depends on all the circumstances, not
         merely the impact on the child or partner in the given case. In the
         present context relevant circumstances certainly include the
         criminal's immigration and criminal history.
21. The matters to be weighed in the balance against  AD  are  set  out  at
    paragraphs 4-6 of the determination where the First-tier Tribunal  goes
    into some detail about the repeated nature of his offending  behaviour.
    In what appears to be an extraordinary binge between January  2004  and
    May 2008 AD found himself in court on no fewer  than  seven  occasions.
    All of the convictions that arose from these  prosecutions  related  to
    driving offences and matters arising, such as  breaches  of  consequent
    community orders. It is little wonder that he was  eventually  sent  to
    prison.   The determination records the submissions of the HOPO to  the
    effect that these were not offences  to  be  trivialised  because  they
    involved motor vehicles: AD repeatedly drove over the  legal  limit  of
    alcohol, without insurance and without a licence. He is very  fortunate
    that no-one was ever physically  hurt.   In  his  evidence,  apparently
    accepted by the Tribunal, AD expressed contrition  and  attributed  his
    behaviour to being young and stupid,  "moving  around  with  the  wrong
    people".   He stopped driving after the last offence  in  2008  and  no
    longer owns a car.  As  to  the  risk  of  re-offending,  the  Tribunal
    concludes it to be low.


22. These matters are to be weighed against the positive findings  of  fact
    in AD's  favour.  His  relationship  with  his  children  is  real  and
    subsisting, and the Tribunal from them to be "benefitting" from it. The
    determination records the "very emotional" evidence of  the  children's
    mother who appeared before the Tribunal. She testified  that  he  is  a
    good father, that he contributes  financially  towards  his  children's
    upkeep, and that she is  very  concerned  about  the  impact  that  his
    removal would have on the children.  She also expressed  concern  about
    is ability to care for himself should he be removed: I take this to  be
    an oblique reference to the fact that AD  is  HIV+  (the  determination
    records that the Tribunal took the  medical  evidence  before  it  into
    account).  Reference is also made to the fact  that  AD's  daughter  is
    unwell and requires regular hospital visits.    The little girl suffers
    from severe asthma and the bundles contains numerous items  of  medical
    evidence  going  to  her  condition  and  her  frequent  admissions  to
    hospital.  Her mother gave evidence that this child in  particular  was
    badly affected when her  parents  split  up  and  found  difficulty  in
    sleeping. She would come into her mother's room asking for her  father.
    In her mother's assessment it would 'break her heart' if she were to be
    separated from her father again.  He is the one who  will  always  stay
    with her whilst she is hospital overnight.


23. The Secretary of State made, and makes, no submissions as to  limb  (a)
    of the tests in paragraph 399(1)(a). It has never been  the  case  that
    these children could live in Zimbabwe since to do so would deprive them
    of their relationships with their mother, their  stepfather  and  their
    new half-sibling on their mother's side.

24. As to limb (b) I have already found that the Tribunal erred because  it
    placed reliance  on  paragraph  117B(6)  when  that  provision  had  no
    application. I am however satisfied that this error was  not  material,
    because on the facts, it would be unduly harsh for these children to be
    separated from their father. He has  committed  a  number  of  criminal
    offences, and as I note above it is simply by  luck  that  he  did  not
    injure himself or others when driving drunk, uninsured  and  without  a
    licence. Even after his spree ended in  2008  he  committed  a  further
    offence in 2013, for which he received a fine.   He has been stupid and
    at that time showed a flagrant disregard for the law. He  has  been  an
    overstayer since 2004. All of that  weighs  heavily  against  him.  His
    deportation would however likely  mean  the  complete  severance  of  a
    relationship that has a great deal of significance for these three very
    young children. Their mother makes it clear in  her  witness  statement
    [at 8] that she would have no intention of taking them to visit him  in
    a country she  regards  as  unsafe  and  dangerous  for  her  asthmatic
    daughter. Their relationship with their  father  would  be  reduced  to
    telephone and skype contact which at their age would  be  difficult  to
    invest with much meaning.  His former partner describes him as a "great
    father" who continues to play a substantial  role  in  their  lives.  I
    place considerable weight on her assessment that his deportation  would
    "devastate" their lives.  Having weighed all of these  matters  in  the
    balance I am satisfied that AD's removal,  some  six  years  after  the
    decision to deport was taken, would be unduly harsh for  his  children.
    On the facts the Tribunal was entitled to  allow  the  appeal  and  the
    misdirection as to s117B was immaterial.


      Decisions

25. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    of law such that it should be set aside. The appeal  is  dismissed  and
    the decision is upheld.


26. There is a direction for anonymity.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                               21st July 2016
