
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10322/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th December 2017                  |On 21st December 2017                |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                               Ahmed Abuzayda
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Sadiq of Adam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against the decision of Judge J  Austin  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 24th April 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a Palestinian born 16th June 1979.  He entered the  UK
    on 17th January 2015, having been granted a medical  visit  visa  valid
    from 6th January 2015 until 6th July 2015.

 3. On 18th January 2015 he claimed asylum.  He claims to be a  Palestinian
    national who was born in Tripoli in Libya and who has always  lived  in
    Libya.

 4. The Appellant claimed asylum on the basis that he had been a  supporter
    of Gaddafi in Libya and the fact that he is Palestinian heightened  the
    risk.  In addition to his asylum claim, the Appellant claimed  that  he
    would be entitled to humanitarian protection on account of the risk  to
    civilians in Libya, and that to  return  him  would  breach  his  human
    rights in relation to Article 3.  He  claimed  that  he  would  not  be
    allowed  to  enter  Palestine  because  of  the  lack  of   appropriate
    identification documentation.

 5. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.  The FTT found  the  Appellant
    to be an incredible witness and  his  asylum  claim  was  dismissed  on
    credibility grounds.  The FTT did not find that the Appellant would  be
    at risk if returned to Libya and dismissed his Article 15(c) protection
    claim, noting that his wife had  returned  to  Libya  without  apparent
    difficulty.

 6. The FTT found the Appellant to be a  recognised  Palestinian  national,
    with a Palestinian wife, and noted that  his  parents  are  Palestinian
    nationals living in Gaza, and found that he would be able to return  to
    the Palestinian territories.

 7. Following dismissal of his appeal the Appellant applied for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  There was no  challenge  to  the  FTT
    findings in relation to asylum.

 8. It was contended that the FTT had erred in law in  considering  Article
    15(c) in relation to Libya and had failed to take into account specific
    information and documentation placed before  it,  in  relation  to  the
    indiscriminate violence in Libya.  The FTT had failed to  consider  the
    Appellant's Palestinian background which  gave  rise  to  a  heightened
    risk.  The FTT had failed to consider that the Appellant had  no  legal
    residential status in Libya.

 9. With reference to return to Palestine it was contended that the FTT had
    erred in law by not providing adequate reasons for the conclusion  that
    the Appellant would be able to return to Palestine.  It  was  contended
    that the FTT had failed to consider objective evidence  on  this  issue
    which had been placed before it.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede in  the
    following terms;

         "2.  Although the country guidance in ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya  CG
             [2017] UKUT  00263  was  issued  after  the  decision  in  the
             Appellant's appeal, it arguably relates  to  circumstances  in
             Libya covering the period of time in which the appeal  hearing
             took place.  Whilst the judge plainly cannot be criticised for
             considering the most recent and current  country  guidance  at
             that time, and for failing to  take  account  of  new  country
             guidance not yet issued by the Upper Tribunal, it is  arguable
             that the decision made by the judge on  Article  15(c)  cannot
             now be considered to be sustainable.  Neither can it  be  said
             that  it  is  immaterial  in  view  of  the  findings  in  the
             alternative as to return to Gaza, since it  is  arguable  that
             the judge's findings in that regard at [47] arguably failed to
             take account of all  the  evidence,  or  at  least  failed  to
             address all the evidence, including in particular the document
             at page 3 of the supplementary bundle."

Error of Law

11. On 13th October 2017 I heard submissions from both parties in  relation
    to error of law.  On behalf of the Respondent it was accepted that  the
    FTT had erred in law in considering Article 15(c) in relation to Libya,
    but it was contended that this was not a material error as the FTT  had
    not erred in finding that the Appellant could return to Palestine.

12. On behalf of the Appellant it was submitted that as a  matter  of  law,
    the Appellant would not be accepted to be Palestinian and would not  be
    allowed to return there.  It was contended that  the  FTT  had  ignored
    material evidence to confirm that the Appellant would not be allowed to
    enter Palestine.

13. I found a material error of law disclosed in the FTT decision, and  set
    aside the decision but  preserved  the  findings  which  had  not  been
    challenged, in relation to the  asylum  claim.   Full  details  of  the
    application for permission, the grant of  permission,  the  submissions
    made by both parties, and my conclusions are contained in  my  decision
    dated 17th October 2017, promulgated on 23rd October 2017.  I  set  out
    below paragraphs 21 - 27 which contain my conclusions and  reasons  for
    setting aside the FTT decision;

         "21. In my view Mr McVeety rightly conceded that the FTT had  erred
             in considering Article 15(c)  in  relation  to  Libya.   Judge
             Kebede in granting permission to appeal makes  it  clear  that
             the FTT cannot  be  criticised  for  considering  the  country
             guidance that was before it, and could  not  take  account  of
             country  guidance  not  yet  published.   However,  there  was
             evidence before the FTT which contended that there would be an
             Article 15(c) risk for a returnee.

         22.  Some of the objective evidence was specifically referred to in
             the Appellant's skeleton argument before the FTT.  The bundles
             submitted on behalf of  the  Appellant  contain  reports  from
             UNHCR, Human Rights Watch, and Amnesty International.  The FTT
             findings are to be found in paragraphs 42 - 48.  Paragraphs 42
             - 45 make credibility findings in relation to the  Appellant's
             asylum claim.  There is no challenge to those findings.

         23.  Paragraph 46, which is brief, finds that  there  would  be  no
             Article 15(c) risk to the Appellant if retuned to Libya.   The
             point is made by the FTT, that the country  guidance  case  in
             force, indicates that each case should be  considered  on  the
             basis of the individual evidence in that case.

         24.  The error made by the FTT is  not  to  consider  some  of  the
             evidence submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.   The  FTT
             decision gives no  indication  that  the  background  evidence
             relevant to risk on return in relation to  Article  15(c)  has
             been considered and analysed.  The  failure  to  consider  and
             analyse potentially material evidence is an error of law.

         25.  The FTT  findings  in  relation  to  the  possibility  of  the
             Appellant returning to Palestine are set out in paragraph  47.
             There is reference at paragraph  41  of  the  decision,  which
             summarises the submissions made on behalf of the Appellant, to
             a letter from the  Palestinian  Mission  at  page  32  of  the
             Appellant's bundle.  My view is the reference is  in  fact  to
             page 3 of the Appellant's bundle which is the letter from  the
             Palestinian Mission to the UK dated 5th December 2016.   There
             is, however,  no  analysis  and  conclusions  reached  on  the
             contents of that letter.  In summary, the letter  states  that
             what has  been  described  by  Mr  McVeety  as  a  Palestinian
             passport  does  not  entitle  the  Appellant  to   enter   the
             Palestinian territories and there is no indication  that  this
             point has been considered by the FTT.  Equally, I accept  that
             there is no indication in paragraph 47, that  the  Operational
             Guidance Note or the report referred to in the grounds seeking
             permission to appeal have been analysed and considered.

         26.  This is a failure to consider and make findings upon potential
             material evidence, and amounts to a  material  error  of  law.
             When taken together with the error of law in relation  to  the
             consideration of Article 15(c) with  reference  to  return  to
             Libya, I find that the decision is unsafe and is therefore set
             aside.

         27.  The decision needs to be  make  again  and  there  will  be  a
             further hearing before the Upper Tribunal.  The findings  that
             have been made in relation to credibility and asylum have  not
             been challenged and are preserved.  The purpose  of  the  next
             hearing is to consider the issue  of  Article  15(c)  risk  if
             there is a return to Libya, and to  consider  the  possibility
             and feasibility of return to Palestine."

Remaking the Decision

The Upper Tribunal Hearing - 18th December 2017

14. The Appellant attended the hearing.   There  were  no  difficulties  in
    communication between the Appellant and interpreter in Arabic.

15. I ascertained that I had received  all  documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely, and that each party had served the other with
    any documentation upon which reliance was to  be  placed.   I  had  the
    Respondent's bundle of documents with Annexes A  -  D,  that  had  been
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  I  also  had  the  Appellant's  bundle
    "AB1" comprising 121 pages and the Appellant's bundle "AB2"  comprising
    28 pages, both of which had been before the FTT.  In addition a further
    bundle had been filed on behalf of the Appellant comprising five pages.



16. The case was put back as Mr Diwnycz  had  not  seen  my  error  of  law
    decision dated 17th October 2017  and  a  copy  was  provided  to  him,
    together with a copy of the recent Appellant's bundle  comprising  five
    pages which I will call "AB3".

17. The  hearing  was  put  back  to  allow  Mr  Diwnycz  to  consider  the
    documentation  he  had  not  seen.   When  the  hearing  resumed   both
    representatives indicated that they were ready to proceed and there was
    no application for an adjournment.  Mr  Sadiq  submitted  the  original
    letters issued by the Palestinian Mission to the UK dated 5th  December
    2016 and 6th December 2017, copies of which  were  in  the  Appellant's
    bundles.

18. It was agreed that in the light of ZMM Libya CG, it could not be argued
    that it would be safe for the Appellant to return to Libya.  The  issue
    to be decided was therefore whether the  Appellant  could  relocate  to
    Palestine.

Oral Evidence

19. The Appellant adopted his witness statement dated 12th  December  2017.
    He was not questioned by Mr Sadiq, and there was no  cross-examination.



20. The Appellant's evidence contained in his witness statement is  briefly
    summarised below.

21. He had attended the Palestinian Mission in London and as a  result  had
    obtained the letter dated 6th December 2017 and further  clarified  the
    position regarding the issuance of his travel document/passport  issued
    in June 2012.  The Appellant's case is that  he  has  always  lived  in
    Libya, and has never visited Palestine.  He was not present in Ramallah
    which is in Palestine, when the travel document was issued.

22. The Appellant explained that his parents  had  initially  travelled  to
    Libya in the early 1970s, they had  seven  children,  six  sons  and  a
    daughter.  The Appellant's parents have returned  to  Palestine.   They
    had been able to do so because they were born in Palestine.

23. Two of the Appellant's brothers and his sister returned  to  Palestine.
    They used the illegal tunnels running between Egypt and Gaza.   Two  of
    the Appellant's brothers remained in Libya.  One had  been  killed  and
    the other is missing.

24. The position of the Appellant's brothers and sister  in  Gaza  is  that
    they are not formally registered and have no  formal  identity  papers.
    They do not  have  the  rights  that  people  born  and  registered  in
    Palestine have.  They can therefore only  take  casual  and  occasional
    work.

Oral Submissions

25. Mr Diwnycz relied upon the Respondent's reasons for refusal  dated  6th
    July 2015 but accepted the country guidance case  law  in  relation  to
    Libya had been published subsequent to that refusal, and that there was
    further evidence in relation to the issue of return to  Palestine.   No
    further oral submissions were made.

26. Mr Sadiq submitted that the country guidance decision in  ZMM  made  it
    clear that it would not be safe for the Appellant to return  to  Libya.
    His case was that he had never been to Palestine and in  law  he  would
    not be recognised as a Palestinian and would therefore have no right to
    enter Palestine.

27. In support of this submission Mr Sadiq referred me to the  Respondent's
    Operational Guidance Note on the Palestinian occupied territories,  the
    letters dated 5th December 2016 and 6th December  2017  issued  by  the
    Palestinian Mission to the UK, a report by the Refugee Board of  Canada
    dated 29th October 2015, and a document at page 89 of AB1  which  is  a
    document issued by the Palestinian National Authority, confirming  that
    the Appellant does not have the right to reside in Palestine, and holds
    only a temporary Palestinian passport issued on 12th June 2012.

28. I was asked to find that as the Appellant could not  safely  return  to
    Libya, and he could not relocate to Palestine,  his  appeal  should  be
    allowed on the basis that he is entitled to  a  grant  of  humanitarian
    protection, and that to remove him from the UK would breach  Article  3
    of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950  Convention).



29. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

30. The burden of proof is on the Appellant and the standard of proof is  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood.

31. The issue before me relates to humanitarian protection and Article 3 of
    the 1950 Convention.  I will  set  out  at  this  stage  the  preserved
    findings of the FTT, in relation to the Appellant's asylum claim  which
    was dismissed;

         "42. I do not accept the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  left  Libya
             because he was at risk of persecution as  an  individual.   He
             has not shown to the required lower standard that this is  the
             case.  He left Libya to travel to Italy at  a  time  when  the
             reasons for his claim for asylum already applied,  namely  the
             threatening phone calls and the physical abuse on one occasion
             at a checkpoint  because  of  his  Palestinian  identity.   He
             worked for an Italian company in a professional capacity.   He
             has not provided a reasonable explanation as to why he did not
             apply at a time when, as an employee of an Italian  firm,  his
             position would have been strongest.  The absence of  his  wife
             is not a reason when he has already agreed to her returning to
             Libya in 2016 whilst this claim is being made in the UK.   The
             Appellant's visit to the UK  subsequently  in  2014,  when  he
             again made no claim  for  asylum,  when  his  reasons  already
             existed, undermines his credibility.

         43.  The Appellant relies on his evidence 'in the round' about  his
             genuine fear  of  persecution.   If  he  was  concerned  about
             threatening calls to his  phone,  changing  his  phone  number
             would have been a basic precautionary step.  He did not do so.
              Moving home would have  been  a  more  inconvenient  and  yet
             reasonable precaution to take.  He did not do so.  When he did
             eventually move for work  reasons,  but  did  not  change  his
             number, the threats ceased.  The claimed difficulties  with  a
             security guard at his place of employment do not amount  to  a
             basis for asylum.  On his own evidence he took no steps to try
             to remedy the situation by reporting it.  It is not  credible.



         44.  The Appellant  claims  that  two  events  have  occurred  more
             recently which bolster his claim.   The  death  of  a  brother
             abducted some time ago, and the issue of an arrest warrant  in
             December 2016, which has come into the hands of his father-in-
             law and a copy sent to him this year.  I am  invited  to  give
             little or no weight to  these  documents.   They  are  not  in
             original form and they have been submitted at a late stage.  I
             do attach little weight to the claimed arrest warrant.  On the
             basis of the Appellant's evidence such  a  document  does  not
             meet common sense when there is no evidence of any interest of
             the authorities in him, a man who has travelled freely between
             Libya and Italy, and Libya and the UK on  two  occasions,  and
             whose wife has  recently  returned  to  Libya  and  re-entered
             without significant difficulty.

         45.  The Appellant's credibility is also  undermined  by  the  fact
             that when he came to the UK and claimed asylum, he had done so
             and admitted doing so in order to seek  medical  treatment,  a
             fact that he has since disputed  unconvincingly  in  my  view,
             bearing in mind the clear statement  he  made  in  his  asylum
             interview."

32. The Appellant is not entitled to asylum.  He has not proved that he has
    a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  Convention  reason.   I
    therefore  must  consider  whether  the  Appellant   is   entitled   to
    humanitarian protection which entails him showing  substantial  grounds
    for believing that if returned to Libya, he would face a real  risk  of
    suffering serious harm, and is unable, or owing to such risk, unwilling
    to avail himself of the  protection  of  the  Libyan  authorities.   In
    addition I must consider whether returning the Appellant to Libya would
    mean that he would be at risk of  being  subjected  to  torture  or  to
    inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

33. I find that the Appellant would be at risk if returned to Libya on  the
    basis of the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in ZMM Libya  CG  the
    headnote of which is set out below;


         "The  violence  in  Libya  has  reached  such  a  high  level  that
         substantial grounds  are  shown  for  believing  that  a  returning
         civilian would, solely on account of his presence on the  territory
         of that country or region, face a real risk of being subject  to  a
         threat to his life or person."

34. The Appellant would therefore be entitled to a  grant  of  humanitarian
    protection, and his removal from the UK would breach Article 3,  unless
    he could safely relocate to Palestine.

35.  I  accept  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  he   claims   Palestinian
    nationality because his parents were Palestinian, but that he was  born
    in Libya and has always lived in Libya.  I accept  that  he  has  never
    visited Palestine.  I accept that he was not present in  Ramallah  when
    his passport/travel document was issued in June 2012.  I  place  weight
    upon the Appellant's evidence, but I also  place  weight  upon  what  I
    regard  as  independent  and  objective  evidence  that  supports   the
    Appellant's evidence.

36. I place weight upon the Respondent's OGN on  the  Occupied  Palestinian
    Territories although it is of some age, being dated  19th  March  2013.
    At  paragraph  3.15.3  it  is  stated  that  the  great   majority   of
    Palestinians are stateless.  At 3.15.4 it is stated Israel conducted  a
    snap census in the Palestinian territories in September 1967,  and  any
    individual not registered had their  residency  rights  revoked,  which
    meant that tens of thousands of Palestinians who were studying, working
    or travelling abroad immediately lost any entitlement to residency  and
    today have no official  identity.   Some  of  this  group,  arbitrarily
    dispossessed of any nationality, later applied to return  to  Palestine
    through a family reunification programme, and  some  were  granted  the
    right to live in Palestine as temporary visitors or tourists  but  even
    this right has been difficult to obtain or  sustain.   I  place  weight
    upon the letter dated 5th  December  2016  issued  by  the  Palestinian
    Mission to the UK, which was written  as  a  result  of  the  Appellant
    enquiring with  the  mission,  about  the  status  of  the  Palestinian
    passport issued to  him  in  June  2012.   This  letter  confirms  that
    Palestinian passports are issued by the Palestinian National  Authority
    in either  the  West  Bank  or  Gaza  only  to  Palestinians  who  hold
    Palestinian ID cards.  Palestinian refugees  living  abroad  cannot  be
    issued with Palestinian ID  numbers,  they  usually  travel  on  travel
    documents issued to them as a person who is stateless.

37. Palestinian ID cards cannot be applied for from abroad as  the  Israeli
    forces  control  the  Palestinian  borders,   and   will   only   admit
    Palestinians who have ID numbers.  The Palestinian passport  issued  to
    the Appellant does not entitle him to free  entry  to  the  Palestinian
    territories, as he is not resident either in Gaza Strip, or in the West
    Bank, and he does not possess a  Palestinian  resident  ID  card.   The
    letter goes on to explain that the passport was issued to  him,  solely
    to facilitate his travel and movement abroad.  The Palestinian  Mission
    to the UK has no authority to issue  Palestinian  travel  documents  or
    passports.

38. Further enquiries made by the Appellant to the Palestinian  Mission  to
    the UK resulted in the letter dated 6th December 2017, to which I  also
    attach weight.  This confirms Palestinian embassies and missions abroad
    have no authority  to  issue  or  renew  passports,  they  can  receive
    applications and deliver them to the Ministry of Interior in  Ramallah.
    Applicants abroad are not required to travel to Ramallah  in  order  to
    renew or issue passports but can be provided with certified (powers  of
    attorney) from the Palestinian Missions in their  respective  countries
    of residence to a trusted person to  process  their  application.   The
    letter confirms that holding a Palestinian passport issued in  Ramallah
    does not necessarily mean the holder has been in Ramallah.

39. I also place some weight upon the Refugee Board of Canada report  dated
    29th October 2015 which at paragraph  2.1  quotes  the  Jerusalem  Post
    stating that applicants for a Palestinian passport need to have a birth
    certificate showing that they were born  in  Palestine  as  well  as  a
    current Palestinian identity card.

40. I am satisfied that the Appellant cannot produce  a  birth  certificate
    showing that he was born in Palestine, and  does  not  have  a  current
    Palestinian identity card.  I am also satisfied that he has not visited
    Ramallah to obtain the passport/travel document, and that was  obtained
    on his behalf while he remained in Libya.  I accept  the  letters  from
    the Palestinian Mission to the UK, that this passport/travel  document,
    does not entitle the Appellant to  enter  Palestinian  territories.   I
    also place some weight on a further document  that  the  Appellant  has
    obtained at page 89 of AB1.  This was issued in Gaza  on  9th  February
    2016 and confirms that the Appellant holds only a temporary Palestinian
    passport issued on 12th  June  2012,  and  that  he  does  not  hold  a
    Palestinian identity card.  The  Appellant  explained  in  his  witness
    statement dated 27th  January  2017  contained  within  AB2  that  this
    confirmation of his non-residence status in Palestine was sent  to  him
    by his brother in Gaza.  He made enquiries on  the  Appellant's  behalf
    with the Palestinian authorities there.  The  Appellant  received  that
    document in the post from his brother in November 2016 and  enclosed  a
    copy of the relevant envelope.

41. In conclusion I find that the Appellant  has  proved  to  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood, that he would not be allowed legal entry  to  the
    Palestinian territories.  Therefore, as  the  Appellant  cannot  safely
    return to Libya, I find that his removal from the UK would  breach  the
    UK's obligations in  relation  to  persons  eligible  for  a  grant  of
    humanitarian protection, and that his removal would be  unlawful  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998, as  his  removal  would  breach
    Article 3 of the 1950 Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.

The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

The  appeal  is  allowed  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds,  and   with
reference to Article 3 of the 1950 Convention.

Anonymity

The FTT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity and no anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             19th December 2017





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made.  The appeal  has  been  allowed  because  of  evidence
presented to the Tribunal that was not before the initial decision maker.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             19th December 2017
