
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/10128/2014
                                                               AA/10129/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 5 August 2015                     |On 11 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     LW
                                     HH
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms Moores (Sandbrook Solicitors)
For the Respondent:     Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an anonymity order.  Unless the Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
directly or indirectly identify  the  original  appellant.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

      1. The appellants are citizens of China.  They have two minor children
         and have claimed asylum and it is therefore appropriate to maintain
         the anonymity directions of the First-tier Tribunal.

Procedural history

      2. In a decision  promulgated  on  28  January  2015  Judge  De  Haney
         dismissed the  appellants'  appeals  on  asylum  and  human  rights
         grounds.  The Judge comprehensively  disbelieved  each  appellant's
         claim as to what happened to them in China.

      3. In grounds seeking permission  to  appeal  it  was  submitted  that
         although  the  Judge  directed  himself  to  the  relevant  country
         guidance decision of AX (Family planning scheme) [2012] UKUT  00097
         (IAC) and the relevant Operational Guidance Note on China (OGN), he
         failed to consider the consequences for the appellants if  returned
         to China in light of the SSHD's acknowledgement that they have  had
         two children, which is an apparent breach  of  the  Chinese  family
         planning scheme.

      4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Kelly on the  basis  that
         it is arguable that there was a failure to carry out the assessment
         of risk on return by reason of the appellant's breach of the family
         planning scheme.

      5. The matter now comes before me to  determine  whether  or  not  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
         law.

Hearing

      6. At the beginning of the hearing I made it clear to Ms Moores that I
         accepted the Judge had provided little reasoning for his conclusion
         that there would be no breach of the Refugee Convention or Articles
         3 and 8 of the ECHR by reason of the apparent breach of the  family
         planning scheme.  However I pointed out that  the  Judge  had  made
         clear (and unappealed) findings that there is no credible reason to
         consider that either appellant is at individual risk or  could  not
         internally relocate.  I indicated  my  preliminary  view  that  the
         guidance in AX permitted of only one answer on the facts  found  in
         this case - the appellants  are  not  at  risk  of  persecution  or
         Article 3 ill treatment by reason  of  any  breach  of  the  family
         planning scheme. I then invited  Ms  Moores  to  set  out  how  the
         Judge's  reasoning  could  be  said  to  be  deficient   in   these
         circumstances.

      7. Ms Moores at first asked me to re-examine the  Judge's  credibility
         findings.  I declined to do this on the basis that this was not the
         subject of any criticism in the grounds of appeal and it was simply
         too late to raise this on the day of the hearing.  Ms  Moores  next
         asked me to find that as the second appellant had given birth to  a
         second child she was at  real  risk  of  forced  sterilisation.   I
         directed Ms Moores attention to (11) of the head note in AX.   This
         states that in general female returnees are not at risk of forcible
         sterilisation in China.  Ms Moores  pointed  out  that  a  possible
         exception applied in this case on the basis that the  appellant  is
         from a rural area.  Ms Moores was unable to take me to any evidence
         to  support  this  proposition.   Indeed  the  evidence   available
         indicated a more liberal attitude to families having more than  one
         child in rural areas.  I  asked  Ms  Moores  to  particularise  the
         evidence to support the submission that one of the  exceptions  set
         out in (11) of AX applied.   She  however  accepted  that  she  was
         unable to take me to any such evidence  and  unable  to  support  a
         submission that the second appellant would be returned to a 'hukou'
         area  where  there   is   a   crackdown   accompanied   by   forced
         sterilisation.

      8. I also asked Ms Moores to address me on why, even if  there  was  a
         risk to the second appellant in her 'hukou'  area,  she  could  not
         internally relocate as (14) of the headnote in  AX  indicates  that
         "internal relocation will, in almost all cases, avert the  risk  in
         the hukou area".  Ms Moores  was  only  able  to  submit  that  the
         appellants have people looking for them and would not  be  able  to
         safely relocate in China.

      9. I then heard briefly from Ms Johnson,  who  simply  relied  on  the
         SSHD's rule 24 notice, before reserving my decision,  which  I  now
         provide with reasons.

Country guidance

     10. It is helpful to set out the country  guidance  summarised  in  the
         head note of AX in full.

             "Chinese family planning scheme:

             (1) In China, all state obligations and benefits depend on the
             area where a person holds their 'hukou', the name given to the
             Chinese household registration  system.  There  are  different
             provisions for those holding an  'urban  hukou'  or  a  'rural
             hukou': in particular,  partly  because  of  the  difficulties
             experienced historically by  peasants  in  China,  the  family
             planning scheme is  more  relaxed  for  those  with  a  'rural
             hukou'.

             (2) It is unhelpful (and a mistranslation of the Chinese term)
             to describe the Chinese family planning scheme as a 'one-child
             policy', given the current vast range  of  exceptions  to  the
             'one couple, one child' principle. Special provision  is  made
             for 'double-single' couples,  where  both  are  only  children
             supporting their parents and their grandparents. The number of
             children  authorised  for  a  married   couple,   ('authorised
             children') depends  on  the  provincial  regulations  and  the
             individual circumstances of the  couple.  Additional  children
             are referred as 'unauthorised children'.

             (3) The Chinese family planning scheme expects  childbirth  to
             occur within marriage.   It  encourages  'late'  marriage  and
             'late' first births. 'Late' marriages are defined  as  age  25
             (male) and 23 (female) and 'late' first births from age 24.  A
             birth permit is not usually required for the first birth,  but
             must be obtained before trying to  become  pregnant  with  any
             further children. The  Chinese  family  planning  scheme  also
             originally  included  a  requirement  for   four-year   'birth
             spacing'. With the passage of time,  province  after  province
             has abandoned that requirement. Incorrect birth spacing, where
             this is still a requirement, results in a financial penalty.

             (4) Breach of the Chinese family planning scheme  is  a  civil
             matter, not a criminal matter.

             Single-child families

             (5) Parents who restrict themselves to one child qualify for a
             "Certificate  of  Honour  for   Single-Child   Parents"   (SCP
             certificate), which entitles  them  to  a  range  of  enhanced
             benefits throughout their lives, from priority schooling, free
             medical treatment, longer maternity, paternity  and  honeymoon
             leave, priority access to housing and to retirement homes, and
             enhanced pension provision.

             Multiple-child families

             (6) Any second child, even if authorised, entails the loss  of
             the family's SCP certificate. Loss of a family's  SCP  results
             in loss of privileged access to schools, housing, pensions and
             free  medical  and  contraceptive  treatment.  Education   and
             medical treatment remain available but are no longer free.

             (7) Where an unauthorised  child  is  born,  the  family  will
             encounter  additional  penalties.  Workplace  discipline   for
             parents in employment is likely to include  demotion  or  even
             loss of employment. In addition, a 'social upbringing  charge'
             is payable (SUC), which  is  based  on  income,  with  a  down
             payment of 50% and three years to pay the balance.

             (8) There are hundreds of thousands of  unauthorised  children
             born every year.  Family planning officials are  not  entitled
             to refuse to register unauthorised children and  there  is  no
             real risk of a refusal to register a child. Payment for  birth
             permits, for the registration of children, and the  imposition
             of SUC charges  for  unauthorised  births  are  a  significant
             source of  revenue  for  local  family  planning  authorities.
             There is a tension between that profitability, and enforcement
             of the nationally imposed quota of births for the town, county
             and province, exceeding which can harm officials' careers.

             (9) The financial consequences for a family of losing its  SCP
             (for having more than one child) and/or of having SUC  imposed
             (for   having   unauthorised   children)   and/or    suffering
             disadvantages  in  terms  of  access  to  education,   medical
             treatment, loss of employment, detriment to future  employment
             etc will not, in general,  reach  the  severity  threshold  to
             amount to persecution or serious harm or treatment  in  breach
             of Article 3.

             (10) There are regular national campaigns to  bring  down  the
             birth rates in provinces and local areas which  have  exceeded
             the permitted quota.   Over-quota  birth  rates  threaten  the
             employment and future careers of birth  control  officials  in
             those regions, and where there is  a  national  campaign,  can
             result in large scale unlawful crackdowns by  local  officials
             in a small number of  provinces  and  areas.  In  such  areas,
             during such large scale crackdowns, human  rights  abuses  can
             and do occur, resulting in women,  and  sometimes  men,  being
             forcibly  sterilised   and   pregnant   women   having   their
             pregnancies forcibly terminated. The last such crackdown  took
             place in spring 2010.

             Risk factors

             (11) In general, for female returnees, there is no  real  risk
             of forcible sterilisation or forcible  termination  in  China.
             However,  if  a  female  returnee  who  has  already  had  her
             permitted quota of children is being returned at a  time  when
             there is a crackdown  in  her  'hukou'  area,  accompanied  by
             unlawful practices such as forced abortion  or  sterilisation,
             such  a  returnee  would  be  at   real   risk   of   forcible
             sterilisation or, if she is pregnant at the time, of  forcible
             termination of an unauthorised pregnancy.   Outside  of  these
             times, such a female returnee may also  be  able  to  show  an
             individual risk, notwithstanding  the  absence  of  a  general
             risk, where there is credible evidence that she, or members of
             her family remaining in China, have been threatened  with,  or
             have suffered, serious adverse ill-treatment by reason of  her
             breach of the family planning scheme.

             (12) Where a female returnee  is  at  real  risk  of  forcible
             sterilisation or termination of pregnancy in her 'hukou' area,
             such risk is of persecution, serious harm and Article  3  ill-
             treatment. The respondent accepted that such risk would be  by
             reason  of  a  Refugee  Convention  reason,  membership  of  a
             particular social group, 'women who gave birth  in  breach  of
             China's family planning scheme'.

             (13) Male returnees do not, in general, face a  real  risk  of
             forcible sterilisation,  whether  in  their  'hukou'  area  or
             elsewhere, given the very low rate of sterilisation  of  males
             overall, and the even lower rate of forcible sterilisation.

             Internal relocation

             (14) Where a real risk exists in the 'hukou' area, it  may  be
             possible to avoid the risk by moving to a  city.  Millions  of
             Chinese internal migrants, male and female, live and  work  in
             cities where they do not  hold  an  'urban  hukou'.   Internal
             migrant women are required to stay in touch with their 'hukou'
             area and either return for tri-monthly pregnancy tests or else
             send  back  test  results.   The  country  evidence  does  not
             indicate a real risk of effective pursuit of internal  migrant
             women   leading   to   forcible   family   planning   actions,
             sterilisation or termination, taking place in  their  city  of
             migration.  Therefore, internal relocation will, in almost all
             cases, avert the risk in the hukou  area.   However,  internal
             relocation may not be safe where there is credible evidence of
             individual pursuit of the returnee or her family, outside  the
             'hukou'  area.  Whether  it  is  unduly  harsh  to  expect  an
             individual returnee and her family to  relocate  in  this  way
             will be a question of fact in each case."

Findings

     11. I accept  that  that  the  Judge  has  not  clearly  addressed  the
         consequences of the family planning  scheme  for  these  appellants
         upon return to China. The submissions before  me  focussed  on  the
         Judge's failure to 'spell out' why the appellant was not at risk of
         forcible  sterilisation.   I  accept  that  the  Judge  could  have
         provided much clearer reasons for his conclusion  in  this  regard.
         The question before me is whether or not  the  Judge  has  provided
         sufficient reasoning  for  the  appellants  to  understand  why  he
         reached his decision that the second appellant was not at risk  and
         in any event could internally relocate [33].  The reasons need  not
         be elaborate, and need not deal with every argument presented.

     12. It is important to consider the decision as a whole and in light of
         the country guidance in AX.  The Judge recorded in some detail  the
         submissions of both representatives [15-19].  The  submission  made
         on behalf of the appellant was that the  Judge  should  follow  the
         OGN, which updated the position set out in  AX.   The  reason  that
         submission was made is  obvious.   There  was  simply  insufficient
         evidence to support a submission that  there  is  a  real  risk  of
         forced sterilisation for the second appellant as she does not  fall
         into any of the exceptions  to  the  general  finding  that  female
         returnees who have already had their permitted  quota  of  children
         face such a real risk.  The Judge  did  not  accept  that  the  OGN
         required AX to be considered differently [36].   This  finding  was
         not challenged in the grounds of appeal or  in  submissions  before
         me.  When the decision is read as a whole  it  is  clear  that  the
         Judge has rejected the submission that AX does  not  remain  proper
         guidance.  As AX remained the appropriate guidance the  Judge  must
         have considered there was little else to say on the issue of forced
         sterilisation, as AX makes the position very clear.

     13. As I set out above Ms Moores was unable to refer me to any evidence
         whatsoever to suggest that the second appellant falls within any of
         the risk categories set out in AX.  Ms Moores accepted that she was
         unable to take me to any evidence to support a submission that  the
         second appellant would be returned to a 'hukou' area where there is
         a crackdown  accompanied  by  forced  sterilisation.   The  Judge's
         credibility findings prevented any reliance  upon  threats  of  ill
         treatment from individuals or family members.

     14. In any event AX  clearly  states,  "internal  relocation  will,  in
         almost all cases, avert the risk in the hukou area".  Ms Moores was
         only able to submit that the appellants have people looking for the
         appellants and would not be  able  to  safely  relocate  in  China.
         This submission simply flies in  the  face  of  the  Judge's  clear
         adverse credibility findings.

     15. There is clear evidence  that  as  a  multiple-child  family  these
         appellants are likely to face a number of penalties  (see  (6)  and
         (7)  of  the  headnote).   However   hundreds   of   thousands   of
         unauthorised  children  are  born  each  year.    AX   specifically
         considered the position of foreign born children [186-188] before

             "We find that in general, couples with foreign born  children,
             over and above the permitted number for that couple...will  on
             return to China not be at real risk  of  persecution,  serious
             harm  or  human   rights   breaches   engaging   international
             protection."

     16. The Judge has given succinct reasons for finding that  the  removal
         of the appellants' children with their parents will not  give  rise
         to a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR  [34-37].   I  note  that  the
         Judge refused an application for an adjournment on the  basis  that
         the SSHD did not adequately  address  section  55  of  the  Borders
         Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009.   However  the  grounds  of
         appeal, drafted by solicitors, are narrow.  As  they  put  it  "the
         only remaining question was what would be the consequence  for  the
         appellants in view  of  the  acceptance  that  the  appellants  had
         breached [the family planning scheme]".  This is therefore  not  an
         appeal in which it continues to be said that section  55  has  been
         breached.  The focus of the grounds of appeal and  the  submissions
         before me has been on the failure to address the  consequences  for
         the appellants of their breach of the family planning scheme.

     17. Whilst I accept the Judge could have provided  more  particularised
         reasoning why he concluded that the second appellant did not face a
         real risk of forced sterilisation  and  /  or  that  the  penalties
         imposed would constitute a breach of Article 8,  I  find  that  the
         appellants should be able to  understand  why  he  dismissed  their
         appeals from reading the decision as a whole.   The  Judge  clearly
         regarded the appellants'  claim  that  they  are  at  risk  of  ill
         treatment because of what happened  to  them  in  the  past  to  be
         incredible [22-33].  He was also aware that the  appellants  feared
         the consequences of having two children in  breach  of  the  family
         planning scheme [14(xxviii)] and considered submissions  from  both
         representatives regarding this particular issue [15 and  18].   The
         Judge was well aware of AX and the  OGN  but  considered  that  the
         guidance in AX remained appropriate guidance [15, 16, 35  and  36].
         The appellants did not  rely  upon  any  evidence  to  support  the
         submission that the second appellant  fell  into  a  risk  category
         identified in AX.  The application of the  accepted  facts  to  the
         guidance in AX permitted of only one answer -  the  appellants  and
         their children are not at risk of persecution  or  Article  3  ill-
         treatment and in any event can internally relocate.  The Judge  set
         out his reasoning regarding the consequences of the family planning
         scheme  upon  Article  8  succinctly.    The  Judge  was  therefore
         entitled to conclude as he did and dismiss the appellants'  appeals
         for the reasons provided.

Decision

     18. I do not find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains
         an error of law.

     19. I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 6 August 2015

