

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      AA/10622/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Manchester
   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
|On 21 June 2017                            |   On 23 June 2017             |
|                                           |                               |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                    Mr E
                         (Anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Brown, Counsel instructed by Compass
Immigration Law
                       Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Libya born  in  1995.  He  appeals  with
    permission[1] against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Cruthers) to dismiss his appeal[2] on asylum and human rights grounds.








    Anonymity


 2. This case concerns a claim for international protection.   I  have  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders and I
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"



    Background


 3. It is not in dispute that the Appellant came to the United  Kingdom  in
    June 2014 having been given leave to  enter  as  part  of  a  group  of
    soldiers in the Libyan army who were coming to the UK for training. Nor
    does it appear to be in dispute that he deserted: he claimed asylum  on
    that ground on the 29th October 2014.


 4. The Appellant was initially detained following his asylum claim. He was
    held at Harmondsworth immigration detention facility and when his claim
    for protection was refused his appeal was heard  in  the  'fast  track'
    system.  His appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom on
    the 16th December 2014.   On the 6th October 2015 that decision was set
    aside by order of the  President  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Mr  M.
    Clements. This followed the decision of the High Court  to  the  effect
    that the fast-track system was unlawful for unfairness.  At  that  time
    the address held by the Tribunal for the Appellant was in Tameside, and
    the solicitors on record were Lawrence Lupin Solicitors in London.

 5. When the matter came before Judge Cruthers there was no  appearance  by
    or on behalf of the Appellant.  His clerk contacted Lawrence Lupins who
    by way of fax indicated that  they  were  no  longer  representing  the
    Appellant. They  did  not  indicate  when  instructions  ceased.  Judge
    Cruthers found that notices of hearing had been sent to the Appellant's
    last known address - in  Tameside  -  and  to  Lawrence  Lupins.  Being
    satisfied that there had been good service he proceeded  to  hear,  and
    dismiss, the appeal in the Appellant's absence.


    The Challenge

 6. The first ground  of  appeal  is  that  there  has  been  a  procedural
    unfairness. The Appellant has, through no fault of his own, missed  the
    opportunity to be present at his appeal hearing.  By the time that  the
    notices of appeal had been sent out he had been 'dispersed' by NASS  to
    other accommodation. He had been expecting  that  his  then  solicitors
    would have  informed  him  of  the  hearing  date.  They  had  not.  He
    understood that the Home  Office  would  be  aware  of  his  change  of
    address, since it was a NASS decision to move him.  He  asks  that  the
    matter be remitted to enable him to take part in the proceedings.

 7. The second ground is that the Tribunal erred in following the  findings
    in AT & Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Libya  CG)
    [2014] UKUT 00318 (IAC) insofar as they related to Article 15(c) of the
    Qualification Directive. It is submitted that  by  the  time  that  the
    Tribunal dealt with the appeal the  situation  in  Libya  had  markedly
    deteriorated and that even on the basis  of  the  Respondent's  country
    background information report (the only 'objective' material before the
    Tribunal) there should have been a more thorough evaluation of  whether
    he would face a risk, particularly as a recruit who had deserted.



    The Response


 8. The Respondent accepts that the first ground of  appeal  is  made  out.
    The Appellant was moved by NASS and  it  would  seem  that  his  former
    solicitors had failed to inform the Tribunal when they were  no  longer
    instructed. That placed the Tribunal in a difficult position on the day
    but the Appellant could not be blamed for their failings. It  would  be
    in the interests of justice to remit the matter so that the appeal  can
    be heard afresh.


 9. In respect of AT & Others the Respondent points out that at the date of
    the appeal in this case, it was still country guidance. The  First-tier
    Tribunal determination is dated the 19th August 2016, three days before
    the Tribunal heard the appeal in FA (Libya: art 15(c)) Libya CG  [2016]
    UKUT 00413 (IAC) which was to overturn AT  on  the  matter  of  Article
    15(c). In light of the procedural unfairness point, and the decision in
    FA, the Respondent did not however oppose the matter going back to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for remaking.







    Decisions


10. The making of the First-tier Tribunal decision  involved  an  error  in
    approach such that the decision is set aside by consent.


11. The decision in the matter is to be remade de novo  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

12. There is an order for anonymity.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              21st June 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 14th March 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Grant-Hutchinson


[2] Brought against a decision to remove pursuant to s10 of the Immigration
and Asylum Act 1999, dated 1st December 2014.

