

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10591/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Sent           |
|On 23 September 2014                          |10 October 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     TP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Hodgetts instructed by McGarvey Immigration &
                    Asylum Practitioners Ltd

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Introduction

   2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of  the
      First-tier Tribunal (Judge Trevaskis) allowing TP's appeal  on  asylum
      grounds against the Secretary of State's decision to remove him by way
      of directions to Sri Lanka on 30 November 2013.
   3. For convenience, I will refer to the parties as they  appeared  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.

   4. The appeal initially came before me on 6  May  2014.   In  a  decision
      dated 19 May 2014, I concluded that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred
      in law in its assessment of the risk to the appellant on return to Sri
      Lanka applying the country guidance of GJ and Others (Post-Civil  War:
      Returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).  As  a  result,  I  set
      aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision and adjourned the appeal to a
      further hearing in the Upper Tribunal to remake the decision.

   5. Judge Trevaskis' findings of fact stand and  the  sole  issue  in  the
      appeal is whether, given those facts, the appellant had established  a
      real risk of persecution for  a  Convention  reason  applying  GJ  and
      Others.

The Background Facts

   6. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was  born  on  12  October
      1975.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 18 September 2013  and,  on
      16 October 2013 he claimed asylum.  That  claim  was  refused  by  the
      Secretary of State on 13 November 2013 and  a  decision  was  made  to
      remove him as an illegal entrant by way of directions to Sri Lanka.

   7.  The appellant's appeal against that decision was allowed by the First-
      tier Tribunal (Judge Trevaskis) in a determination  dated  26  January
      2014.

   8. The Judge found the appellant to be  credible  (see  para  63).   That
      finding stands as a  result  of  my  earlier  decision  rejecting  the
      Secretary of State's grounds  of  challenge  to  the  Judge's  factual
      findings.  The appellant's evidence is set out at paras 29-37 of Judge
      Trevaskis' determination as follows:

           "29.  The Appellant gave evidence  with  the  assistance  of  an
                 interpreter  of  the  Tamil  language.   He   adopted   his
                 statement dated 2nd January 2014.  He joined  the  LTTE  in
                 1996 and received 3 months weapons training.  From 1996  to
                 2002 he was stationed in a camp near Kuchchaveli,  carrying
                 out general tasks.

             30. He was only involved in fighting twice  in  1997/1998;  the
                 army attacked the camp, and later he was  attacked  by  the
                 army when collecting food from a village. In  2000  he  was
                 injured by a grenade during an attack on the camp; he still
                 has pain in his right hip from that injury.

             31. He has provided a photo; he says it is of him, taken around
                 2000; he  is  holding  a  M-16  assault  rifle,  wearing  a
                 military holster containing a grenade and  6  magazines  of
                 ammunition, and has a cyanide capsule on  a  string  around
                 his neck.

             32. He left LTTE in 2002 because his mother wanted him to  look
                 after the family; he had to carry out 6 months'  punishment
                 in order to leave within 10 years of joining.  He  returned
                 to Trincomalee and married his wife in 2002.  He worked  as
                 a delivery driver,  sometimes  transporting  LTTE  members,
                 despite no longer being a member.  On  11th  July  2004  he
                 daughter was born.

             33. In 2005 LTTE brought him a refrigerator van to collect  and
                 sell fish; he gave them the money he earned and  they  paid
                 him.  The peace agreement between the government  and  LTTE
                 in 2002 ended in 2006; the war started  again,  and  people
                 who assisted LTTE were being arrested and killed.  He moved
                 to Colombo in 2006 with his wife and daughter,  and  stayed
                 with his sister for 6 months.

             34. On 17th September 2006 they returned to his village because
                 his mother told him it was safe to return.   They  went  to
                 his cousin's house for lunch; after lunch he was inside the
                 house when he heard shooting outside; his  2  cousins  went
                 outside and were killed.  The Appellant and his brother-in-
                 law went out of the back door and  hid  in  a  neighbouring
                 village.  He was told by his mother that his friend and his
                 2 cousins were killed,  and  his  wife  and  daughter  were
                 wounded; later he was told that his daughter had died.  His
                 mother told him the Criminal Investigation  Department  was
                 looking for him.  He remained in  hiding  until  after  his
                 daughter's funeral and his wife's discharge from  hospital;
                 he joined her in Vanni and they stayed there until 2009; he
                 made a living selling paraffin at  the  roadside.   On  8th
                 August 2007 his second daughter was born.

             35. In 2008 he was forced to assist LTTE  by  transporting  men
                 and supplies, which he did until April 2009 when the  civil
                 war ended.  He continued to transport items for LTTE, which
                 he believed were weapons and ammunition  and  were  buried.
                 He and  his  family  left  Vanni  for  a  refugee  camp  at
                 Vavuniya; he paid a bribe to get out of the camp  and  went
                 to stay with relatives in Vavuniya village.  On  17th  June
                 2010 his third daughter was born.

             36. On 5th June 2013 he was stopped when walking to the  shops;
                 he was placed in a van and taken to Joseph Camp,  the  main
                 army base in Vavuniya.  He was kept there for 3 months;  he
                 was told he had been named as LTTE and he  knew  where  the
                 arms were buried.  He showed the 3 places where he  thought
                 the arms were buried,  but  they  had  been  moved.   While
                 detained he was regularly beaten  on  his  back,  legs  and
                 heels with a stick, wire and a pipe  containing  sand.   On
                 10th September 2013 he was taken  in  a  van  to  meet  his
                 uncle, who paid a bribe for his release.

             37. His uncle took him to the house of an agent in Manaar.   On
                 11th September he was taken to the Maldives by boat;  after
                 3 days he was flown to an unknown Arab country, and then to
                 an unknown European country;  he  left  there  by  car  and
                 arrived in the United Kingdom on 18th September 2013."

   9. The appellant's case is that because of  his  knowledge  of  where  he
      believes the LTTE has buried arms, he will be perceived as a threat to
      the integrity of Sri Lanka because of his significant role in relation
      to the renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka and  falls  within  the
      risk category set out in [356(7)(a)] of GJ and Others.

GJ and Others

  10. I begin with the relevant guidance set out in GJ and Others at  [356].
      It is appropriate to set it out in its entirety as follows:

         "356.   Having considered and reviewed all the evidence,  including
             the latest UNHCR guidance, we consider that the change in  the
             GOSL's approach is so significant that  it  is  preferable  to
             reframe the risk analysis for the present political  situation
             in Sri Lanka.  We give the following country guidance:


             (1) This determination replaces all existing country  guidance
                  on Sri Lanka.


             (2) The focus of  the  Sri  Lankan  government's  concern  has
                  changed since the civil war ended in May 2009.   The  LTTE
                  in Sri Lanka itself is a spent force and there  have  been
                  no terrorist incidents since the end of the civil war.


             (3) The government's present objective is  to  identify  Tamil
                  activists in  the  diaspora  who  are  working  for  Tamil
                  separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state
                  enshrined in Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution
                  in 1983, which prohibits  the  'violation  of  territorial
                  integrity' of Sri Lanka.  Its focus is on preventing  both
                  (a) the resurgence  of  the  LTTE  or  any  similar  Tamil
                  separatist organisation and (b) the revival of  the  civil
                  war within Sri Lanka.


             (4) If a  person  is  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  security
                  services there remains a real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or
                  harm requiring international protection.


             (5) Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka  for
                  a person at real risk from  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,
                  since the government now controls the whole of  Sri  Lanka
                  and Tamils are required to return to a named address after
                  passing through the airport.


             (6) There are no detention facilities at  the  airport.   Only
                  those whose names appear on a 'stop' list will be detained
                  from the airport.  Any risk for  those  in  whom  the  Sri
                  Lankan authorities are or become interested exists not  at
                  the airport, but after arrival in their home  area,  where
                  their arrival will be verified by the CID or police within
                  a few days.


             (7)  The  current  categories  of  persons  at  real  risk  of
                  persecution or  serious  harm  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,
                  whether in detention or otherwise, are:


                  (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat
                      to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka  as  a  single  state
                      because  they  are,  or  are  perceived  to  have   a
                      significant role in relation to  post-conflict  Tamil
                      separatism within the diaspora and/or  a  renewal  of
                      hostilities within Sri Lanka.


                  (b)  Journalists (whether in  print  or  other  media)  or
                      human rights activists, who,  in  either  case,  have
                      criticised the Sri Lankan government,  in  particular
                      its human rights record, or who are  associated  with
                      publications critical of the Sri Lankan government.


                  (c)  Individuals who have given evidence  to  the  Lessons
                      Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the
                      Sri Lankan security forces, armed forces or  the  Sri
                      Lankan authorities  in  alleged  war  crimes.   Among
                      those who may have  witness  war  crimes  during  the
                      conflict, particularly in the No-Fire  Zones  in  May
                      2009,  only  those  who   have   already   identified
                      themselves by giving such evidence would be known  to
                      the Sri Lankan authorities and  therefore  only  they
                      are at real risk of adverse attention or  persecution
                      on  return  as  potential  or   actual   war   crimes
                      witnesses.


                  (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised  'stop'
                      list accessible at the airport, comprising a list  of
                      those against whom there is an extant court order  or
                      arrest warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on  a
                      'stop' list will be stopped at the airport and handed
                      over to the appropriate Sri  Lankan  authorities,  in
                      pursuance of such order or warrant.


             (8)  The  Sri  Lankan  authorities'  approach  is   based   on
                  sophisticated intelligence, both as to  activities  within
                  Sri Lanka and the diaspora.  The  Sri  Lankan  authorities
                  know that many  Sri  Lankan  Tamils  travelled  abroad  as
                  economic migrants and also that everyone in  the  Northern
                  Province had some  level  of  involvement  with  the  LTTE
                  during the civil war.   In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,  an
                  individual's past history will be  relevant  only  to  the
                  extent that it is perceived by the Sri Lankan  authorities
                  as indicating a present risk to  the  unitary  Sri  Lankan
                  state or the Sri Lankan Government.


             (9) The authorities maintain a  computerised  intelligence-led
                  [watch] list.  A person whose name appears  on  a  'watch'
                  list is not  reasonably  likely  to  be  detained  at  the
                  airport but will be monitored  by  the  security  services
                  after his or her return.   If  that  monitoring  does  not
                  indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist working to
                  destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  revive  the
                  internal armed conflict, the  individual  in  question  is
                  not, in general, reasonably likely to be detained  by  the
                  security forces.  That will be a question of fact in  each
                  case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out  by
                  such an individual.


             (10)      Consideration must always be given  to  whether,  in
                  the   light   of   an    individual's    activities    and
                  responsibilities  during  the  civil  war,  the  exclusion
                  clauses are engaged (Article 1F of the Refugee  Convention
                  and Article 12(2) of the Qualification Directive).  Regard
                  should be had to the categories for exclusion set  out  in
                  the   'Eligibility   Guidelines    for    Assessing    the
                  International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from  Sri
                  Lanka' published  by  UNHCR  on  21  December  2012."  (my
                  emphasis)

  11. The relevant risk category relied upon by the appellant in this appeal
      is in [356(7)(a)], namely that he would be perceived as  a  threat  to
      the integrity of the Sri Lankan state because he would be perceived as
      having  a  significant  role  in  relation  to   post-conflict   Tamil
      separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities  within
      Sri Lanka.

  12. The UT makes clear in [356(8)] that  in  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka  an
      individual's past history is only relevant to the extent  that  it  is
      perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities as indicating a  present  risk
      to the state or government.

  13. In MP and NT (Sri Lanka), the Court of  Appeal,  on  appeal  from  the
      Upper Tribunal in GJ and Others, considered a legal challenge  to  the
      country guidance set out in [356].  The Court  of  Appeal  rejected  a
      number of challenges and upheld  the  guidance.   In  particular,  the
      Court of Appeal accepted that  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  entitled  to
      depart  from  the  UNHCR  guidelines,  "Eligibility   Guidelines   for
      Assessing the International Protection Needs of  Asylum  Seekers  from
      Sri Lanka" (21 December 2012) which set  out  (at  pages  26-27)  risk
      categories of individuals with "more  elaborate  links  to  the  LTTE"
      including  former  combatants  or  cadres  and  those  sheltering   or
      transporting LTTE personnel or supplying or transporting goods for the
      LTTE.

  14. However, the Court of Appeal did so on the basis that the UT  had  not
      excluded the relevance of the "more elaborate links with the LTTE"  in
      determining whether an individual fell within  the  risk  category  in
      [356(7)(a)] as presenting a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka.   At
      [15] Maurice Kay LJ  observed  that  the  UT's  decision  meant  that:
      "[m]erely to have one or more of the  features  listed  in  the  'more
      elaborate links' part of the UNHCR Guidelines is not enough".

  15. At [16] Maurice Kay LJ concluded:

         "I am unable to escape the conclusion that the  UNHCR's  Guidelines
         are indeed less demanding than the UT's guidance although no  doubt
         it will be easer  to  infer  that  the  paragraph  356(7)  test  is
         satisfied where elaborate links are established than where they are
         not."

  16. Underhill LJ at [50] also accepted that the UT was entitled to exclude
      from a risk category per se those who had "more elaborate links"  with
      the LTTE.  He also concluded that the UT was entitled to find that the
      Sri Lankan government's  concern  was  now  with  "current  or  future
      threats to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a unitary state".

  17. Underhill LJ concluded that in assessing that risk, whilst principally
      the Sri Lankan government was focused on actual or perceived "diaspora
      activism", nevertheless:

         "there may, though  untypically,  be  other  cases  ...  where  the
         evidence  shows  particular  grounds  for   concluding   that   the
         Government might regard the applicant as posing a current threat to
         the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state even in the absence of
         evidence that he or she has been involved in diaspora activism."

  18. The issue which I must decide is whether, in the light of the  country
      guidance, the appellant falls within the risk category in  [356(7)(a)]
      as a person who would be perceived to  be  a  present  threat  to  the
      integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because of their  significant
      role in post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the  diaspora  or  a
      renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

Discussion

  19. Mr Hodgetts, on behalf of the appellant  submitted  that  it  was  not
      necessary for the appellant to show any "diaspora activities" in order
      to establish that he fell within the  risk  category  in  [356(7)(a)].
      That, as I have already made clear, I accept in the light of MP and NT
      (Sri Lanka) at [43] and [50].

  20. The issue here is whether the appellant's past history  including  his
      recent detention and ill-treatment in June 2013 creates  a  real  risk
      that he will be of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities  because  he
      would be perceived as someone who poses a threat to the  integrity  of
      Sri Lanka as a unitary state.

  21. The starting point  must  be  that  as  recently  as  June  2013,  the
      appellant was  detained  and  ill-treated  precisely  because  of  his
      knowledge of potential sites where LTTE arms were buried.   The  Judge
      accepted, and so do I, the appellant's evidence that he was persecuted
      and seriously ill-treated whilst detained because of that knowledge.

  22. In assessing his future  risk,  I  bear  in  mind  para  339K  of  the
      Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended) which provides as follows:

           "The fact that a person has already been subject to  persecution
           or serious harm, or to direct threats  of  such  persecution  or
           serious harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication  of  the
           person's well-founded  fear  of  persecution  or  real  risk  of
           serious harm, unless there are good  reasons  to  consider  that
           such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated."

  23. It seems to me that the only possible  "change"  in  circumstances  is
      that the appellant was released.  However, he was released by a  bribe
      and left Sri Lanka one day after he was released.   I  do  not  accept
      that his release demonstrates that he was not of  continuing  interest
      to the Sri Lankan authorities.   The  appellant's  evidence  was  that
      whilst he was detained he was  told  by  his  interrogator  that  they
      thought that he wanted to restart the civil war (see para  28  of  the
      appellant's witness statement dated 2 January 2014 at page  7  of  the
      appellant's bundle).  The appellant's evidence was that the Sri Lankan
      authorities think that the LTTE will use the hidden  weapons  to  come
      back to power (see Question 164 of the appellant's asylum  interview).
      I accept that there is a  real  risk  that  the  appellant's  history,
      including  his  detention  and  involvement  with   transporting   and
      subsequently directing the authorities to  the  buried  arms  will  be
      discovered during the documentation process in the UK (see [308]-[309]
      of GJ and Others) and that on return to Sri Lanka he will continue  to
      be of interest in relation to the buried arms.  I  do  not  accept  Mr
      Parkinson's submission that, in effect,  the  Sir  Lankan  authority's
      interest in the appellant is spent.  Their last interest  in  him  was
      only just over twelve months ago and his release was not as  a  result
      of due process but because of  bribery.   The  recent  nature  of  the
      authorities' interest in the appellant differentiates this  case  from
      many other where the interest is truly historical only.  Further,  the
      appellant is not simply a former LTTE member or supporter involved  in
      their activities in Sri Lanka including  fighting  government  forces.
      The appellant potentially has information relevant to a future risk or
      threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka and, in particular,  any  renewal
      of hostilities by the LTTE using their hidden arms.  Such matters  are
      likely to remain of concern to the Sri Lankan authorities as  relevant
      to a present threat to the state. This, in my judgment,  is  precisely
      one of the situations contemplated by the  UT  in  GJ  and  Others  in
      [356(7)(a)].  In my judgment, having regard to the  "elaborate  links"
      with the LTTE, this is a case in which  the  appellant's  recent  past
      points to a future interest in him by the Sir Lankan  authorities  and
      creates a real risk of detention during which, as is  accepted  in  GJ
      and Others, there is a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  ill-
      treatment as indeed occurred to the appellant in June 2013.

  24. For these reasons, I am satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  a  well-
      founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason and  I  allow  his
      appeal on asylum grounds.

Decision

  25. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appellant's
      appeal on asylum grounds involved the making of an error of law.  That
      decision was set aside.  To that  extent,  the  Secretary  of  State's
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

  26. I remake the decision allowing the appeal on asylum grounds.

  27. No other ground was relied on by the appellant before me.


                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:    6 October 2014






















