
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10491/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th October 2016                 |On 6th December 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                     MM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Radford, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 3rd August 1991.  The
    Appellant left Afghanistan on a valid visa in April  2014  arriving  in
    the UK via Turkey the same month.  On 5th February 2015  the  Appellant
    claimed asylum.  That claim for asylum contended that the Appellant had
    a fear if returned to Afghanistan that he would face  mistreatment  due
    to his imputed political  opinion.   The  Appellant's  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on  9th  July  2015  wherein  it  was
    noted, by the Appellant's own evidence, that he had  not  had  specific
    problems in Afghanistan and that his fear was based upon  his  father's
    problems and the consequences that he  may  suffer,  if  the  Appellant
    returned to Afghanistan.  It was noted that the Appellant claims to  be
    the son of SM, the head of customs in Afghanistan.   At  the  time  the
    Appellant left Afghanistan his father had been head of  the  department
    for around four years.  It was noted that the  Appellant  claimed  that
    his father had faced problems with those seeking to bring in controlled
    drugs into Afghanistan as  well  as  export  heroin  and  that  he  had
    problems with a group of specifically named politicians.

 2. In refusing the appeal the Secretary of State concluded that it was not
    accepted that the Appellant had a genuine subjective fear on return and
    that it was noted that he had no personal problems in  Afghanistan  and
    had no profile himself in Afghanistan and  that  any  profile  that  he
    would have was imputed.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Goodrich sitting at Taylor House on 30th June 2016.  In a
    determination and reasons promulgated on 28th July 2016 the Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on protection and human rights grounds.

 4. On 12th July 2016 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal.
    On  22nd August  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Frankish  refused
    permission to appeal.  In refusing permission the judge noted  that  no
    rule of law limited the First-tier Tribunal Judge to issues  raised  by
    the Respondent or, indeed, of raising every credibility  point  at  all
    and that five and a  half  pages  of  adverse  credibility  conclusions
    amounted to findings of fact which were open to the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge.

 5. On 8th September 2016 renewed  and  extended  Grounds  of  Appeal  were
    lodged with the Upper Tribunal.  On 23rd September 2016 Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Rimington granted permission to appeal.   Judge  Rimington  noted
    that the grounds assert firstly that the Respondent impliedly  accepted
    the Appellant's credibility but  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    diverged from this and made a myriad of  adverse  credibility  findings
    having transformed the basis of the appeal.  Judge Rimington found that
    it was arguable that the judge did develop a theory beyond the case  of
    the Respondent, the Secretary of State's case appearing to rest on lack
    of profile and sufficiency of protection, and  that  the  judge  should
    specifically have put the challenge of credibility to the Appellant.

 6. Secondly the grounds asserted that the questioning  of  the  judge  was
    inquisitorial and hostile.  It is pertinent to note that permission  to
    appeal on this ground was refused.

 7. The Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24
    on 6th October 2016.  The Rule 24 response contends that it cannot  be
    said that it was not open to the judge to ask  clarificatory  questions
    and  that  the  judge  has  listed  those  at  paragraph  13   of   her
    determination.  It is contended that the questions arose from the  flow
    of evidence given and did not amount to a  conclusion  that  the  judge
    entered into an arena outside her  remit.   Overall  the  Secretary  of
    State contends that it was open for the judge to weigh the evidence  in
    the round in coming to her conclusions.

 8. It is against that background  that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to
    determine whether or not there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Appellant  appears  by
    his instructed Counsel, Miss Radford.  The Secretary of  State  appears
    by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Tufan.  There does not appear
    to have been a Rule 24 response lodged or served by  the  Secretary  of
    State.

Submission/Discussion

 9. Miss Radford contends that the First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed  the
    appeal on the basis of a series of  wide  ranging  adverse  credibility
    findings set out in some detail at paragraphs 33 to 43 of  the  judge's
    decision.  She contends that the judge developed her own argument  both
    at and after the hearing and that the judge dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal on a wholly different basis to that upon  which  his  claim  was
    refused by the Respondent and also in a different manner as to how  the
    appeal was pursued by the Respondent up to and  including  the  hearing
    itself.  She submits that there was no justification for the  judge  to
    have taken it upon herself to diverge so manifestly from  the  original
    grounds and the approach taken by the Respondent.

10. She refers to the approach  the  judge  has  taken  in  conducting  the
    appeal,  reminding  me  of  the  guideline  cases  of  MNM  533882/2000
    (starred) and WN  (Surendran:  credibility:  new  evidence)  Democratic
    Republic of Congo [2004] UKIAT 00213 which give clear  guidance  as  to
    the extent to which a judge should question witnesses themselves and in
    particular the approach  to  be  taken  to  the  Surendran  guidelines.
    Further whilst Miss Radford acknowledged that Immigration  Judges  were
    not bound to accept accounts  at  face  value  and  could,  and  indeed
    should, probe for apparent improbabilities, it was not open  to  judges
    to involve themselves directly in questioning Appellants  or  witnesses
    save when it is absolutely necessary to enable them  to  ascertain  the
    truth and that a judge must never adopt or appear to  adopt  a  hostile
    attitude.

11. I am referred to the witness statement of Angela  Cole.   This  witness
    statement is dated 12th August 2016.  Miss Cole states in that  witness
    statement at paragraph 7 that the credibility of the Appellant was  not
    specifically raised by the Secretary of State in her refusal letter  of
    16th July 2015 and  that  this  was  accepted  at  the  outset  by  the
    Presenting Officer who did not seek to challenge the credibility of the
    Appellant's account in his cross-examination.  Against this  background
    Miss Radford points out that there was no cross-examination made of the
    Appellant regarding his father's  job  and  experiences  and  that  the
    judge's questions concentrate upon the Appellant's ability, or lack  of
    it, to contact his family.  She submits  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    cross-examined with regard to the proof of his claim and she refers  to
    his witness statement that was before the First-tier Tribunal and  that
    not one aspect of that witness statement was challenged.   She  submits
    that the issues upon which the judge found  the  Appellant  not  to  be
    truthful are by and large ones that were not raised before the Tribunal
    and consequently there are material errors of law.

12. Miss Radford adopts a  stage  by  stage  approach  to  an  analysis  of
    paragraph 33 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.   She  refers
    to the matters that are headed by the judge as "cause her concern as to
    whether his account of what happened to his father and family  on  17th
    January 2015  are  true".   She  takes  a  stage  by  stage  attack  on
    paragraphs (a) to (g) but in essence she submits that the  majority  of
    points raised by the judge were actually not put to the  Appellant  and
    were not an issue and in the alternative paragraphs no explanation  was
    given by the judge as to their significance.   Similar  features  arise
    she submits in paragraphs 34, 35, 38 and 39.  She points  out  that  in
    addition to this the  Appellant's  representative  was  not  given  the
    opportunity to address  these  issues.   She  submits  that  there  are
    consequently substantial material errors of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge and she asks me to set aside the decision and
    to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing  with
    none of the findings of fact to stand.

13. In response Mr Tufan indicates that it is accepted that  the  Appellant
    must make his case and what is accepted is that the  Appellant  was  an
    Afghan and who his father is.  Nothing else in the Notice of Refusal is
    accepted.  He rather unusually refers me to the Appellant's  instructed
    solicitor's skeleton argument particularly at paragraph 25 which  makes
    reference to the report of Dr Giustozzi.  It is the  contention  of  Mr
    Tufan on behalf of the Secretary of State  that  the  Appellant  simply
    would not be at risk on return to Afghanistan and that  the  judge  was
    perfectly entitled to ask the questions that she did.   His  submission
    is that this Appellant merely just wants to remain in the UK and he has
    made his asylum claim at a time shortly before he was  due  to  return.
    He asks me to find that there are no material  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision and to dismiss the appeal.

14. In brief response Miss Radford looks at  the  issue  of  relocation  in
    Afghanistan, submitting that it would not be safe for the Appellant  to
    go anywhere in the country and  that  the  Immigration  Judge  made  no
    findings in the alternative to her findings at paragraph 45 which  were
    based on events that  had  not  occurred.   She  again  reiterates  her
    submission that there are material errors of law in the decision.

The Law

15.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

16. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

17. A proper approach to credibility requires an assessment of the evidence
    and of the general  claim.   In  asylum  claims  relevant  factors  are
    firstly the internal consistency of the claim,  secondly  the  inherent
    plausibility of the claim and thirdly the consistency of the claim with
    external factors of the sort typically found in country  guidance.   It
    is theoretically correct that a claimant need do no more than state his
    claim but that claim still needs to be  examined  for  consistency  and
    inherent plausibility.   In  nearly  every  case  external  information
    against which a claim can be checked will be available.

18. In this case there is a considerable dispute  between  the  submissions
    made by the Appellant's representative and Mr Tufan on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State as to what exactly was agreed between  the  parties.
    To a certain extent that is strange because it is very clear  from  the
    Notice of Refusal and paragraph  29  that  the  Appellant's  father  is
    accepted as being SM and  that  a  detailed  account  of  his  role  in
    Afghanistan as  well  as  the  Appellant's  family  life  together  are
    accepted and that the Secretary of State  accepts  that  the  Appellant
    holds a father and son relationship.  What is not accepted, as  is  set
    out at paragraph 30 and thereafter of the Notice of  Refusal,  is  that
    the Appellant has a subjective fear on return to  Afghanistan.   It  is
    against that background the issue of credibility comes to be considered
    and the guidelines make it clear that where no matters  of  credibility
    are raised in a letter of refusal but from a reading of the papers, the
    judge  considers  that  there  are  matters  of   credibility   arising
    therefrom, then it is for the judge similarly to  point  these  matters
    out to the representatives and ask that they be dealt  with  either  by
    way of examination of the Appellant  or  submissions.   The  guidelines
    make it clear that it is  not  the  role  of  the  judge  to  adopt  an
    inquisitorial  role  and  where  having  received   the   evidence   or
    submissions in relation to matters which he has drawn to the  attention
    of the representatives the judge considers clarification is  necessary,
    then the judge should be at liberty to ask questions for the purpose of
    seeking clarification.

19. It is against that background that strong submissions are made by  Miss
    Radford as to the approach adopted by the judge and it  is  clear  that
    there are a number of questions where the judge has  made  findings  of
    fact of adverse credibility against the Appellant by way of issues that
    were not raised before the Tribunal.  Miss  Radford's  submissions  are
    those answers to questions put at  paragraphs  33(a),  (e),  (f),  (g),
    paragraph 34, 35, 38 and 39.  Mr Tufan  in  his  submissions  does  not
    challenge those submissions.  His challenge is of a much  more  general
    and rounded approach, namely that nothing else other than the fact that
    the Appellant is the son of his father and an Afghan  is  accepted  and
    that the judge was entitled to ask questions.

20. It is true as  stated  clearly  above  as  a  matter  of  law  that  in
    appropriate situations the judge can ask questions, but they must  flow
    from evidence that is raised by the advocates before  the  Tribunal  or
    indeed if that is not the case and the judge has intervened,  then  the
    advocates must be given the opportunity to comment.   Without  such  an
    approach procedural unfairness can inevitably arise.

21. It is very clear that the judge in this instant case has made  findings
    based on her own analysis, rather than on an  examination  of  all  the
    evidence that has been put  before  her.   That  is  not  to  say  that
    ultimately her findings are wrong  but  the  process  has  to  be  gone
    through so as  to  give  the  representatives  and  in  particular  the
    Appellant's  representatives  the  opportunity  to  comment  and   make
    submissions.

22. In such circumstances there are material errors of law in the  findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge which may very well taint her findings
    on credibility.  The correct approach is consequently to set aside  the
    decision and to give directions  for  the  rehearing  of  this  matter.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  material  errors  of
law and is set aside.  Directions are given hereinafter  for  the  rehearing
of this matter.

 1) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  on  the
    first available date 28 days hence at Taylor House  with  an  estimated
    length of hearing of three hours.

 2) The appeal to be before any Immigration Judge  other  than  Immigration
    Judge Goodrich.

 3) That none of the findings of fact are to stand.

 4) That there be leave to either party to file  and  serve  an  up-to-date
    bundle of subjective and objective evidence upon  which  they  seek  to
    rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

 5) That a Dari interpreter is required.

No application is made to vary the anonymity direction made  by  the  First-
tier Tribunal and such anonymity direction remains in place.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           6th December 2016

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           6th December 2016

