
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number AA/10916/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 July 2016                           |On 5 October 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          The Hon MR JUSTICE WARBY
                 Deputy UPPER TRIBUNAL Judge DEBORAH TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               ACJ (Sri Lanka)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Grieves, Counsel, instructed by Birnberg Pierce.

For the Respondent: Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction regarding anonymity:

The respondent and his witnesses  are  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
proceedings. The respondent shall be referred to as ACJ. No report of  these
proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify   him,   whether   by
identifying a member of his family or otherwise, or  any  of  the  witnesses
pseudonymised as B to Q. Breach of  this  direction  may  be  treated  as  a
contempt of court.
                                 The appeal

  1. This is a case about asylum. The issue at stake in the proceedings  is
     whether the respondent is excluded from protection  as  a  refugee  by
     virtue of Article 1F of the 1951 Geneva Convention on  the  Status  of
     Refugees (the Refugee Convention)  because  of  complicity  in  crimes
     perpetrated by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE).  The  SSHD
     decided that he was. On appeal, the First Tier Tribunal  Judge  (FTTJ)
     held that the respondent qualifies as a refugee, and is not  excluded.
     The SSHD has now appealed against the decision of the FTTJ. The  issue
     on this appeal is whether that decision  involved  material  error  of
     law. At the conclusion of the hearing on 12 July 2016 we announced our
     conclusion: that for reasons to be given later  the  appeal  would  be
     dismissed, with the consequence that the decision of the FTTJ  stands.
     These are our reasons.


                                 Background


  2. The respondent is from Sri Lanka, his stated date of  birth  being  10
     November 1971. From about 1995 he worked for the Tamil  Rehabilitation
     Organisation (TRO), based in Sri Lanka. From 2 April 2002 he  was  its
     Executive Director. In  August  2005  he  became  a  Director  of  the
     International TRO (ITRO). He held these  posts  during  the  ceasefire
     between the Sri Lankan government and the LTTE, which lasted from 2001
     to 2006.


  3. On 15 March 2007 the  respondent  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  a
     visitor visa. On 21 March 2007 he was informed that a warrant had been
     issued for his arrest in Sri Lanka. On 4 April 2007 he claimed asylum.
     The progress of that application  was,  by  any  standards,  slow.   A
     number of false starts were made. Eventually, by a  decision  dated  1
     December 2014,  the  Secretary  of  State  (SSHD)  accepted  that  the
     respondent had a well-founded fear of persecution if returned  to  Sri
     Lanka, but decided that he was excluded from  the  protection  of  the
     Refugee Convention under Article 1F.


  4. In broad summary, the grounds for that  decision  were  that  research
     gave serious grounds for considering that in his capacity as Executive
     Director of TRO and Director of  ITRO  the  respondent  had  knowingly
     facilitated  terrorist  acts  perpetrated  by  the  LTTE  during   the
     ceasefire. The case, which there were  said  be  serious  grounds  for
     considering to be true, was that TRO was  a  Sri  Lankan  organisation
     with branches worldwide, which operated as a front for the  LTTE.  TRO
     had  diverted  some  of  the  funds  it  raised  worldwide  away  from
     charitable purposes to the LTTE. ITRO  had  similarly  operated  as  a
     front, diverting funds to  the  LTTE.  The  LTTE  had  carried  out  a
     significant number of terrorist  attacks  during  the  ceasefire.  The
     respondent, as a senior figure within the TRO  and  ITRO,  would  have
     been aware that some of the diverted  funds  might  be  used  for  the
     purpose of terrorism.


  5. The respondent appealed to the FTT. His appeal was itself  beset  with
     delays, but it was eventually heard by FTT Judge  Scott-Baker  over  5
     days in November 2015. The respondent himself did not  give  evidence.
     Other  witnesses  did,  and  there  was  a  considerable   volume   of
     documentary material. The appeal hearing took 5 days.  In  a  detailed
     written determination dated 24 March 2016 the FTTJ allowed the appeal.
     She held that the respondent falls to be considered as a  refugee  and
     is not subject to exclusion under Article 1F.  The  SSHD  now  appeals
     against that decision, by permission of FTT Judge Parkes.

  6. In accordance with the current practice of the FTT and Upper  Tribunal
     in asylum cases, and without opposition from the SSHD, the  respondent
     has  been  anonymised  throughout.  We  consider  that  this   remains
     appropriate.  In the proceedings below  he  was  identified  as  XXXX.
     Because ABC and XYZ are over-used for anonymization,  we  have  chosen
     the three-letter formula ACJ instead. Witnesses were also  anonymised,
     on  the  application  of  the  respondent,  and  given  single  letter
     references letters, from B to Q We retain that anonymization.

                              The legal context

  7. The Refugee Convention protects from expulsion those who  fall  within
     the definition of "refugee" in Article 1A.  It has been common  ground
     since the SSHD's decision of 21 August 2013 that the respondent  meets
     that definition unless he is excluded  on  the  grounds  specified  in
     Article 1F(b) or (c).  The issues before the Judge  and  those  before
     this Tribunal are all concerned with those exceptions.

  8. The burden of proving that an individual  is  excluded  by  virtue  of
     these provisions lies on the person who makes that assertion, in  this
     case the SSHD.


  9. The FTTJ set out the relevant legal principles  at  [71]-[79]  of  her
     determination, which the SSHD does  not  seek  to  challenge  on  this
     appeal.  We can therefore conveniently adopt her account:


           1. Article lF of the Refugee Convention excludes three  types  of
              persons from the definition of refugee:

                 "The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any
                 person with respect to whom there are serious reasons for
                 considering that:

                   a) he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime,
                      or a crime against humanity, as defined in the
                      international instruments drawn up to make provision
                      in respect of such crimes;


                   b)  he  has  committed  a  serious  non-political  crime
                      outside the country of refuge prior to his  admission
                      to that country as a refugee;


                   c) he has been guilty of acts contrary to  the  purposes
                      and principles of the United  Nations."


           2. Further a member state of the European Union must observe  the
              requirements of  the  Qualification  Directive.    Recital  22
              dealing with Article lF(c) provides as follows:-

                  "Acts contrary to  the  purposes  and  principles  of  the
                  United Nations are set out in the  preamble  and  Articles
                  1and 2 of the Charter  of  the  United  Nations  and  are,
                  amongst others, embodied in the United Nations Resolutions
                  relating  to  measures  for  combating  terrorism,   which
                  declare that: "Acts, methods and  practices  of  terrorism
                  are contrary to the purpose and principles of  the  United
                  Nations"  and  that  "knowingly  financing,  planning  and
                  inciting terrorist acts are also contrary to  the  purpose
                  of the purpose and principles of the United Nations.""

           3.  Article  12(2)  of  the  Qualification  Directive  interprets
              Article lF of the Refugee Convention and under Section  54  of
              the Immigration,Asylum  and Nationality  Act 2006 it  provides
              for the construction and application of  Article  lF(c)  which
              shall be taken  to include:-


                   d)  Acts  of  committing,   preparing   or   instigating
                      terrorism (whether or  not  the  acts  amount  to  an
                      actual or inchoate offence; and


                   e) Acts of encouraging or  inducing  others  to  commit,
                      prepare or instigate terrorism (whether  or  not  the
                      acts amount to an actual or inchoate offence)."

             Terrorism has the meaning given to it by Section 1of the
             Terrorism Act 2000.

           4. For exclusion from  international  refugee  protection  to  be
              justified it  must  be  established  that  there  are  serious
              reasons for considering the person  concerned  had  individual
              responsibility for acts within the scope of Article 1F(c).  At
              [15] of Al Sirri [2012] UKSC 54 the Supreme Court held that:

                 This requires an individualised consideration of the  facts
                 of the case,  which  will  include  an  assessment  of  the
                 person's involvement in the act concerned, his mental state
                 and   possible   grounds   for     rejecting     individual
                 responsibility. As   a   general  proposition,   individual
                 responsibility arises where the individual committed an act
                 within the scope of Article lF(c), or participated  in  its
                 commission in a  manner  that  gives  rise  to   individual
                 responsibility,  for example through planning,  instigating
                 or ordering the act   in   question,   or   by   making   a
                 significant contribution to the commission of the  relevant
                 act in knowledge that his act or  omission would facilitate
                 the  act."

           5. In particular the court noted in the same paragraph:-

                  "In Bundesrepublik Deutschland v BB and D (Joint cases  C-
                  57/09 and C-101/09) [2011] Imm AR 190 the Grand Chamber of
                  the Court of Justice of the European Union  confirmed  the
                  requirement of an individualised assessment and held  that
                  it was not justifiable  to  base  a  decision  to  exclude
                  solely on a person's membership of a group included  in  a
                  list of   terrorist organisations.  This too is consistent
                  with the approach adopted by this court in JS (Sri  Lanka)
                  [2011] 1AC 184."

           6. At [16] the Supreme Court found  that  this  was  the  correct
              approach and went on to state:-

                 "The  Article  should  be  interpreted  restrictively   and
                 applied with caution. There  should  be  a  high  threshold
                 "defined in terms of the gravity of the  act  in  question,
                 the manner in which the act is organised, its international
                 impact and long term objectives, and the  implications  for
                 international peace and  security".  And  there  should  be
                 serious reasons for considering that the  person  concerned
                 bore individual responsibility for acts of that character."

           7. The Supreme Court considered that the phrase "acts contrary to
              the purposes of the principles of  the  United  Nations"  must
              have  an  autonomous  meaning.  The  United  Nations  Security
              Council had declared that  "Acts,  methods  and  practices  of
              terrorism are contrary to the purposes and principles  of  the
              United Nations" and that was repeated in  Recital  22  to  the
              Qualification Directive. This  declaration  was  made  in  the
              absence of an internationally agreed definition of  terrorism.
              The court also noted that in the case of  B  and  D  the  CJEU
              consistently referred to "international" terrorism.


           8.  The  Supreme  Court  therefore  found  at   [38]   that   the
              appropriately cautious and restrictive approach  would  be  to
              adopt paragraph 17 of the UNHCR Guidelines which provides:-

                 "Article lF(c) is only triggered in  extreme  circumstances
                 by  activity  which  attacks  the   very   basis   of   the
                 international community's coexistence. Such  activity  must
                 have  an  international  dimension.   Crimes   capable   of
                 affecting  international  peace,  security   and   peaceful
                 relations  between  the  states  as  well  as  serious  and
                 sustained violations of human rights would fall under  this
                 category."

           9. In considering the issue of the appropriate standard of  proof
              the court found the following at [75]:-

                    1)  "Serious  reasons"  is  stronger  than   "reasonable
                       grounds"
                    2) The evidence from which  those  reasons  are  derived
                       must be "clear and credible" or "strong"
                    3) "Considering" is stronger than "suspecting".  In  our
                       view  it  is  also  stronger  than  "believing".   It
                       requires a considered judgment of the decision-maker.
        4) The decision-maker need not be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
           or to the standard required in criminal law.
                    5)  It is unnecessary to import our  domestic  standards
                       of proof into  the  question.  The  circumstances  of
                       refugee  claims  and  the  nature  of  the   evidence
                       available are so variable. However if  the  decision-
                       maker is satisfied it is more likely  than  not  that
                       the  applicant  has  not  committed  the  crimes   in
                       question or has not been guilty of acts  contrary  to
                       the purposes and principles of the United Nations, it
                       is difficult  to  see  how  there  could  be  serious
                       reasons for considering that he had   done  so.   The
                       reality is that there are unlikely to be sufficiently
                       serious reasons for considering the applicant  to  be
                       guilty unless the decision-maker can be satisfied  on
                       a balance of probabilities that he is. The task of  a
                       decision-maker  is  to  apply  the   words   of   the
                       Convention (and Directive) in the particular case.

                         The First Tier proceedings


 10. Before the FTT, the  respondent  advanced  an  affirmative  case  that
     neither TRO nor ITRO were front organisations for the  LTTE.  The  Sri
     Lankan office of TRO, referred to as  "TRO  SL",  was  a  humanitarian
     organisation carrying  out  genuine  relief  work  amongst  the  Tamil
     community in Sri Lanka. The overseas offices bearing the TRO name were
     not branches of TRO, organised and controlled from  the  centre.  They
     were independent organisations, only loosely affiliated. If  they  had
     engaged in any illicit activity, which was not accepted,  it  was  not
     done at the instigation or with the knowledge of the respondent.  ITRO
     was a legitimate organisation which had been established in 2005  with
     the aim of ensuring due diligence by the overseas TRO organisations.


 11. In support of this case the respondent relied on the  account  he  had
     given in interview, and the two substantial witness statements he  had
     made for the purposes of the appeal, running to 125 pages in all.   He
     also  adduced  evidence  from  a  substantial  number  of   supporting
     witnesses, who were given the designations  B  to  Q  inclusive.  Oral
     evidence was adduced from six of these witnesses  "live"  or,  in  two
     instances  via  Skype  from  abroad.  The   appellant   also   adduced
     documentary evidence.


 12. The respondent's witnesses gave direct evidence of  fact,  and  expert
     opinion evidence. One, Witness B, had worked for  the  United  Nations
     for over 30 years, including work in Sri Lanka and  with  the  Berghof
     Foundation. He spoke from experience gained when working in Sri  Lanka
     from mid-2002, as an independent consultant working in the  office  of
     the Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe. His assignment  had  been  to
     advise the Government of Sri Lanka ("GoSL") on the  rehabilitation  of
     the North East of the country in a manner which  would  not  interfere
     with the ongoing peace negotiations. Witness Dr P was an academic at a
     UK University, lecturing on International Relations and Global  Public
     Policy. His doctoral thesis  was  concerned  with  Sri  Lanka's  armed
     conflict and the 2002-6  Norwegian-led  peace  process.  He  had  been
     invited  to  lecture  on  Sri  Lanka  to  members  of  Her   Majesty's
     Government, and had briefed  incoming  ambassadors.  He  submitted  an
     expert report, and attended to be cross-examined upon it.

13. The SSHD advanced a case to the effect that:
     1) the  LTTE  during  the  Sri  Lankan  ceasefire  2001-2006  committed
        terrorist acts;
     2) TRO and/or ITRO procured funds and diverted them  to  the  LTTE,  by
        which the funds were used in part for terrorist purposes;
     3) the respondent's conduct in his capacity as  Executive  Director  of
        TRO and/or Director of ITRO satisfied the  test  identified  in  Al-
        Sirri [15] in that he acted or failed to act in ways  which  made  a
        "significant contribution to the relevant  act"  knowing  that  such
        acts or omissions would facilitate  the  terrorist  conduct  of  the
        LTTE.


14. The terrorist acts were alleged to have an international dimension  and
    hence to fall within Article 1F(c), or  alternatively  to  fall  within
    Article 1F(b). It was, however, accepted that on the facts of this case
    the SSHD's case on each of these limbs of  Article  1F  stood  or  fell
    together.


15. The SSHD's case as to the role of TRO  was  that,  as  alleged  in  the
    decision letter, there were serious grounds for consider it was a front
    for the LTTE; that it controlled a number of  offices  worldwide  which
    functioned as branches and also operated as fronts, acquiring funds and
    passing them to the LTTE for illicit purposes, including terrorism.  As
    to the respondent's  role  within  TRO,  reliance  was  placed  on  his
    statement in interview on 19 April 2007 that he was second in  command.
    It was said to follow that he played a significant role in  controlling
    TRO and its foreign branches, or must at least have been aware of their
    activities. The SSHD relied on the fact that the  respondent  travelled
    internationally to visit TRO offices overseas. As to ITRO,  the  SSHD's
    case was that this too was a "front" for the LTTE, performing a similar
    role to that of TRO and/or the international "branches".


16. The evidence relied on by the SSHD in support of these contentions  was
    entirely documentary. It consisted principally of a document called the
    International Crimes, Case Research and  Analysis  Report,  dubbed  the
    "RAR", dated May 2013, and its supporting documentation. It was the RAR
    and its supporting documentation that formed the basis for  the  SSHD's
    December 2014 decision to exclude the respondent from protection  as  a
    refugee.  The RAR ran to 59 pages. It had no paragraph  numbering,  and
    hence was referred to by the FTTJ by its page numbering in the bundles:
    GG1 to GG59. We shall do the same.  The  supporting  documentation  was
    identified in footnotes to the RAR, from 79 to 260 and 289 to 361.


17. According to the Presenting Officer who appeared before  us  as  below,
    all this material was before the FTTJ. That was not accepted by Counsel
    for the respondent. We were unable to verify the position  because,  in
    breach of this Tribunal's directions, the SSHD had failed to provide  a
    paginated hearing bundle or to check that all  the  material  that  was
    before the FTTJ was also available to us. We shall however assume  that
    the Presenting Officer is correct on this point. However, what is clear
    is that the Presenting Officer did not take the Judge to every document
    relied on in the RAR.  As he explained the position  to  us,  the  time
    available to him at the hearing  was  not  enough  to  allow  this.  On
    enquiry, it proved that he had not submitted  a  Skeleton  Argument  or
    written submissions. The Presenting Officer agreed that  where  he  had
    not shown the Judge,  or  specifically  directed  her  attention  to  a
    document referred to and relied on in the RAR, he had left  it  to  the
    Judge to locate, study and evaluate that documentation.

                          The FTTJ's Determination


 18. The Determination is a lengthy and very detailed  document,  extending
     to 595  paragraphs  over  123  pages,  with  34  pages  of  Appendices
     detailing  the  evidential  sources   referred   to,   including   the
     chronology.  The Determination is clearly structured and divided  into
     sections as follows: Introduction - Procedural History  -  Evidence  -
     Basis  of  Claim  -  Reasons  for  Secretary  of  State's  decision  -
     International Crimes,  Case  Research  and  Analysis  Report  (RAR)  -
     Relevant law (as cited above) - Country Evidence  on  the  Conflict  -
     Appellant's Evidence - Evidence of Witness B - Evidence of Witness E -
     Evidence of Witness F - Evidence of Witness G - Evidence of Witness  L
     - Evidence of Witness P - Written evidence - Challenges  by  Appellant
     to Objective Materials Produced by the Respondent -  Further  Evidence
     Provided by the Appellant - Findings and Assessment of Evidence -  TRO
     Worldwide - TRO UK  - Applicability of Law.


 19. In the section entitled "Findings and Assessment of  Evidence",  which
     runs from paragraph [361] to [554], the Judge  reviews  and  evaluates
     each and every relevant page of the RAR. In the "Applicability of Law"
     section, which runs from [555] to [595], she  identifies  the  matters
     requiring proof by the SSHD and assesses the rival contentions on each
     issue, by reference to the evidence before  her.  She  summarises  her
     main conclusions in the concluding paragraphs of the Determination  as
     follows:

          "592. In short I find that the [SSHD] has not established that TRO
          SL during the period 2002-2006 was fundraising for the LTTE or was
          a front for the LTTE. I remind  myself  that  the  charity  worked
          through an amorphous network of offices,  the  majority  of  which
          took TRO as a name and that  these  offices  were  not  controlled
          centrally. Clearly therefore there is the possibility that one  or
          more of the offices has been used as a front for the LTTE. However
          the burden of proof is on the [SSHD] and that burden has not  been
          satisfied.


          593.     I find that ITRO was not a fundraising  organisation  and
          there is no  evidence before  me to establish that through any  of
          its activities monies were raised for the LTTE  or  channelled  to
          them, or that it could be considered as a front for the  LTTE.


          594.     There was evidence before  me  concerning  the  LTTE  and
          alleged terrorist attacks carried out by them during the ceasefire
          period. However there is  no  necessity  to  consider  this  issue
          within the terms of this determination as [ACJ] has  not   been  a
          member of the LTTE and the [SSHD] has  failed  to   establish   on
          the   evidence  before  me   that  TRO  SL,  and  ITRO  are  front
          organisations for the LTTE.


          595.     I find that [ACJ] falls to be considered as a refugee and
          he is not subject to exclusion under Article IF."

 20. To aid clarity we have substituted "SSHD" and "ACJ"  for  "respondent"
     and "appellant" in these citations, as we shall in  further  citations
     from the Determination. For the same reason, we shall do the same when
     citing from the Grounds.


                            The Grounds of Appeal


 21. The SSHD originally advanced four Grounds of Appeal.  The  fourth  was
     not pursued at the hearing, on the grounds that it was  academic.  The
     remaining three are as follows:

    (1) "Failure to resolve conflict of fact/make findings".


22. The FTTJ is criticised for concentrating only on the conduct of the Sri
    Lankan offices of TRO (or TRO SL) and ITRO, and  failing  to  make  any
    findings as to
      . whether terrorist acts  were  committed  by  the  LTTE  during  the
        ceasefire and, if so, whether they had an international  dimension,
        and
      . whether the respondent as Executive Director of TRO knew  that  his
        acts or  omissions  would  facilitate  such  conduct  "through  the
        branches of TRO worldwide".


    (2) "Failure to give  reasons/failure  to  make  findings/  failing  to
    resolve conflicts of  fact/wrong  standard  of  proof/failure  to  take
    evidence into account."


23. A number of disparate points are advanced under this overall headline.
    The main criticisms are
      . An error of approach, by disregarding some of the evidence about
        the conduct of TRO on the basis that it related to time before
        2002, when she should instead have applied a presumption of
        continuity;
      . A further error of approach, by asking herself whether particular
        items of evidence were "determinative" rather than considering the
        evidence "in the round", by reference to the standard prescribed by
        Al-Sirri;
      . A failure to make findings, as the SSHD asked the Judge to do, on
        whether public statements made by international Government
        Departments and Courts on which the SSHD relied were made in bad
        faith;
      . Making findings of fact which are perverse, because she ignored
        evidence that was before her, or evaluated it in a way that was not
        open to her.


     This last category of criticism involves no less than 25 individual
     points.

    3) "Mistake of fact/Failure to make findings".


24. The criticism is that the FTTJ mistakenly proceeded on the  basis  that
    it was common ground that the respondent was "Executive Director of TRO
    SL", when the SSHD's case was that he was Executive  Director  of  "TRO
    worldwide",  with  responsibilities  for  the  operation  of   overseas
    "branches". The Judge is said to have "failed to take into  account  at
    all the letters of appointment or the submissions made upon them"  when
    considering whether the Al Sirri test was met.   This Ground of  appeal
    would appear to overlap with Ground (1).


25. A substantial number of the SSHD's criticisms, including all 25 of  the
    detailed points  relied  on  under  Ground  2,  can  only  be  properly
    evaluated by reference to the RAR  and  its  supporting  documentation.
    The RAR was before us but not the documents referred  to.  As  we  have
    noted, the SSHD failed to provide us with an appeal bundle or to  check
    that we had the relevant materials available to us. We are grateful  to
    Mr  Grieves  for  preparing  a  paginated  bundle  of  the   underlying
    materials. We were also assisted by the detailed Reply which Mr Grieves
    prepared under Rule 24, and for his provision of the thorough  Skeleton
    Argument which he submitted to the FTTJ by way  of  a  written  closing
    argument. This material allowed Mr Clarke to make a proper presentation
    of his arguments, and enabled us to follow and assess  the  submissions
    of both sides.

                                 Assessment

    Ground 1

26. We do not accept that the FTTJ misunderstood or failed to  address  the
    case for the SSHD, as is alleged.  We are satisfied that  the  case  as
    presented below focused firmly on the conduct of TRO SL and  ITRO,  and
    their alleged roles as fronts for the LTTE. That explains why the Judge
    focused her attention on those points in her concluding paragraphs.  We
    accept that the SSHD's case also  extended  to  an  argument  that  TRO
    offices elsewhere in the world were involved in funding the  LTTE,  and
    that the respondent was knowingly involved in such  activity.   But  we
    reject the submission that the Judge ignored or  failed  to  deal  with
    that aspect of the case. On the contrary, she gave  it  full  attention
    and dismissed it on the evidence.

27. This is apparent from the conclusions we have set out already.  In  the
    second sentence of paragraph [592] the Judge reminded herself "that the
    charity worked through an amorphous network of offices, the majority of
    which took TRO as a name and that these  offices  were  not  controlled
    centrally." The findings to that effect are to be  found  set  out  and
    explained at some length earlier in the Determination.  At  [368]-[369]
    the Judge said this:

          "368. The essential question, given that it is not in dispute that
          [ACJ] was an Executive Director of TRO Sri Lanka, is  whether  TRO
          Sri Lanka was a front for the LTTE.


          369.  In Section 3 of the RAR GG8 the [SSHD] maintains that TRO is
          a Sri Lankan organisation with  branches   worldwide.    This  was
          disputed by [ACJ] in that he claimed there  were  no  branches  as
          such but independent offices worldwide. This issue  is  considered
          later in this Determination."


28. The Judge had already recorded the evidence on this issue. At [197] she
    referred to evidence of Witness B that TRO did not control the overseas
    offices. At [222]-[225] the evidence of Professor F  was  referred  to.
    Witness L also gave evidence on the issue, referred to at  [257]-[258].
    The Judge's findings and the reasoning behind them appear in paragraphs
    [508]-[509], [541], [542-545] and [573]-[576].   It  is  sufficient  to
    extract the following key passages:

          "542.  There is merit in [ACJ's]  submissions.   The  relationship
          [ACJ]  had  with  overseas  TRO  offices  was   one   of   natural
          communications concerning TRO SL/joint  donor projects  that  were
          being funded by overseas TRO  offices.
          ...


          544. The evidence to support  the  [SSHD's]  contention  that  the
          overseas offices were linked was the back cover of  the  TRO  CFA:
          2002 to 2007 report where a  number  of  TRO  offices  are  listed
          together with WP. All of the witnesses before me  at  the  hearing
          confirmed that they were  all  separate  institutions  who  funded
          projects and were part of a family and no more


          545. The only  evidence  before  me  of  any  alleged  linkage  of
          overseas TRO offices to TRO Sri Lanka is through the investigation
          undertaken by the British Charity Commissioners between  2000  and
          2005.  The investigators did not find any evidence of  funding  of
          the LITE in that investigation. The investigations by the Canadian
          Revenue Agency appear not to have included investigations  in  Sri
          Lanka.
          ...

          547. What is clear from the evidence before me is that  despite  a
          lengthy investigation into TRO UK starting in 2000 and culminating
          in 2005 no link of  funding  to  the  LTTE  had  been  ascertained
          despite investigations by BDO in both London and in Sri Lanka ...
          ...
          574. It is not disputed that [ACJ] was an  executive  director  of
          TRO SL. He was appointed  in  April  2002  and  his  job  included
          visiting the overseas branches and promoting further  cooperation.
          His primary role was being responsible for coordination  with  the
          government and international organisations.  A further letter from
          April 2005 renewed his contract to April 2008 and reconfirmed  his
          duties as before.
          ...


          576. [ACJ] had said that  international  branches   of   TRO  were
          not related  to  TRO SL and that  branches  acted   independently.
          The  [SSHD] sought  to  rely  on  documents at fn263,264,  265  at
          GG35 which were  TRO's  own  documents.  It was asserted that  TRO
          SL and the international branches of TRO were effectively part  of
          the same organisation. ...  It is clear from the limited  evidence
          that each branch  appeared  to  be   incorporated   independently,
          in  accordance   with  the  laws  of the appropriate  jurisdiction
          and  the  incorporation  of  ITRO  in  2005   is   evidence   that
          the TRO offices were  independent  of  each  other-  that  is  the
          reason  that  ITRO  was  formed as it was to bring some  cohesion.
          Much  confusion  has  arisen  in  that  the  majority of  overseas
          offices were  called   TRO   but   it  would   appear   from   the
          evidence that each TRO office was incorporated under the  laws  of
          each  country.  If  the offices  were all branches   of   TRO   as
          suggested  by  the  respondent  one  would  expect   to   find  an
          umbrella company which is not the  case.  There  was   clearly   a
          joint  intention  to provide  for  humanitarian  relief  and   TRO
          offices  developed  where  the   diaspora settled. No  doubt  many
          involved  knew  each  other   and   there    would    have    been
          discussions and agreement on the name and logo  but  it   is   not
          possible  to  find  that   TRO  officials  globally  were  legally
          accountable to each other.  The  incorporation  of  ITRO  did  not
           change  that situation.

          577. The [SSHD] stated that there was  an  identifiable  link  and
          that they were not separate from the central organisation. Clearly
          there were some links as they all used  the  same  name  and  were
          supporting the same cause. Loans appeared to be made between  them
          and addresses and email shared. ITRO was set up to coordinate  and
          it  is clear  from  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  did  work
          internationally visiting TRO offices but  there  was  in  fact  no
          evidence as to what the appellant did  when  he  travelled  around
          Europe and indeed no evidence to  suggest  that  through   [ACJ's]
          work he was raising funds for the LTTE."



29. In the light of these passages it cannot be said that the Judge  failed
    to address this aspect of the case for the SSHD. She did address it, in
    detail, and gave full reasons for rejecting it.

    Ground 3

30. It is convenient to deal with this out of turn, as  it  is  so  closely
    linked with Ground 1.  There was  disagreement  between  Counsel  about
    whether, and if so with what emphasis, the SSHD's  submissions  to  the
    FTTJ relied on the respondent's  letters  of  appointment  as  evidence
    supportive  of  his  case  that  the  respondent  had  control   and/or
    responsibility over the  alleged  overseas  "branches"  of  TRO.    The
    Determination would suggest that the emphasis before the  FTTJ  was  on
    the "back cover of the TRO CFA 2002 to 2007 report", listing  a  number
    of TRO Overseas offices. But it does not seem to us to be necessary  to
    do resolve this dispute. The passages we have cited at [28]  above  are
    enough to show that the SSHD is wrong to submit that the  Judge  failed
    to take into account  the  respondent's  letters  of  appointment:  she
    referred to them expressly  at  [574],  where  she  described  the  key
    features of their content.

31. Those features included the point most strongly relied on by Mr  Clarke
    before us: that the respondent's job "included  visiting  the  overseas
    branches and promoting further cooperation."  These words are not quite
    but very close to  a  literal  quotation  of  the  initial  appointment
    letter, on which Mr Clarke placed emphasis on this  appeal.  It  stated
    that the respondent's  function  was  as  Executive  Director  of  "our
    Organization as from 12th March 2002" and went on:

         "Accordingly you shall
         1)  Be  responsible  for  co-ordination  with  the  Government  and
            International Organizations
         2) On behalf of our Organization visit the  Overseas  branches  and
            promote further co-operation."


32. We do not consider that it can fairly be said that the Judge "failed to
    take into account at all" the appointment letters.  Nor  have  we  been
    persuaded that she failed to take account of such submissions  as  were
    made about those letters. Moreover, it seems to us that the wording  we
    have cited is a tenuous basis on  which  to  rest  a  case  of  overall
    functional control of the overseas TRO offices, or  any  similar  case.
    Even when combined with the listing of overseas offices on the back  of
    a report, it does not add up to much. This  evidence  also  had  to  be
    considered against the evidence called  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
    about the interplay or lack of it  between  TRO  SL  and  the  overseas
    offices. It was not just  open  to  the  Judge  to  find  but,  in  our
    judgment, powerfully supported by the evidence that, as she put  it  at
    [592] "the charity worked through an amorphous network of offices,  the
    majority of which took TRO as a name and that these  offices  were  not
    controlled centrally."

    Ground 2

33. Turning to ground 2, we do not consider  there  is  any  merit  in  the
    SSHD's various criticisms of the Judge's approach.

34. As to  the  evidence  that  related  to  periods  of  time  before  the
    respondent assumed the role of Executive Director of TRO, it is  common
    ground that this is not directly relevant. The SSHD's entire  case  was
    based on the seniority of the role performed by the respondent  in  and
    after April 2002. Mr Clarke accepted before us  that  the  respondent's
    role in TRO before that was not and could not be relied on  in  support
    of the grounds for exclusion. Evidence about events before 2002 is only
    relevant therefore, to the extent that it provides a basis for  drawing
    inferences about what occurred in and after 2002.


35. We do not agree that the Judge was bound to conclude that what happened
    before continued to happen after the respondent's appointment. There is
    no reason for any presumption to that  effect.  It  is  a  question  of
    evaluating each individual item of evidence and determining whether  it
    gives or contributes  to  serious  grounds  for  considering  that  the
    position in and after 2002 was as suggested by the  SSHD.   We  do  not
    consider that the Judge erred in the way submitted by Mr Clarke. We  do
    not read her as dismissing out of  hand  the  (limited)  evidence  that
    related to periods before 2002. Rather, she took into account the  fact
    that it concerned events outside the material period. We see  no  error
    in that approach.


36. It is submitted that  references  in  the  Determination  to  items  of
    evidence not being "determinative" show that the  Judge  asked  herself
    the wrong question. We are quite  satisfied  that  she  identified  and
    applied the correct standard of  proof.   Applying  that  standard,  it
    could in principle be the case that  a  single  item  of  evidence  was
    determinative against the respondent.  That  would  be  the  case,  for
    instance, if a criminal  court  had  after  a  fair  and  public  trial
    convicted the respondent on a charge that he on a specified day  handed
    over funds to an armed LTTE fighter, knowing and intending those  funds
    to be used  to  purchase  weapons  for  terrorism.  The  only  rational
    conclusion would be that there were serious grounds to consider that he
    was a willing  participant  in  terrorist  funding.  To  say,  in  this
    context, that an item of evidence is not determinative is to  say  that
    it does not of itself meet that standard. It is not  to  say  that  the
    evidence is irrelevant.  We reject the submission that the Judge failed
    to consider the evidence "in the round".


37. The complaint that the Judge failed to make findings of  fraud  or  bad
    faith  is  in  our  view  misconceived.  The  submission  is  that  the
    respondent had argued that there was a  conspiracy,  organised  by  the
    GoSL, to  demonise  TRO;  and  that  this  conspiracy  underpinned  the
    Secretary of State's adverse evidence of  TRO's  involvement  with  the
    LTTE. That being so, it is said that  the  respondent's  case  required
    findings of bad faith if it was to succeed.  We are not convinced  that
    this characterisation of the  argument  for  the  respondent  is  quite
    accurate. But even if it is, it would not follow  that  the  Judge  was
    bound either to uphold that argument or  to  accept  that  the  "public
    statements made by International Government Departments and Courts"  on
    which the SSHD relied were correct and  should  be  relied  on  without
    question in the instant case. Had she found that there was no bad faith
    she would still have been entitled if not bound to evaluate each of the
    public statements relied on individually, and assess the weight  to  be
    given to that statement given its contents  and  all  the  other  known
    circumstances of the case.


38. That is what she did. She made no findings of bad faith. But she looked
    at each statement on its merits.  As an aspect of that  evaluation  she
    gave "some weight" to the evidence that supported the  view  that  GoSL
    did seek to demonise the TRO. This is apparent  from  paragraphs  [579]
    and [580]:


          "579. The  [SSHD]  sought  to  rely  on  a  number  of  documents,
          published internationally and alleging that TRO was  a  front  for
          the LTTE. Greater weight can be given  to  documents  produced  by
          reliable observers and human rights organisations.   [ACJ]  sought
          to challenge the impartiality  of  a  number  of  journalists  and
          commentators.  The evidence relating to Rohan  Gunaratna  and  the
          libel case was  particularly  illuminating  as  was  the  evidence
          relating to the other Sri  Lankan  journalists  who  prompted  the
          investigation by the British Charity Commissioners into TRO UK.

          580. In the light of the political background  and  the  situation
          following  the  election  of  Rajapaksa  in  November   2005   the
          submission that GoSL was seeking to demonise TRO as it  wished  to
          shut down the peace talks and remove   the   presence   of   INGOs
          has  some weight."


39. We can see no ground for criticising this approach. The submission that
    the Judge's approach to the statements relied on should have turned  on
    whether or not it was shown that there was "bad faith" on the  part  of
    the governments or courts that made  them  is  far  too  blunt.  It  is
    obvious that the conclusions of the  best  intentioned  people  may  be
    affected, or infected, by ill-intentioned misinformation. In any event,
    statements of this kind, whatever their source, require individual  and
    nuanced assessment, which is what they in fact received.


40.  We  have  carefully  considered  each  of  the  SSHD's  25  individual
    allegations of perversity. Our overall conclusion is that  this  ground
    of appeal fails.  The Judge's findings were not perverse. In the  final
    section of this Determination we set out  in  detail  our  reasons  for
    reaching that conclusion.


41. In that section we acknowledge that on a number of occasions the  Judge
    mistakenly stated that a document referred to and relied on in the  RAR
    had not been reproduced, when it was in fact  within  the  papers  that
    were  before  her.   In  the  vast  majority  of  these  instances  our
    conclusion is that the Judge  did  address  what  was  said  about  the
    document in the RAR, and thereby gave  adequate  consideration  to  the
    point raised by the SSHD. In one instance, we conclude that  the  Judge
    wrongly said that she was unable to make a finding because the document
    was not before her. But we do not consider it arguable  that  it  would
    have made a difference if she had found and considered the document  in
    question.


42. There is, however, another point. Proceedings in  these  tribunals  are
    not inquisitorial, but adversarial.   The  burden  of  proof  in  these
    proceedings lay on the SSHD. The procedure is not a paper exercise, but
    one that involves a hearing. Under those circumstances, it seems to  us
    obvious that the SSHD must ensure that her case is fully  explained  at
    the hearing and the essential reading  identified  to  the  Judge.  She
    cannot expect to discharge the  burden  that  lies  on  her  by  simply
    presenting the Tribunal with a voluminous paper case,  and  asking  the
    Judge to navigate her way through it unaided.


43. We do not suggest that this is how this case was presented. It is clear
    that the Presenting Officer  did  take  steps  to  direct  the  Judge's
    attention to documents  of  particular  significance  from  the  SSHD's
    perspective, and to explain the significance which the SSHD attached to
    those documents. It is equally clear, however, that this was  not  done
    with every document, and that some of  the  documents  which  were  not
    shown to and explained to the Judge are among those which the SSHD  now
    complains the Judge mistakenly thought were not before her at all.   We
    do not consider that, when determining this appeal, it would  be  right
    to attach any great weight to complaints that the Judge did not look at
    documents to which her attention was not specifically directed  at  the
    hearing. This is not so much a matter of fairness to the Judge,  though
    that may not be a wholly irrelevant consideration. The critical  factor
    is that it would be unfair to the respondent to allow an appellant what
    amounts to a second bite of the cherry.
                            The SSHD's 25 points


44. As  we  have  noted,  the  RAR  does  not  follow  a  chronological  or
    geographical format. The same is true of the FTTJ's assessment  of  the
    RAR, for the simple reason that she followed  the  RAR  page  by  page.
    The SSHD's critique  of  the  FTTJ's  Determination  follows  the  same
    course. In  this  section  of  our  Determination,  however,  we  shall
    approach the relevant material in a  different  way.   We  will  do  so
    principally  by  source  jurisdiction,  whilst  following   a   broadly
    chronological  approach.  This  helps  illuminate  the  nature  of  the
    underlying material. As will become clear, the source  material  mainly
    derives from two jurisdictions, Canada and  the  USA,  with  a  smaller
    amount from Europe; much of the Canadian material is  in  the  form  of
    press cuttings; there is a considerable body of  unattributed  hearsay;
    and the 25 points involve a degree of repetition.


45. Repetitiousness, reliance on hearsay,  and  on  cuttings  from  sources
    lacking objectivity were among the criticisms levelled at the materials
    relied on in the RAR by Mr Grieves, Counsel for the  appellant,  before
    the  FTTJ:  see  [351]-[352]  of  the  FTTJ's   Determination,   headed
    "Challenges  by  Appellant  to  Objective  Materials  Produced  by  the
    Respondent". In a number of instances the FTTJ accepted the  thrust  of
    the appellant's criticisms. A major strand of the SSHD's case  on  this
    appeal has been that she was wrong to do so. As will be clear from what
    follows, however, we consider that the FTTJ's approach was  legitimate.
    She  did  not  discount  material  from  apparently  authoritative  and
    reliable sources, but assessed it for what it was, adopting a  cautious
    or sceptical approach only where  this  was  fairly  warranted  by  the
    material before her.


    1998 Jane's Intelligence Review


46. The SSHD relied on a report  in  this  publication  in  July  1998.  At
    paragraph [370] the Judge said this:
         "[the SSHD] maintained that TRO acted as a front  organisation  and
         Jane's Intelligence Review in July 1998 stated  that  the  bulk  of
         LTTE funds raised under the banner of humanitarian  and  children's
         welfare organisations had been channelled to fund  the  LTTE's  war
         effort -fn 79, 1/TRO. This report was by Rohan Gunaratna. There was
         evidence before me and  set  out  above  that  Mr  Gunaratna  is  a
         journalist and academic particularly interested in  this  political
         issue. It is of note that the article relied upon by [ACJ] has  not
         been  written  by  an  acknowledged  academic  expert,  but,   more
         importantly, in my judgment he  cannot  be  regarded  as  impartial
         given the findings made about him in the  Canadian  libel  case  in
         2011."
47. The SSHD's criticises the  Judge's  approach  to  Mr  Gunaratna's  1998
    article, complaining that the libel judgment  was  not  before  her  in
    full. In our judgment the criticism amounts to mere  disagreement  with
    the Judge's decision. Her task was to decide what weight to put on this
    journalist's stated views about the channelling of funds ostensibly for
    humanitarian purposes into the war effort.  In  that  exercise  it  was
    plainly relevant for her to consider  whether  his  opinion  should  be
    given less weight because he is not an  acknowledged  academic  expert.
    There was written evidence that in  2011  Mr  Gunaratna  lost  a  libel
    action in the Ontario Superior Court over an article claiming that  the
    Canadian Tamil Congress was a front for the LTTE, and  was  ordered  to
    pay damages. There was no challenge by the Secretary of State  to  that
    evidence, which was a legitimate basis for doubting his reliability  on
    such issues.
    Canada
    1998: case about FACT
48. The Judge said, at [451]:
         "Also at GG20 reference was made to a case from  1998  relating  to
         Manikavasagam  Suresh,  a  spokesman  for   FACT   (Federation   of
         Associations of Canadian Tamils) who had been sent to Canada by the
         LTTE. This case was not before me but the  findings  by  the  Judge
         were that he had been a member of the LTTE and  had  been  sent  to
         head up the World  Tamil  Movement  ([WTM]).  He  was  banned  from
         contact with other LTTE representatives and individuals  linked  to
         the LTTE and examples were given but there was no reference to  TRO
         Canada or TRO UK or any other TRO offices. This case was decided in
         1998 and was therefore outside the relevant time  frame  but  there
         was no finding that TRO was involved. "

49. The SSHD complained in her  grounds  that  this  passage  "disregarded"
    evidence of a link between FACT and the LTTE", which should  have  been
    considered "in the round" with other evidence, referred to by the Judge
    at [450]. That other evidence consisted of an article by  Stewart  Bell
    in the Canadian National  Post  2003,  asserting  that  "the  identical
    Toronto address as the Federation of Associations of  Canadian  Tamils,
    which the Canadian Government has named as a front for  the  Liberation
    Tigers of Tamil Eelam". The Judge found that  "There  was  no  evidence
    however that the Federation of Canadian Tamils had been found to  be  a
    front for the LTTE."


 50. At best, the SSHD's complaint would amount to a disagreement with  the
     Judge's findings. The Judge did not "disregard" evidence. She  reached
     reasoned conclusions. She was fully entitled to conclude that the case
     about FACT had nothing to say about TRO, and was outside the  relevant
     time framework anyway. The only evidence adduced by the  SSHD  of  any
     link between the TRO and FACT was a newspaper cutting from  2003.  The
     allegation was that the Canadian government had made a  finding.  This
     was uncorroborated, and related to TRO Canada in any event. The common
     address point was abandoned by Mr Clarke at the hearing. We  think  he
     was wise to do so. The  report  did  not  even  allege  that  the  two
     organisations had shared an address, merely that  TRO  Canada  had  at
     some unspecified date "used" the same address as FACT.   The Judge was
     rightly alive to the risk of smear, or  of  inferring  guilt  by  mere
     association.
    1999: Senate Committee on Security and Intelligence
51. At [416] the FTTJ dealt with an assertion  in  the  RAR  that  relevant
    statements were made by the Canadian Senate Committee on  Security  and
    Intelligence in 1999. She said:
         "At fn 144, GG16 the [SSHD] sought to rely on the  comment  by  the
         Canadian Senate Committee on Security and Intelligence 1999 stating
         that TRO was one group identified by the Committee that had  raised
         money  for guns and  materials  used by  the Tamil Tigers but  this
         was outside of the timeframe that was under consideration   and  in
         any event the source material being an  article  from  the  Toronto
         Star had not  been  produced."
52. The complaint advanced in the Grounds of Appeal,  and  repeated  by  Mr
    Clarke in his oral submissions  is  that  the  FTTJ  had  "discount[ed]
    evidence  from  the  Canadian  Senate   Committee   on   Security   and
    Intelligence 1999" (our emphasis).  It  was  said  that  this  evidence
    "confirmed the TRO raised money for  guns  and  material  used  by  the
    LTTE."  The Grounds give these reasons  for  asserting  that  the  FTTJ
    erred:
        1) The [FTTJ] wrongly asserts  that  the  source  report  from  the
           Toronto Star was not before the Tribunal when it appears at  p42
           of Respondent bundle 3. An appendix A was served on all  parties
           by [the SSHD] that clearly identified the relevant page  numbers
           and associated bundles.

        2) The [FTTJ] rejects the report on account of the  fact  that  the
           report  was  made  3  years  prior  to  the  Appellant  becoming
           Executive Director. It is submitted that there was  no  evidence
           before the Tribunal that TRO had made any efforts  to  stop  the
           practices  referred  to  in  the  report,   therefore   such   a
           presumption does not arise on the facts.

        3) The [FTTJ] rejects the report on the basis that the President of
           TRO in Canada had been exonerated of LTTE  links.  At  paragraph
           447 the [FTTJ] refers to the evidence of this exoneration. It is
           apparent however that the President in question  enjoyed  tenure
           for one year only from 1995/1996 and then left.  The  report  at
           page 554-555 of Respondent bundle  2  quotes  the  President  as
           saying  "I  worked  for  TRO  for   1   year.   After   that   I
           resigned......there were some questions that  came  about  so  I
           really did not want to take my name there". The report  goes  on
           to evidence that the president  had  been  ostracised  by  Tamil
           organisation because he had left the TRO. It is  submitted  that
           the [FTTJ] has failed to adequately engage with this evidence in
           respect of  the  time  when  he  was  not  president  and  given
           inadequate reasons  as  to  why  his  tenure  for  one  year  is
           determinative of TROs activities during the time when he was not
           associated with TRO.

        4) In light of the invitation by  [the  SSHD]  at  the  hearing  in
           respect of the alleged conspiracy against TRO, the [FTTJ]  fails
           to make any findings as to whether the statement by the Canadian
           Senate Committee was made in bad faith."

53. In our view, again, the SSHD is attempting simply to reargue her  case,
    and on a weak footing. The  SSHD  wrongly  characterises  the  material
    relied on as "evidence from the Canadian Senate Committee". It was  not
    even evidence about findings of that Committee. The quotation relied on
    was from a consultant to the Committee, one Don Gracey.   No  statement
    from him, nor any report  from  the  Committee,  was  before  her.  The
    quotation was derived from a passage in a  newspaper  cutting,  quoting
    from an interview with the paper.  The  fact  that  the  Judge  wrongly
    stated that the article, from the Toronto Star,  was  not  amongst  her
    papers is  immaterial  to  her  decision.  She  clearly  addressed  its
    contents, as recounted in the RAR, at  paragraphs  [416]-[417]  of  the
    determination. Furthermore, during  the  time  period  over  which  the
    alleged investigation took place, no evidence of wrongdoing  in  Canada
    ever came to light, despite detailed investigations having taken place.
    The Judge was entitled to observe that the TRO was permitted  to  raise
    funds in Canada in the following years. No attempt was made by GoSL  to
    shut down the  TRO  during  this  period.  Finally,  there  was  strong
    evidence submitted to the Judge  on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  from
    people who had actually worked with him and with TRO-SL and upon  which
    she was fully entitled to rely. Other grounds have been dealt  with  by
    us already.

    1999/2001: Canadian Immigration case


54. The Judge considered this case (X v  Canada  (Immigration  and  Refugee
    Board) 2001 CANLII 26920 (IRB)) in detail at  [418-430].  She  observed
    that it dealt with the period between 1990-1997 which was  outside  the
    material period for the purposes of the appeal. The appellant  was  not
    affiliated to the TRO at the time, and could not have  been  personally
    involved. Moreover, the Sri Lankan authorities had registered  the  TRO
    as  a  charity  in  June  2002  and   accordingly   would   have   made
    investigations into the charity's background.  The  witness's  evidence
    upon which the panel relied was not tested at the hearing and there was
    no indication of how they had reached the conclusion that the TRO was a
    fundraising arm of  the  LTTE.  It  was  not  possible  to  assess  the
    objective evidence which appeared to consist of newspaper articles  and
    witness evidence which had been heavily anonymised. She concluded  that
    there was a degree of speculation in the  panel's  findings,  and  they
    could not be considered to be determinative of the issue before her.


55. Mr Clarke submitted that the Judge had erred in  her  consideration  of
    the evidence in that case for the following reasons:


      . She found that  TRO  had  registered  as  a  charity  in  2002  and
        therefore the GoSL was satisfied that TRO  was  not  a  front,  but
        failed to take into account the  fact  that  TRO  was  subsequently
        deregistered as a charitable organisation, had its assets frozen in
        Sri Lanka and was proscribed by the GoSL. She had  also  failed  to
        take into account the case advanced by the SSHD that during the CFA
        period (2001-2006) TRO was facilitating the LTTE through the  modus
        operandi of a faade of legitimacy to disguise  its  links  to  the
        LTTE. The SSHD relied upon  the  findings  of  the  Canadian  Court
        decision which dealt with the same issues of secrecy  and  apparent
        legitimacy in this regard and the Judge failed to  properly  engage
        with this evidence.

      . Her findings at  427,  428  and  429  were  irrational.  The  Judge
        asserted that the findings of the Canadian Court  were  speculative
        given the lack of a  clear  paper  trail  for  funds  but  she  had
        erroneously rejected the other "objective material  and  witnesses"
        before the  Canadian  Court,  acknowledged  at  paragraph  425,  on
        account of anonymisation alone.

      . Though she found that the case dealt with the period 1990  to  1997
        and was  therefore  outside  the  material  period,  there  was  no
        evidence before the Tribunal that TRO had made any efforts to  stop
        the practices referred to in the Court's  decision,  and  therefore
        such a presumption did not arise on the facts.

      . She found that the respondent was "not affiliated with  TRO  during
        this period" (1990  -97)  which  was  a  mistake  of  fact  as  the
        respondent's own evidence was that he  was  "Director  of  Disaster
        Management" for TRO from 1995-1999 (q16 AIR 19/4/07).

      . In light of the invitation by [the SSHD] at the hearing in  respect
        of the alleged conspiracy against TRO, the Judge failed to make any
        findings as to whether the findings of the Court were made  in  bad
        faith. It is asserted that the decision is  inadequately  reasoned,
        speculative, obtuse as well as to  question  its  findings  on  the
        basis of anonymised witnesses.

      . At paragraph 430 the Judge  erroneously  found  that  the  Canadian
        Court determination was not determinative. By  asking  whether  the
        Canadian Court findings were determinative of the issue before  her
        the Judge failed to consider this evidence in the round.

      . In summary the  Tribunal  failed  to  have  proper  regard  to  the
        persuasive nature of a determination from the Court of Commonwealth
        country and her conclusions were perverse.

56. In our view the SSHD's criticisms  of  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the
    Canadian case fall far short of establishing perversity. Clearly it was
    persuasive evidence, and hence she considered it in great  detail;  but
    it was no more than that. By stating that it was not determinative  the
    Judge  was  merely  repeating  the  obvious:  that  a  case  which  was
    principally dealing with another organisation during a period when  the
    respondent was not involved with the TRO in the same capacity could not
    provide the complete answer to the question which she had to decide and
    which had to be assessed in the light of  all  of  the  other  evidence
    before her. Having made rational criticisms of  the  Canadian  evidence
    there was  no  obligation  to  engage  with  the  question  of  whether
    practices had changed during the relevant period.


57. The Judge had an enormous quantity of evidence to consider.  Whilst  it
    is regrettable that she made an error in stating  that  the  respondent
    was not affiliated to the TRO in 1995  it  is  unsurprising  that  such
    errors occurred and, in the context of the determination as a whole, it
    is irrelevant to the outcome. It has  never  been  suggested  that  the
    respondent's role in 1995 could form the basis of exclusion. Indeed, Mr
    Clarke expressly acknowledged as much before  us.  It  is  quite  plain
    that, as the Judge said, in order to  operate  within  LTTE  controlled
    areas the TRO would have to have some kind of understanding with  them,
    and the issue of the nature of their relationship is bound to require a
    nuanced assessment.

58. The Judge was not obliged to make any findings on bad faith, as we have
    explained. It is legitimate to decide not to follow a previous  panel's
    conclusions on a factual issue, without concluding  that  the  decision
    was made  in  bad  faith.  The  Judge  heard  different  evidence  from
    different witnesses, including one  who  worked  alongside  Sri  Lankan
    government agents, who all confirmed that the TRO was not acting  as  a
    conduit for LTTE funding. It was clearly open to  her  to  accept  that
    evidence, not before the Canadian  Court,  and  to  disagree  with  its
    conclusions.

59. Mr Clarke's Point (5) also concerns an immigration case, and an article
    by Stewart Bell. He refers to paragraph  [443]  of  the  determination,
    where the Judge said this:

         "443. At GG19 Mr Bell of  the  National  Post  in  Canada  in  2005
         requested documents relating to TRO from a 1999 immigration case fn
         153. However this document  was  not  reproduced  in  the  evidence
         before me. [The SSHD] stated that coded information about  TRO  had
         been found on a laptop computer seized during a  police  search  at
         the home of Muralitharan Nadarajah, an alleged  LTTE  activist  who
         was facing deportation. There was no evidence that the  authorities
         had pursued any investigations into TRO.


60. In his oral submissions to us, Mr Clarke said that the 1999 immigration
    case was before the Judge and the article contained quotations from the
    Immigration Refugee Board proceedings. She dismissed it  on  the  basis
    that there was  no  evidence  that  the  authorities  had  pursued  any
    investigations into TRO. The Judge was not referred to the material  in
    submissions but Mr Clarke said that she should have found the  document
    and was not limited to the material which she was referred to.


61. We have difficulty with that argument, as  already  indicated.  It  was
    incumbent on the Presenting Officer at the hearing to direct the  Judge
    to all of the documents which he considered necessary  to  support  his
    case. In any event, it is difficult to see how the point  is  material,
    given that it relates to a 1999 case, and was referring to TRO  Canada.
    In fact, the  Judge  addressed  it.  She  was  right  to  say  that  no
    underlying document was before her. She had only another press cutting:
    an article by Mr Bell which contained various hearsay assertions. Among
    these were quotations from an RCMP sergeant who was said to have  given
    evidence to the IRB in 1999. On enquiry Mr  Clarke  accepted  that  the
    case in question was probably X v Canada (above), though he  could  not
    be sure. We have looked at the article, and we are confident it was the
    same case. In that case, the Judge had dealt with the  IRB's  judgment,
    and this is a repetitive point, the merits of  which  we  have  already
    addressed. In any event, this  is  another  case  of  multiple  hearsay
    assertions. The Judge dealt with the substance of the matter in  a  way
    that she was fully entitled to.

    2003: Canadian Intelligence Service

62. It will be apparent already  that  the  SSHD  relied  on  a  number  of
    newspaper cuttings consisting of articles by Stewart Bell. Mr  Clarke's
    Point (6) concerns another one, dealt with in  paragraph  [431],  where
    the Judge said:-

         "At fn 149 GG17 reliance was placed on another report from  Stewart
         Bell in 2002  alleging  that  the  World  Tamil  Movement  was  the
         principal Tamil Tiger's support organisation in the world  as  well
         as in Canada.  The Canadian Intelligence  Service  listed  WTM  and
         other Tamil support groups, TRO being one. However this article was
         not before me nor the findings made by  the  Canadian  Intelligence
         Service listing TRO."

63. The Judge was criticised in the grounds for dismissing this report,  in
    the Canadian National Post. It asserted that Canadian Intelligence  (a)
    estimated that $2million  was  clandestinely  funnelled  through  front
    organisations and (b) listed TRO as one of these fronts.  In  his  oral
    submissions to us, Mr Clarke pointed out that the  article  was  before
    the FTTJ, but he accepted that the alleged  findings  of  the  Canadian
    Intelligence Services were not. Mr Clarke submitted,  again,  that  the
    article should have been considered  "in  the  round"  with  the  other
    evidence relating to the TRO in Canada. However, individual  pieces  of
    evidence which are of little value gain little from being combined with
    others of the same kind. This ground of appeal again involved  reliance
    on a newspaper cutting containing multiple hearsay,  from  unattributed
    sources, without corroboration from the government which is  relied  on
    as the authoritative source of origin. We cannot see that the Judge can
    be criticised for her approach.


    2004 Human Rights Watch report


64. The SSHD relied on this report. The Judge referred to it at  [371]  and
    [373], describing its contents in this way:


         "The respondent states that TRO was established by the LTTE in  the
         early 1980s and relied on a Human Rights Watch article  at  fn  31,
         10/ TRO dated November 2004 that TRO was organised by the  LTTE  in
         1985 initially to assist  Tamil  refugees  from  Sri  Lanka  taking
         refuge in south India. The  article  goes  on  to  say  that  local
         sources in Trincomalee had told Human Rights Watch  that  many  TRO
         representatives were former LTTE soldiers. It was asserted that TRO
         was controlled largely by the LTTE and its credibility was  riddled
         with allegations about its political motives."
         ...
         There is also reference in this report to UNICEF acknowledging that
         to many TRO and the LTTE  were  synonymous.  The  source  for  this
         assertion was an interview conducted by  Human  Rights  Watch  with
         UNICEF staff in Killinochchi in August 2004."


65. At [373] the Judge said this:

         "I note that it is recorded that UNICEF believed that TRO  and  the
         LTTE were synonymous. However, this article had been written  post-
         CFA, after TRO had been accepted by  the  GoSL  as  an  appropriate
         partner for delivering humanitarian aid in the North  East  of  the
         island. It was also after UNICEF had partnered TRO in that  area  -
         67-73 A AB. I note that [the SSHD] had recorded these facts at  GG8
         and addressed the issue that allegations against TRO was the result
         of GoSL propaganda but  notwithstanding  this  acknowledgement  the
         [SSHD] sought to rely also  on  court  cases,  official  government
         reports and commentary from human rights organisations and academic
         researchers."

66. The SSHD asserts that this amounts to discounting the HRW report on the
    grounds that it was written post CFA (2001-2006), after  TRO  had  been
    accepted by the GoSL and deemed an appropriate partner  for  delivering
    humanitarian aid. Mr Clarke submits that this finding is perverse.   We
    reject that complaint. It does not fairly reflect the full  breadth  of
    the Judge's reasoning. She was entitled to take into account  not  only
    the view of the  GoSL  in  2004,  but  also  all  of  the  respondent's
    witnesses when assessing the relevance and probative value  of  remarks
    reported by HRW from UNICEF workers in Killinochi that  "to  many,  the
    LTTE and TRO were synonymous." This is not evidence that the TRO SL was
    functionally and/or hierarchically under the control of  the  LTTE  and
    providing funds to the LTTE from charitable projects.


    2005 National Post articles


67. Mr Clarke advanced a familiar set of arguments in his point (10), which
    criticises the Judge's paragraph [453], where she said this:

         "453. At fn 161,162,163 and 164, 74/ 42/ TRO reliance was placed on
         articles by Stewart  Bell  but  only  two  of  the  documents  were
         produced. There were no  documents  from  the  Canadian  government
         fully explaining why TRO Canada had lost its charitable status  but
         this fact is accepted. However it cannot be considered  by  itself,
         or cumulatively, determinative of the issue that TRO  worldwide  or
         TRO Sri Lanka was funding the LTTE.  Reliance  was  placed  on  the
         finding that World Tamil Movement advised persons to donate to  TRO
         but again this in itself does not establish that there are  serious
         grounds for believing that TRO was funding the LTTE."


68. In his oral submissions to us, Mr Clarke said that the  documents  were
    before the Judge and that she had failed  to  deal  with  the  material
    adequately or at all. However, this is again a case of the SSHD relying
    not on any official material but on press cuttings cited in  footnotes;
    documents to which the Judge in all probability was not taken. Although
    there were four footnotes, there were only two  articles.  One  was  an
    opinion piece and the other  a  report  by  Mr  Bell,  which  contained
    considerable repetition of matters we have dealt with earlier. She  was
    entitled to give this multiple hearsay little weight.   In  any  event,
    the Judge did address  the  content  of  the  documents.  The  loss  of
    charitable status by TRO Canada does  not  mean  that  TRO  SL  or  TRO
    worldwide were funding the LTTE.

    2008: tax exemptions for TRO Canada

 69.  The Grounds also assert that  the  Judge  failed  to  engage  with  a
     further article from Stewart Bell, or to make a finding on whether  it
     was  written  in  bad  faith.  This  article   quoted   the   Canadian
     government's refusal to allow tax exemptions to the TRO on  the  basis
     of close connections to the LTTE.  We  do  not  consider  this  to  be
     material. The  Judge  was  entitled  to  attach  little  weight  to  a
     newspaper cutting, which was not accompanied by other evidence of  the
     findings of the Canadian authorities to which the report referred,  or
     the reasons for such findings. In any event, once  again  the  alleged
     findings did not relate to TRO but to TRO Canada. The FTTJ found  that
     the respondent did not  control  TRO  Canada.  Furthermore,  a  "close
     relationship" is not tantamount to one where TRO Canada  is  providing
     funds to the LTTE for weapons.

    2010: Revenue documents


 70. In her para [499] the Judge said this:

         "499. At  GG25  fn  195  the  Canada  Revenue  Agency  revoked  the
         charitable status of the Tamil Refugee-Aid  Society  of  Ottawa  in
         2010. This is not TRO nor was it alleged that it was  connected  to
         TRO. The document was not produced. In  November  2011  the  agency
         revoked the status of CFTRR - money had been  received  from  Tamil
         Vision International and two directors of TVI were  also  directors
         of TRO Canada. The CRA described the link between  TRO  Canada  and
         TRO in Sri Lanka as "obvious". There was correspondence between the
         charity and the appellant here in which he requested that donations
         should be sent as soon as possible. There were no records available
         to show how funds had been spent in Sri Lanka. It was noted that in
         2004 it had been reported on a  pro  Tamil  website  that  TRO  had
         provided assistance to the needy from funds channelled through  the
         LTTE on the instruction of the national leader. Neither the website
         nor the report with findings made by the CRA were before me. I note
         however the reporting of the shared directorships between  TVI  and
         TRO Canada. A donation of $620,000 had been  stopped  by  the  bank
         from going to TRO in Sri Lanka.  I  note  that  a  link  was  found
         between TRO Canada and TRO SL but there was no evidence of any link
         to the LTTE."
71. The SSHD's Grounds complain

         "At paragraph 499 the [FTTJ] again asserts that fn 195, evidence of
         revocation of the charitable status of Tamil Refugee Aid society of
         Ottawa, was not before her. This is wrong,  the  relevant  evidence
         appears at p187  of  Respondent  bundle  3.  Equally  the  [FTTJ]'s
         complaint that "neither the website nor the  report  with  findings
         made by the CRA were before me" is incorrect. The relevant evidence
         runs from  p188-225 of Respondent bundle 3, is  correctly  referred
         to at fn196 and  is  referenced  in  Appendix  A  of  [the  SSHD]'s
         skeleton. It is also of  note  that  the  [FTTJ]  acknowledges  the
         existence of this evidence @para 503 in relation to another matter.
         The  [FTTJ]  has  clearly  failed  to  properly  engage  with  this
         evidence."


72. In his oral submissions to us, Mr Clarke accepted that at para 503  the
    Judge refers to the document and she was wrong to say  that  they  were
    not before her. However, her conclusion that the matters do not  relate
    to any material links between TRO SL and the LTTE was open to  her  and
    in any event there has been  no  challenge  to  her  findings  in  that
    paragraph.

    The USA
73. In the Grounds of Appeal the SSHD says:

         "It is submitted that the [FTTJ] falls into error by  applying  the
         wrong standard of proof  at  paragraph  460  when  she  finds  that
         because charges were not brought against Dr Ranjithan in the US "it
         must be inferred  from  that  that  the  US  authorities  found  no
         evidence of wrong doing by TRO US". It is submitted that the [FTTJ]
         fails to take into account that for the  US  authorities  to  bring
         charges they would have to be  able  to  demonstrate  this  to  the
         criminal standard, it does not follow that there was  "no  evidence
         of wrong doing". The [FTTJ] failed to consider whether  there  were
         "serious reasons for considering" wrong doing by TRO,  pursuant  to
         Article 1F. It is submitted that  the  wrong  burden  is  evidenced
         throughout the [FTTJ]'s consideration as identified  at  paragraphs
         455, 460, 464, 467, 468, 472 and 473."


74. In his oral submissions to us, Mr  Clarke  accepted  that  this  was  a
    narrow issue. It seems to us to be a  semantic  point.  The  Judge  was
    clearly entitled to infer that there was  no  evidence  of  wrongdoing,
    such as would sustain a prosecution. There was no evidence  before  her
    in relation to the threshold  applied  in  the  USA  for  initiating  a
    prosecution. Nor  was  there  evidence  as  to  what  evidence  the  US
    authorities had.


75. Mr Clarke complains of para [468], where the Judge said:

         "At GG21  [the  SSHD]  then  referred  to  the  FBI's  comments  on
         Australian Tamils  referring  to  fn170  in  November  2008  to  an
         IndoAsian News service release which was not before  the  Tribunal.
         It reported that $1million had been raised by  TRO  and  the  Tamil
         Coordinating  Committee  and  that  subsequently  the  claims   had
         resulted in the Australian authorities opening investigations  into
         LTTE fundraising. I note that this report was outside the  relevant
         timeframe but it does not state  that  investigations  were  opened
         into TRO, and that there were any subsequent prosecutions."


76. In the grounds of appeal the SSHD pointed out that it was wrong to  say
    that the IndoAsian News release was not before  the  Tribunal.  It  was
    also submitted that this article was dated 2006 not Nov  2008  so  that
    the [FTTJ]'s comments regarding "timeframe" are wrong. It  was  pointed
    out that ACJ's witness statement confirms that he resigned as Executive
    Director of TRO in March 2007.  ... "

77. Although it is correct that the document at Fn170 was before the  Judge
    and is dated 2006, the citation from the FBI is undated and comes  from
    a different news report. The Judge was entitled to give  little  weight
    to anonymous assertions attributed  to  the  FBI  in  a  news  release.
    Moreover, the report concludes that no arrests were made.  Clearly  the
    SSHD has not provided any follow-up evidence of wrongdoing. The head of
    TRO Australia, to which the material relates, claimed their innocence.

78. At paras [469]-[470] the Judge said:


         "At GG21fn 171 [the SSHD] referred  to  an  investigation  in  2006
         relating to WTM  relating  to  bank  transfers  to  TRO  Sri  Lanka
         amounting to $83,000 and the receipts were marked "Donations to the
         LTTE in Killinochchi Sri Lanka". Again this was reported by Stewart
         Bell of the National Post but this article had not been  reproduced
         to the Tribunal.  Therefore  I  can  make  no  findings  from  this
         document. At fn172 again there was reference  to  an  article  from
         Stewart Bell but this had not been reproduced. It was claimed  that
         WTM Canada disposed of documents in a city dump. WTM however is not
         TRO and no reliable evidence has been produced to link  WTM  Canada
         with TRO Sri Lanka or any other TRO office.

         470. At GG22 at 173/ 178/TRO it  was  noted  that  in  the  USA  in
         November 2007 the USG named  the  TRO  as  a  Specially  Designated
         Global Terrorist Group. (SDTG) for its role  as  a  front  for  the
         LTTE. USG announced that the decision had been made  following  the
         arrest in the US of  nine  men  who  were  charged  with  providing
         materials in  support  for  terrorism,  bribery  and  smuggling  of
         illegal aliens.  [the SSHD] asserted  that  "the  arrests  provided
         information linking TRO USA to procurement operations for the  LTTE
         including the purchase of ammunitions and  military  communications
         equipment" fn 173, 78/TRO.  The  same  report  confirmed  that  the
         Treasury Department had in November 2007 frozen TRO's assets."

79. In the grounds the SSHD said

         "@paragraph 469 the [FTTJ] erroneously asserts that a news  article
         @fn171, which evidences that an RCMP affidavit filed in the Federal
         Court was put to the President of TRO Canada, was  not  before  the
         Tribunal. The document in question is found at p90-93 of Respondent
         bundle 3 and is clearly referenced in Appendix A  of  [the  SSHD]'s
         skeleton. The Affidavit refers to $83000 being transferred  to  TRO
         in Sri Lanka and marked  "donations  to  the  LTTE..."  The  [FTTJ]
         therefore errs when she states that "I can  make  no  finding  from
         this documents" thereby failing to consider  the  evidence  in  the
         round.

         Equally at paragraph 469 the [FTTJ]  erroneously  states  that  the
         document @fn172 was  not  before  the  Tribunal.  The  document  in
         question appears at p104 of Respondent  bundle  3  and  is  clearly
         referred to in Appendix A of [the SSHD]'s  skeleton  argument.  The
         [FTTJ] therefore errs by  failing  to  properly  engage  with  this
         evidence."

80. Whilst we accept that the article was before the Judge she does address
    the substantive point made. In any event  the  investigation  concerned
    WTM and not TRO Canada, and  how  individuals  from  that  organisation
    categorized their receipts is not relevant. TRO SL  was  found  by  the
    Judge to have fully accounted for all monies received and spent.

81. The next point concerns para [471] where the Judge said:

         "I find that the nine men  were  charged  with  providing  material
         support to a terrorist  organisation  and  whilst  the  ambassador,
         Robert Blake, asserted that the arrest  led  to  the  discovery  of
         operation and financial links between TRO and the LTTE I note  that
         there was no evidence of any court case or conviction  relating  to
         these nine men before me. A press release from the US Department of
         Treasury of 15 November 2007 stated that Adam J Szubin  had  stated
         that TRO had passed off its operations as charitable when  in  fact
         it was raising money for designated  terrorist  groups  responsible
         for "heinous acts of terrorism". He reported  that  in  the  United
         States TRO had raised funds on behalf of the LTTE through a network
         of individual representatives and according to sources  within  the
         organisation TRO was the preferred conduit of funds from the United
         States to the LTTE in Sri Lanka. He  also  reported  that  TRO  had
         facilitated LTTE procurement operations in the  United  States  and
         the operations included the  purchase  of  ammunitions,  equipment,
         communication devices and other  technology  for  the  LTTE.  TRO's
         efforts  worldwide  reportedly  had  allowed  the   LTTE   to   use
         humanitarian  aid  which  TRO  collected  from  the   international
         community after the December 2004 tsunami to launch a new  campaign
         to strengthen the LTTE military capacity."

    In the Grounds the SSHD said:-


         "At paragraph 471 the [FTTJ] refers to a US Department of  Treasury
         press  release  quoting  Adam  Szubin  Director  of  the   Treasury
         Department's office of Foreign Assets Control. This  press  release
         coincided  with  the  US  freezing  TRO's  assets  in  the  US  and
         proscribing them as a "Specially Designated  Terrorist  Group".  Mr
         Szubin is quoted as  saying  "TRO  passed  off  its  operations  as
         charitable, when in fact it was  raising  money  for  a  designated
         terrorist    group    responsible    for    heinous     acts     of
         terrorism........TRO is the preferred conduit  of  funds  from  the
         US..." It  is  submitted  that  the  [FTTJ]  falls  into  error  by
         discounting the express statement of the US government on the basis
         of no prosecutions being brought. As stated above, to do so was  to
         apply the wrong standard of proof. Equally the [FTTJ] fails to make
         any findings as to whether the US government made such a  statement
         in bad faith."

82. In our judgment, the Judge was entitled to take into account  the  fact
    that  there  had  been  no  prosecutions  or  convictions  of  the  men
    reportedly arrested. It  was  open  to  her  to  be  sceptical  of  the
    assertions made by the US government in the light of the fact  that  it
    had not presented any corroborative evidence. Moreover, the  fact  that
    White Pigeon in the UK maintained its charitable  status  here  despite
    being designated in the USA at the same time as it designated  the  TRO
    is plainly relevant. The Judge was not required to accept the assertion
    from the US government as fact.


83. At paragraph [480] the Judge said this:
         "480. At fn 176, GG22, although the document was not produced - the
         States News Service reported in November  2007  that  TRO  USA  had
         raised funds on behalf of the LTTE through a network of  individual
         representatives.  TRO  had  also   facilitated   LTTE   procurement
         operations in  the  US.  It  claimed  that  the  LTIE  oversaw  the
         activities of TRO and other LTTE  linked  NGOs  in  Sri  Lanka  and
         abroad. Directives issued by the LTTE suggest that  representatives
         were expected to coordinate their efforts with the  respective  TRO
         representatives in their locations and to report all activities  to
         TRO. Information had indicated that the LTTE had  ordered  NGOs  in
         its territory to provide funding  through  local  NGOs  which  were
         managed collectively by TRO, which allowed TRO  to  withdraw  money
         and to provide a portion to the LTTE.
84. In the Grounds of Appeal the SSHD says:

         "At paragraph 480 the [FTTJ] erroneously asserts that  document  at
         fn 176 was not before  the  Tribunal.  It  is  submitted  that  the
         document appears at p122 of Respondent bundle  3  and  was  clearly
         referenced in Appendix A  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  skeleton
         argument. It is therefore  submitted  that  the  [FTTJ]  failed  to
         properly engage with this evidence."

85. This is a repeat of claims made before. Whilst the SSHD is  correct  to
    say that the document was in fact before the Judge and she was wrong to
    say that it was not, at the end of the  day  the  Judge  was  perfectly
    entitled to prefer  the  evidence  of  the  respondent's  witnesses  to
    unsubstantiated assertions in newspaper reports.

86. The next point relates to para [482] where the Judge said:

         "At GG23 [the SSHD] asserted  that  the  appellant  had  instructed
         lawyers to challenge the designation of  the  TRO  in  the  USA  fn
         -178/65/TRO, but the appellant denied this. [the  SSHD]  sought  to
         rely on this document being an  article  from  Tamil  Sydney  which
         confirmed that the appellant had instructed TRO lawyers in the USA.
         The appellant stated that he had been interviewed by the  President
         of TRO in the USA that they were planning to  appeal  the  decision
         and that President Dr Arulranjithn had telephoned him and said that
         one of the reasons for the decision related to the  fact  that  TRO
         USA had been sending money to TRO Sri Lanka and they were perceived
         to  have  links  with  the  LTTE.  The  appellant  stated  that  he
         represented that all of the funds  had  been  used  for  legitimate
         humanitarian purposes and he did not see any  difficulties  in  the
         designation being challenged on that basis. He had  not  instructed
         lawyers on behalf of US TRO because he had no power to do  so.  The
         foreign TRO organisations were separate and he  was  the  Executive
         Director  of  TRO  Sri  Lanka  only.  He  recalled  speaking  to  a
         journalist around that time as to whether  TRO  US  should  file  a
         chase to challenge and he had explained his views  but  he  thought
         that  possibly  the  journalist  had  misunderstood.  I  find   the
         appellant's explanation plausible and, having weighed it  with  all
         the evidence, I accept it.
87. In the Grounds of Appeal the SSHD says:

         "At paragraph 482 the [FTTJ] accepts the Appellant's evidence  that
         he was Executive Director of TRO Sri Lanka only, therefore  he  did
         not have the authority to instruct lawyers on behalf of TRO US.  It
         is submitted that the [FTTJ] has failed to have due regard  to  the
         evidence or submissions by the Secretary of State in respect of the
         same. At paragraph 362 the [FTTJ] wrongly asserts that  "there  was
         no issue that the Appellant had been Executive Director of TRO SL".
          This is incorrect, submissions were made at the hearing  that  the
         Appellant was Executive Director of  TRO  worldwide.  Reliance  was
         placed  upon  the  Appellant's  letter  of  appointment  @I  16  of
         Respondent bundle 1. Submissions were made that the letter confirms
         the Appellant as "Executive  Director  of  our  organisation.....in
         addition to your duty and function as  co-ordinating  secretary  of
         the TRO in the North and East of Sri Lanka". The  letter  does  not
         refer to the Appellant as being Executive Director of TRO Sri Lanka
         and, as was pointed out at the hearing, contains  a  correspondence
         address for "International Contact  TRO..."  The  [FTTJ]  fails  to
         refer to this evidence at all."

88. In our view this is a repeat of the arguments previously  made  by  the
    SSHD in relation to engagement with the evidence. The point has  to  be
    made that the respondent's main witnesses all had extensive  experience
    of actually working with the LTTE and the TRO.  Their  credibility  was
    not challenged by the Presenting Officer.  The  volume  of  documentary
    evidence produced was absolutely enormous. The Judge was  not  required
    to set out each piece of  evidence  and  every  submission.  Her  basic
    conclusion, that the TRO operated as entirely separate organisations in
    different countries is well supported by the evidence before her.


89. At para [484] the Judge said
        "484. [the SSHD] also sought  to  rely  on  a  meeting  in  Colombo
        reported in November 2007 between the High Commissions from the UK,
        Canada, Australia and the US Embassy (fn 179  GG23)  where  the  US
        Embassy  reported  that:  "All  agreed  that   TRO   does   genuine
        humanitarian work but appeared likely to have functional  links  to
        the LTTE."
90. In the Grounds of Appeal the SSHD says:

         "At paragraph 484 the [FTTJ] wrongly asserts evidence at fn179  was
         not before the Tribunal and therefore errs  by  failing  to  engage
         with its contents. This document appears at p94 of bundle 3 and  is
         the same document that appears at fn 166. It is submitted that  the
         [FTTJ]'s rejection of this evidence on the basis that it  does  not
         confirm "a finding by the government representatives that  TRO  had
         been funding the LTTE" clearly  fails  to  take  account  of  other
         evidence  produced  i.e.  Courts,  Government  department  and  law
         enforcement statements, that do find that TRO was funding the LTTE.
         The [FTTJ]'s assertion clearly fails  to  take  into  account  that
         government and law enforcement statements will always  be  made  by
         government representatives.  It  is  submitted  that  this  further
         evidences the [FTTJ]'s failure to  consider  the  evidence  in  the
         round"

91. In his oral submissions to us, Mr Clarke accepted that the key provided
    to the Judge did not contain the citation and page number and  did  not
    rely on this ground. According to Mr Grieves there  were  a  number  of
    documents missing from the bundle.

92. Mr Clarke also criticises the Judge's paragraph [490] where she said:

         "490. At GG24 [the SSHD] asserted that in June 2009, fn  189  145JJ
         RB,  in  the  USA   Kandasamy,   Thauaraja,   Vinayagamoorthy   and
         Patpanathan pleaded guilty in the US to charges  relating  to  LITE
         fundraising and illegal activities. During the investigation it was
         claimed that Patpanathan had told an undercover agent that the LTTE
         had raised millions in the USA stating  that  money  was  funnelled
         through TRO. According to the FBI  TRO  transferred  money  to  Sri
         Lanka via London. A US Department of Justice report at fn  189  was
         not reproduced and referred to Kandasamy being the Director of  the
         American branch of the LTTE which operated through charitable front
         organisations involving TRO.
93. In the Grounds of Appeal the SSHD says:

         "At paragraph 490 the [FTTJ] erroneously states that evidence  from
         the United State's Attorney's office Eastern District of New  York,
         Canadian National Post, New York Times and Washington Post was  not
         put before the Tribunal. This is wrong,  the  documents  appear  at
         p145-152  of  bundle  3.  The  assertion  made  by  the  [FTTJ]  is
         particularly puzzling given the submissions made; the Secretary  of
         State expressly took the  [FTTJ]  to  these  documents  during  the
         course of 2 hours of submissions.  It  is  submitted  that  the  US
         Attorney's office report confirms that 4 individuals pleaded guilty
         to conspiring to provide material support to the LTTE.  The  Report
         states in relation to one of those convicted that "As the  director
         of the American branch, Kandasamy oversaw and directed  the  LTTE's
         various activities in the United States, including raising millions
         of dollars for the LTTE and laundering it through the TRO....."  It
         is therefore submitted that the [FTTJ] findings  at  paragraph  491
         that "there was simply no evidence of TRO being used  as  a  funnel
         for money to the LTTE" is wholly irrational and does not  arise  on
         the evidence.  The [FTTJ] had before her  express  statements  from
         the US Attorney's office  as  to  the  facts  of  the  cases  of  4
         individuals who had pleaded guilty. As above despite my  invitation
         for a finding as to whether these statements were made in bad faith
         the [FTTJ] has failed to make any finding at all."

94. In our view the Judge simply finds that  she  is  unwilling  to  accept
    unsubstantiated statements concerning TRO US. She was  correct  to  say
    that the findings of the criminal court were not produced,  and  so  it
    was not possible to say what had been found  as  facts.  There  was  no
    confirmation of money being funnelled through London;  the  allegations
    in any event referred to TRO USA.

95. The SSHD criticises the Judge's [494 - 495], where she said this:

         "494. At GG25 fn 191document 159JJ 2RB there was reference  to  the
         banning of the Tamil Foundation by USG in 2009.It was reported that
         the Head of the Tamil Foundation was also president of TRO  in  the
         USA The press report from Adam Szubin stated that TRO and the Tamil
         Foundation had comingled funds and that TRO acted as  a  front  for
         the LITE. TRO had been designated  a  Specially  Designated  Global
         Terrorist (SDGT) on 15 November 2007. This was  not  challenged  by
         the appellant. There was also a finding that TRO acted as  a  front
         to facilitate fundraising and procurement for the LITE, and that in
         the US TRO had raised funds for  the  LITE  through  a  network  of
         individual representatives.

         495. However despite the proscription of TRO in November  2007  and
         presumably, investigations into TRO officials there is no  evidence
         before me of any prosecutions of officials of TRO in the USA."

96. In the Grounds of Appeal the SSHD says:


         "At paragraph 494 and 495 the [FTTJ] notes that the  Appellant  did
         not challenge the US Treasury Department's  press  release  quoting
         Adam Szubin Director of the Treasury Department's office of Foreign
         Assets Control as confirming that TRO acted as a front for the LTTE
         to  facilitate  fundraising  and  procurement  but  dismisses  this
         evidence  on  the  basis  that  "there  is  no  evidence   of   any
         prosecutions of officials of TRO in the USA". It is submitted  that
         the [FTTJ] has fallen into error by applying the wrong standard  of
         proof, the [FTTJ] should have considered whether there are "serious
         reasons for considering" whether TRO acted as a front for the  LTTE
         to facilitate fundraising and  procurement  and  not  whether  that
         could be demonstrated to a criminal standard of proof.

97. In our view this is a repetition of a point made before. The Judge  was
    entitled to find the lack of prosecutions relevant.


98. The SSHD criticises the Judge's [496]:
         "496. At GG25 fn 193 - there was reference to a newspaper  article,
         which was not before me, stating that Prapaharan  Thambithurai  had
         pleaded guilty in a Canadian court to charges of funding the  LTTE.
         He had collected funds for  the  World  Tamil  Movement  (WTM)  and
         admitted knowing that half the funds would go to  the  LTTE  rather
         than funding charitable projects. It is to be  noted  however  that
         this investigation related to the WTM and not TRO and there  is  no
         indication that TRO was suspected of being involved. In  any  event
         this case is outside the relevant time period in this appeal."
99. In the Grounds of Appeal the SSHD says:


         "At paragraph 496 the [FTTJ] wrongly asserts that  evidence  at  fn
         193 was not before her. It is submitted that this evidence  appears
         at p162 of bundle 3 and is expressly referred to at Appendix  A  of
         the Secretary of State's  skeleton.  The  [FTTJ]  further  errs  by
         referring to this evidence as a newspaper article, it is not, it is
         a decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  British  Colombia.  It  is
         submitted that it is self evident that the  [FTTJ]  has  failed  to
         adequately engage with this evidence."

100. In our view again, the point has to be made that whilst the  Judge  was
    wrong to say that the document was not before her, the  fact  that  she
    was not taken to it by the Presenting Officer is an indication  of  his
    view of the weight to  be  attached  to  it.  This  could  be  seen  as
    unsurprising since it relates to another organisation  and  is  outwith
    the relevant time period.


101. At [497] the Judge said:
         "497. At GG25 at fn 194, 181/ JJ RB  a  representative  of  the  US
         Treasury told the House Committee on Financial Services that in the
         USA TRO had raised funds on behalf of the LITE  and  that  TRO  had
         facilitated LITE procurement in the USA.  TRO's  efforts  worldwide
         reportedly had allowed the LTTE to use humanitarian aid  which  TRO
         had collected from  the  International  community  after  the  2004
         tsunami. The report indicates that since  2001  at  that  time  the
         Treasury  had  designated  eight  domestic  charities   under   the
         Executive Order, five were suspected of supplying Osama Bin  Laden,
         one suspected of support to Hezbollah and two  Tamil  groups  being
         TRO and Tamil Foundation. It would be simplistic to expect that the
         FBI would write about the evidence and investigations that had been
         made into TRO but the report is devoid as to the  background  which
         led to the designation of TRO and the listing has to be accepted as
         a fact although I light of all the evidence before me it cannot  be
         considered determinative of the issue."
102. In the Grounds of Appeal the SSHD says:


         "At paragraph 497 the [FTTJ] refers to the testimony  of  Daniel  L
         Glaser,  Deputy  Assistant  Secretary  (Terrorist   Financing   and
         Financial Crimes) US Department  of  the  Treasury,  to  the  House
         Committee on Financial Services. The testimony  confirms  that  TRO
         had raised money and procured for the LTTE in the USA.  The  [FTTJ]
         appears to reject this  evidence  purely  on  the  basis  that  the
         intelligence  that  led  to  the  US  government   reaching   these
         conclusions is not expressly referred to. It is submitted that  the
         [FTTJ] has failed to consider this evidence in the round  with  the
         other evidence mentioned above that quotes FBI sources in  relation
         to their investigations into TRO. Equally the [FTTJ] fails to  make
         any finding  as  to  whether  the  statement  of  the  US  Treasury
         Department was made in bad faith."

103. In our view Mr Grieves was correct to point out  that  the  designation
    of the TRO after the material period  was  not  determinative  for  the
    Judge, especially since the information upon which to designate  -  the
    sources were not revealed - could have been the Sri Lankan government.


104. The SSHD criticises the Judge's [498] where she said:
         "498. At GG25 referring back  to  the  US  Department  of  Treasury
         report of 2010 reference was made to the findings in May  2010  but
         this was outside the relevant time frame for the purposes  of  this
         appeal and the document was not before me."
105. In the Grounds of Appeal the SSHD says:
         "At paragraph 498 the [FTTJ] again asserts that the  US  Department
         of Treasury report was not before her. This is wholly in  error  as
         it appears at p174 of Respondent bundle 3 and appears in Appendix A
         of [the SSHD]'s skeleton argument. It is submitted that the  [FTTJ]
         has failed to engage with this evidence."
106. In our view, again, whilst the mistake is acknowledged, it is  hard  to
    see how it can be said to be a material error of law.

    Europe

107. Mr Clarke criticises para [488] where the Judge said this:
         "488. At GG24 [the SSHD] noted that in Europe in March 2009  (again
         a timeframe outside the relevant timeframe for the purpose of  this
         appeal)  there  had  been  a  meeting  in  the  Hague  attended  by
         representatives of the Intelligence and Criminal Justice Committees
         of EU member states and also Sri Lanka and Europol fn  188  143  JJ
         2RB. The meeting was addressed by  the  Sri  Lankan  Ambassador  to
         Belgium.  The  meeting  was  told  that  the  LTTE  through   front
         organisations such as TRO and Tamil  Coordination  Committee  (TCC)
         continued to circumvent the impositions placed  on  them.  The  Sri
         Lanka Ambassador called upon EU  members  to  scrutinise  financial
         statements of organisations such as TRO  to  verify  whether  funds
         collected from the Tamil Diaspora  for  relief  and  reconstruction
         were actually used for the stated purpose."
108. In the Grounds of Appeal the SSHD says:

         "At paragraph 488  the  [FTTJ]  discounts  evidence  of  a  meeting
         attended  by  representatives  of  the  Intelligence  and   Justice
         Committees of EU member States as the meeting took place  in  2009,
         outside the "relevant timeframe". It is submitted that  the  [FTTJ]
         has clearly failed to engage with the substance  of  this  evidence
         which states "...notwithstanding its proscription  as  a  terrorist
         entity within the EU  since  May  2006,  the  LTTE,  through  front
         organisations such as TRO........has continued  to  circumvent  the
         impositions..." It is submitted that the Appellant did  not  resign
         his Executive Directorship from TRO until March 2007."

109. In our view it is quite obvious that the Judge was entitled to view
    the assertions with circumspection. She explained at para 489 why the
    objectivity of the report could not be assumed.


    2011, District Court of the Hague


110. Mr Clarke's Point (4) concerns paragraph [502] where the Judge said
    this:


         "It is of note however that in that case  the  defendant  had  been
         found guilty for raising  funds  for  the  LTTE  and  evidence  was
         produced of his association and connection to the LTTE.  There  was
         also a finding that the defendant was the leader of the TCC  branch
         in the Netherlands and the court found at 259 JJ RB  that  the  TCC
         was one of many organisations  falling  within  the  scope  of  the
         International Secretariat of the LTTE in Sri  Lanka  and  therefore
         formed part of the criminal  and  proscribed  organisation  of  the
         LTTE. Apart from a generic grouping of TRO with other Tamil  relief
         organisations there was no specific  finding  with  regard  to  TRO
         Netherlands or TRO Sri Lanka or any other TRO  organisation.  I  do
         not find that this finding by the  court  that  TRO  was  found  to
         support the LTTE in this context can be considered as determinative
         of the issue."

111. In the Grounds of Appeal the SSHD says:

         "It is submitted that the [FTTJ] failed to  properly  consider  the
         findings of the District Court of the Hague in 2011 (as referred to
         @502 of the FTT determination, which was decided  to  the  criminal
         standard), in the round with the other evidence. The criminal court
         found that TRO was founded in the Netherlands to support  the  LTTE
         and was "under the immediate co-ordination of determinative". It is
         submitted that the [FTTJ] was in error for failing to consider this
         evidence in the round."

112. In our view the Judge was perfectly entitled to treat  the  outcome  of
    the Netherlands court decision as she did. In any  event  it  does  not
    provide any basis for undermining the  Judge's  findings  after  having
    considered all of the evidence.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date 25 July 2016


Hon Mr Justice Warby







