
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10179/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields Upper Tribunal           |Determination Sent         |
|On 14 May 2013                                  |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                           Lewis Tapera Matanhike
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tettey, instructed by Switalskis, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Johnson, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Lewis Tapera Matanhike was born on 23 November 1970  and
    is a male citizen of Zimbabwe.  On 24 October 2012, a decision was made
    to refuse to grant the appellant asylum and to remove him as an illegal
    entrant from the United Kingdom by way of directions under paragraphs 8-
    10 of Schedule 2 of the Immigration Act 1971.  The  appellant  appealed
    against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which,   in   a
    determination promulgated on 19 December 2012,  dismissed  the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Judge Barton wrote:

         "The application before me was lodged on behalf  of  the  appellant
         wherein issue has been taken with the determination.   The  grounds
         make a number of assertions, but the most significant are concerned
         with the judge having based his  negative  assessment  of  risk  on
         return largely upon the Tribunal's former country guidance case  of
         EM and Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG  [2011]  UKUT  98  (IAC)  but
         without at any point taking cognizance  of  the  quashing  of  that
         determination by the Court of Appeal on 13 June 2012."

 3. At [30], Judge Saffer refers to EM and in five sub-paragraphs seeks  to
    summarise that the country guidance contained  in  that  determination.
    He does not refer to the quashing of  the  decision  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal. His failure to indicate that he was aware that  EM  and  Others
    (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC) had been  quashed  by  the
    Court of Appeal  and  his  apparent  reliance  on  the  Upper  Tribunal
    determination as valid country guidance constitutes an  error  of  law.
    However, by the time this appeal has reached the  Upper  Tribunal,  new
    country guidance has been issued  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  CM  (EM
    country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059 (IAC).  The
    Tribunal in that decision reiterated the guidance provided  by  EM  and
    found that the guidance had not been "vitiated in any  respect  by  the
    use made of anonymous evidence from certain sources in the Secretary of
    State's Fact Finding Mission report of 2010."  The  only  amendment  to
    the country guidance occurs in sub-paragraph (v) of the head  note  and
    is underlined:

    5)  A  returnee  to  Harare  will  in  general  face   no   significant
    difficulties, if going to a low-density or medium-density area.  Whilst
    the socio-economic situation in high-density areas is more challenging,
    in  general  a  person  without  ZANU-PF  connections  will  not   face
    significant problems there (including a "loyalty test"), unless  he  or
    she has a significant MDC profile, which might  cause  him  or  her  to
    feature on a list of those targeted for harassment, or would  otherwise
    engage in political activities likely to attract the adverse  attention
    of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely to engage in such activities,
    but for a fear of thereby coming to the adverse attention of ZANU-PF.

 4. That amended paragraph is directly relevant to the circumstances of the
    appellant in the current appeal whose home area of Zimbabwe  is  Harare
    and who the Judge Saffer found had failed to prove that he was  from  a
    high-density area of that city [35].

 5. As I have noted above, country guidance  for  Zimbabwe  has,  with  the
    promulgation of CM, come full circle in the months since permission was
    granted in this appeal.  Although EM was not good country  guidance  at
    the time Judge Saffer promulgated his determination, the evidence  upon
    which EM the country guidance in that decision derived and  upon  which
    Judge Saffer relied has now been  shown  (by  CM)  to  have  been  both
    accurate and valid.  I am aware that permission to appeal to the  Court
    of Appeal has been granted in respect of CM but, at  the  date  of  the
    promulgation of this determination in the Upper  Tribunal,  CM  remains
    good law and I have exercised my discretion  not  to  set  aside  Judge
    Saffer's determination  notwithstanding  the  error  of  law  which  it
    contained.  If I were to set it aside and apply the country guidance of
    CM to the facts as he found them, then the outcome of the appeal  would
    be no different.

 6. The other grounds of appeal take issue with  the  judge's  findings  of
    fact.  It is asserted that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  that  the
    appellant went to claim asylum in 2002 but did not actually  claim  it.
    That ground has no merit given that the judge noted at [33] that, "[the
    appellant] has failed to establish that it is reasonably likely he went
    to claim asylum in 2002 as I only have his word for it which, given the
    adverse credibility findings in the determination ...  is  inadequate."
    Further, the appellant had claimed that he was a  teacher  in  Zimbabwe
    and Judge Saffer at [34] found that he had failed to establish that  it
    was reasonably likely that  he  had  been  a  teacher.   He  noted  the
    appellant's  "very  low  level  of  academic  achievement"   and   also
    documentary evidence adduced by the appellant indicating  that  he  had
    worked as a printer and not a teacher in Zimbabwe.  This ground is,  in
    my opinion, nothing more than a disagreement with findings  which  were
    open to the judge on the basis of the evidence before him.  It was open
    to the judge, in particular, to have regard to the  evidence  that  the
    appellant had been a printer in Zimbabwe (which appeared to  contradict
    his claim to have been a teacher) and also to the  incongruity  between
    his low academic achievement and his claim to having taught, albeit  in
    rural areas, in Zimbabwe.

 7. For the reasons I have given above, I find that the First-tier Tribunal
    erred in law but I have declined to set aside this  determination.  The
    appeal is dismissed accordingly.

DECISION

 8. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 2 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

