
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10179/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Sent        |
|On 30th June 2014                      |On 20th August 2014       |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between
                                     MM
                          (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, instructed by Quality Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 9th September 1981.  He
    appealed against a decision dated 8th November 2013 to remove him  from
    the UK following a refusal to grant him asylum, humanitarian protection
    and protection under the European Convention.

 2. In a determination dated  3rd  April  2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal Shepherd refused the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 3. The application for permission made by the appellant  stated  that  the
    judge did not adjourn the hearing when requested, as the appellant  was
    ill and admitted to hospital, and this was an error in law.  The  judge
    took into account that the matter could have been dealt  with  in  fast
    track in November 2013 because no further documentation had been served
    and further that in effect the appellant had made up an illness and the
    appellant 'had in mind an application for  an  adjournment'  from  24th
    February 2014.  This was contrary to the evidence submitted on the  day
    of the hearing which was  that  the  appellant  had  been  admitted  to
    hospital.  It  was  unclear  why  the  judge  was   expecting   further
    information from the appellant.

 4. A complaint had been drafted to the Resident Senior Judge  who  advised
    that the solicitors should wait until after a  determination  had  been
    promulgated.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by  Designated  Judge  Holmes  of  the
    First Tier Tribunal.

The Hearing

 6. At the hearing, Mr Paramjorthy relied on the grounds for permission  to
    appeal.  Mr Kandola thought it was troubling that counsel  appeared  to
    have been instructed on the basis only of an adjournment.

Conclusions

 7. The hearing before the First Tier Tribunal  took  place  on  6th  March
    2013.

 8. The appellant attended a private GP Dr A Obaro  who  on  27th  February
    2014 detailed that the appellant had acute gastritis and he noted  that
    he complained of chest pains.  A  letter of  6th  March  faxed  to  the
    Tribunal from Mr Assaad, the appellant's solicitor, stated

    'I confirm that I had attempted to obtain instruction from my client MM
    on the 25th February 2014, leading up to the hearing this morning and I
    was not able to obtain his instructions.  I then received a letter from
    a Dr Obowa dated 27th February 2014 confirming  that  he  had  attended
    upon MM that day who had complained to him inter alia of chest pains.

    I had managed to speak with MM by telephone  on  4th  March  2014.   He
    informed me that he was still feeling unwell.  I made it plain to  him,
    however, that he would need to attend at the hearing on 6th march  2014
    at Taylor House.

    I confirm this morning I received a text message on my mobile phone  at
    precisely 4.02 am from MM at 8.00am who informed me that he had  severe
    chest pains and was waiting to be attended upon by a doctor at the  A&E
    Department.  I then telephoned Counsel to inform her of this'.

 9. An application for an adjournment was made at  the  hearing  which  was
    refused.

10. The judge at paragraph 15 stated that

    ' I considered the matter taking into account these three factors;-

           -The initial letter upon which the appellant was to rely for  an
           application for an adjournment was clearly wholly inadequate

           -That there had been a  lack  of  any  preparation  for  today's
           hearing beyond the bundle which had been ready at  the  time  of
           the fast track hearing  on  19th  November.   In  particular  no
           further documentation had been obtained from Sir Lanka

           -That Ms Iqbal had  no  instructions  to  proceed  substantively
       before me'.

11. At paragraph 20 of the determination was recorded the following

    'At the time of my preparation of this determination some two and  half
    weeks have passed during which time there  has  been  no  communication
    from either the appellant or his representatives with the Tribunal'.

    That, from the record, is not correct because the solicitors had indeed
    sent a letter of complaint  to  the  Tribunal  prior  to  the  Tribunal
    determination being promulgated.  What was not with that letter was any
    further medical evidence. What the judge was waiting for its not  clear
    because the refusal to adjourn had already been made.

12. Nonetheless it was confirmed by documentation that  the  appellant  had
    indeed been admitted to Newham  University  Hospital.   This  discharge
    letter is dated 6th March 2014 timed 0841 hours but this letter was not
    before the First Tier Tribunal Judge.

13. MM (unfairness E& R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC) confirms that it  is
    every litigant's right to have a fair hearing and this  would  include,
    his right to engage with the hearing.

14. The difficulty for the judge was that Ms Iqbal indicated that  she  had
    been instructed to request  an  adjournment  even  before  the  claimed
    emergency.  She had no further instructions beyond an  application  for
    an adjournment. I note that the solicitor's  letter  did  not  indicate
    that counsel had, the evening before, been instructed  to  adjourn  the
    proceedings. This fact was omitted.  Further counsel did not remain for
    the hearing which took place in the afternoon although  Mr  Paramjorthy
    submitted that this was because counsel had no  instructions  from  the
    appellant. There was however a witness statement.

15. However, the fact that there had been a lack of preparation for case on
    the day was taken into account was an error because in fact the  matter
    had been removed from fast track  on  the  basis  of  the  'independent
    evidence of torture' not for  further  documentation.   The  judge  who
    removed the appeal from fast track  stated  that  the  matter  was  not
    removed in order to obtain further documentation.  He found  there  had
    been time for that.

16. That there had been a lack of preparation and  the  appellant  was  not
    available to give instructions to his solicitors might be explained  by
    the fact that he was unwell.  What is clear from the correspondence  is
    that the appellant reported chest pains to Dr Obaro  on  27th  February
    2014 and was admitted to hospital for the same complaint on the morning
    of the hearing.

17. It may well be that there was confusion as the judge quite rightly  put
    the matter back on the day so that further submissions could  be  made,
    although Ms Iqbal 'indicated that she had no instructions to do so  and
    that she would not appear' [18].  The judge then records at  [19]  that
    'at 3.15 the matter was called for a final time when no-one appeared on
    behalf of the appellant.  Significantly there was no reiteration of the
    application for the adjournment'.

18.  I  find  that  there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the  determination,
    specifically that the  matter  was  determined  without  the  appellant
    giving his evidence following the refusal to adjourn, in part, based on
    the lack of preparation.   This  must  have  affected  the  credibility
    findings with respect to the appellant and these in  turn  run  to  the
    heart of the appeal.  I set aside the determination and  preserve  none
    of the findings.

19. The matter should be returned to the First Tier Tribunal for a  hearing
    de novo.


Signed                                       Date 30th June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
