

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10014/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|On 17 January 2017                            |On 19 January 2017           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                              PUSHPANATHAN [T]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:      Mr A Devlin, Advocate, instructed by McGlashan
MacKay, Solicitors

For the Respondent:   Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 26 July 1986.  He came
    to the UK as a student in February 2011.  He sought asylum  in  January
    2012 but this was refused.  FtT Judge Khan dismissed his  appeal  by  a
    decision promulgated on 1 May  2012  (AA/01998/2012),  and  all  appeal
    rights were exhausted by August 2012.

 2. The appellant returned voluntarily to Sri Lanka in  January  2013.   He
    left Sri Lanka again in March 2014 and appears to have arrived back  in
    the UK in July 2014.

 3. A screening interview in respect of a renewed asylum claim  took  place
    on 27 July 2014.  The respondent rejected  that  claim  on  7  November
    2014.  FtT Judge Clarke dismissed the appellant's appeal be a  decision
    promulgated on 9 August 2016.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal on closely argued grounds (12
    paragraphs over 9 pages).  A major theme (paragraphs 4 -  5,  developed
    in several  sub-paragraphs)  is  that  the  Judge  Clarke  uncritically
    followed the decision of  Judge  Khan,  although  it  contained  patent
    errors of law and reached conclusions which  no  judge  could  properly
    have made.  At paragraph 6 the grounds turn to an  adverse  finding  at
    paragraph 85, based on the appellant's failure to mention at a  medical
    examination torture marks on his penis and buttocks,  arguing  that  no
    adverse inference as to credibility could rationally be drawn, when the
    [prior]  existence  of  those  torture  marks  was  uncontentious   and
    objectively verifiable.  Further criticisms are developed at paragraphs
    7 - 10 of the treatment of the medical evidence.

 5. The FtT refused permission.  The application was renewed  on  the  same
    grounds to the UT, 3 days  late.   On  28  November  UT  Judge  Perkins
    extended time and granted permission, observing as follows:

      One of my reasons for extending time is that the appellant has a  scar
      on his penis described as "highly characteristic of being caused by  a
      cigarette burn" (page 40, inventory of productions 1).

      Judge Clarke followed the unchallenged decision of Judge Khan but even
      allowing for that it seems to me that the possibility  of  the  injury
      being accidental is so slim that I am not presently confident  in  the
      decision that the appellant has not been tortured.

      That said, the FtT's decision  is  considered  and  may  stand  up  to
      scrutiny and the appellant has not helped his case by returning to Sri
      Lanka at a time when he claimed to be at risk, but I  give  permission
      to argue each ground.

 6. Mr Matthews  helpfully  indicated  the  respondent's  position  at  the
    outset.  It was not conceded that there was any error in  the  approach
    Judge  Clarke  took  to  the  decision  of  Judge  Khan.   That   stood
    unappealed, and  must  have  been  the  right  starting  point.     The
    arguments in the grounds had not been  put  to  Judge  Clarke,  so  the
    challenge came far too late.  However, there was force in certain other
    grounds.  Paragraph 8 of the grounds disclosed an error of approach  to
    medical evidence, under reference to KV (scarring -  medical  evidence)
    [2014] UKUT 230.  Paragraph  6  disclosed  a  point  by  which  it  was
    difficult to justify the adverse conclusion  at  paragraph  85  of  the
    decision.  Paragraph 12 made a justifiable  point  about  isolating  an
    item of evidence (an affidavit) from  the  rest  of  the  evidence  and
    turning to it only after reaching an adverse conclusion,  "putting  the
    cart before the horse".  The extent of error  conceded  was  enough  to
    require a fresh hearing.



 7. In light of the approach of the respondent, it  is  sufficient  to  say
    that it might have been difficult for the appellant to  show  error  in
    the treatment of the decision by Judge Khan, having failed  to  advance
    that matter in the FtT; but  it  will  now  be  for  another  judge  to
    deliberate thereon, based on submissions yet to come.

 8. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  None  of  its  findings  are  to
    stand, other than as a record of what was said on that  occasion.   The
    nature of the case is such that it is appropriate in terms  of  section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2 to remit  the
    case to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

 9. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case or not to  include
    Judge Clarke or Judge Khan.

10. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            17 January 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




