
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10308/2013
                                                               AA/10309/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 June 2015                      |On 13 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                            SM (FIRST APPELLANt)
                            XM (SECOND APPELLANT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by North
                    Kensington Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Miss E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify either  of  the
    Appellants. Breach of this order can  be  punished  as  a  contempt  of
    court. We make this order because the Appellants may  be  put  at  risk
    solely because of their claims attracting publicity,  and  because  the
    Second Appellant is a minor.

 2. At the conclusion of the hearing we stated that this  appeal  would  be
    allowed and that our reasons would be given  subsequently  in  writing.
    These are our reasons.

 3. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wyman dismissing the Appellants'  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State refusing their applications for  asylum.  Permission
    to appeal was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin  on  2
    February 2015.

 4. The background can be shortly stated. The First Appellant is a  citizen
    of Albania whose date of birth is stated as 19 October 1994. The Second
    Appellant is her son, born in the United Kingdom on  18  October  2012.
    The First Appellant's case is that for her to return to  Albania  would
    place the United Kingdom in breach of  its  international  obligations.
    She fears persecution if she is returned to Albania because of a  blood
    feud arising from a dispute with another family. She says  she  entered
    into a relationship with the son of that family  and  became  pregnant.
    Her brother learned of this pregnancy and met the son. A  fight  ensued
    during which the son was killed. The brother fled to Italy.  The  First
    Appellant's uncle arranged for her to come to the  United  Kingdom.  In
    July 2011 she miscarried, losing the twins she was carrying.  Her  son,
    the Second Appellant, was born some 15 months later.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal heard from the First  Appellant,  and  from  Mr
    Achila, a social worker. It considered medical evidence in the form  of
    two letters from Parveen Powar, consultant adolescent  psychotherapist,
    dated respectively 27 November 2013 and 15 May 2012,  together  with  a
    substantive report from Dr Rachel Thomas, chartered consultant clinical
    psychologist, dated 23 December  2013.  In  addition  it  considered  a
    country expert report prepared by Sonya  Landesman  dated  12  December
    2013.

 6. The grounds of appeal, upon which permission was granted, concerned  an
    alleged error of law on the part of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in
    failing to consider the high risk of suicide  by  the  First  Appellant
    were she and her son to be returned to Albania. It was  suggested  that
    the content of  the  country  expert  was  disregarded.  Other  grounds
    focussed upon alleged errors by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in  her
    overall assessment of the evidence.

 7. We formed the view from our reading of the papers and from listening to
    the submissions on  behalf  of  the  parties  that  there  was  a  more
    fundamental issue which ought to be addressed prior to determining  the
    grounds advanced on behalf of the Appellants.

 8. There are repeated references in the papers to  the  First  Appellant's
    mental  health.  It  was  expressly  confirmed  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge that no claim was being made under Article 3 in  respect
    of her physical or mental health. Paragraph 64 of the judgment records:
    "Whilst it was acknowledged that the [first]  appellant  was  suffering
    from depression, it was accepted that this was not enough to be granted
    leave to remain solely on this issue".

 9. There was also material in the medical evidence (recorded at  paragraph
    5 above) to  suggest  that  the  First  Appellant  was  suffering  from
    depression, experienced fluctuations of  mood  and  was  considered  to
    require ongoing psychological help and support  from  social  services,
    particularly in caring for her baby. It is a matter of record that  the
    First Appellant was a minor when she entered  the  United  Kingdom  and
    remained so at the time of her early interviews with the authorities.

10. In our view, there were  sufficient  indicators  when  the  matter  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal to place all concerned  on  notice  that
    the First Appellant was potentially a vulnerable  witness  such  as  to
    engage the Joint Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  2  of  2010:  Child,
    vulnerable adult  and  sensitive  appellant  guidance.  The  existence,
    relevance and application of this Note was  not  raised  on  behalf  of
    either of the parties nor by the First-tier Tribunal of its own motion.

11. We consider this to have been a significant  oversight  both  generally
    and in the particular circumstances of the  matters  which  were  being
    determined. Much turned on credibility,  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was evidently influenced by apparent inconsistencies in the First
    Appellant's narrative of events on  various  occasions.  It  may  be  a
    different view would have been taken of inconsistencies in the evidence
    had the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the extent  to  which  the
    First Appellant's age and vulnerability may  have  contributed  to  any
    discrepancy or lack of clarity.

12. We invited submissions from Mr Nicholson and Ms Savage  as  to  whether
    this failure to consider this matter constituted a  'Robinson  obvious'
    point. Mr Nicholson, unsurprisingly, answered that it  was.  Ms  Savage
    said otherwise, and relied inter alia upon  the  fact  that  the  First
    Appellant had been represented at the time (not by  Mr  Nicholson)  and
    that if her own representative  had  chosen  not  to  treat  the  First
    Appellant as vulnerable  that  should  be  determinative.  However,  Ms
    Savage very fairly conceded that had it been brought to  the  attention
    of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that  the  First  Appellant  might
    properly have been  considered  to  be  a  vulnerable  witness,  it  is
    impossible to know whether the Judge's findings  would  have  been  the
    same or not. It was noted that the Guidance provides that if the  issue
    of vulnerability is raised, a witness is to be treated as if he or  she
    were vulnerable unless and until the contrary is proved.

13. We are of the opinion that the witness vulnerability  point  is  indeed
    'Robinson obvious'. The decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  Regina  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex  parte  Robinson  [1997]
    EWCA Civ 3090 has become an  oft-repeated  mantra  in  this  and  other
    jurisdictions. In paragraph 37 of the  judgment  of  the  court  it  is
    stated:

         "... it is the duty of the appellate  authorities  to  apply  their
         knowledge of Convention jurisprudence to the facts  as  established
         by them when they determine  [asylum  matters]  and  they  are  not
         limited in their  consideration  of  the  facts  by  the  arguments
         actually advanced by the asylum seeker or his representative."

    And at paragraph 39:

         "If there is readily discernible an obvious point of Convention law
         which favours the applicant although he has not taken it, then  the
         special adjudicator should apply it in his favour [...]  Similarly,
         if when the Tribunal reads the Special Adjudicator's decision there
         is an obvious point of Convention law  favourable  to  the  asylum-
         seeker which does not appear in the decision, it should grant leave
         to appeal."

14. This principle applies with equal force to  the  First-tier  and  Upper
    Tribunals as they are now constituted. Whilst it  is  unfortunate  that
    the First Appellant's representative did not raise  the  issue  of  the
    First Appellant's vulnerability as  a  witness,  there  was  sufficient
    material before the First-tier Tribunal for the  matter  to  have  been
    raised of  its  own  motion.  No  appellant  should  be  prejudiced  or
    disadvantaged by  an  oversight  on  the  part  of  his  or  her  legal
    representative. Here the fairness of the proceedings was infected by  a
    failure  to  follow  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note.  In  the
    circumstances we cannot be satisfied that either  the  First  Appellant
    nor - equally importantly -  the  Second  Appellant  who  is  a  minor,
    enjoyed a fair hearing as guaranteed under Article 6 of the ECHR.

15. In the particular circumstances of this case, where the  vast  majority
    of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge are predicated on  her
    conclusions as to the First  Appellant's  credibility  and  where  such
    conclusions were reached without reference to  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance Note, the determination cannot stand and must  be  set  aside.
    The entire matter needs to be decided de novo and must be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing before a different judge.

16. Since our conclusion on the vulnerability issue which we  took  of  our
    motion is sufficient to be dispositive of the appeal, it is unnecessary
    for us to determine any of  the  grounds  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants in  advancing  the  appeal.  We  deliberately  refrain  from
    expressing any view on the matters raised as none of  the  findings  is
    preserved and the complex  history  and  background  will  be  examined
    afresh at the rehearing.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is allowed. The determination is set aside. The case will be
    decided again in the First-tier Tribunal.

    1.   Matter to be listed at Hatton Cross (not Judge Wyman)

    2.   Albanian interpreter required

    3.   Time estimate of 4 hours

    4.   Appellant and a number of experts to be notified in due course

    5.   List of witnesses



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Mark Hill QC                         |                                     |
|Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal   |Dated 24 June 2015                   |

