
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/10654/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Sent           |
|On 29 May 2013                                |On 1 July 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                             javad ali-mohammadi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Pickering, Counsel, instructed by Kirklees Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr J Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born on 21 January 1974.  He  seeks
    to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  refusing   his
    application for asylum or other protection in the United Kingdom.

2.   His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher  on  3  January
    2013 and was dismissed.

3.   Grounds of appeal were submitted against that  decision  and  leave  to
    appeal was granted.  Thus, the matter comes before me in  pursuance  of
    that permission.

4.   Ms Pickering addressed  me  as  to  the  grounds  of  her  appeal.   Mr
    Kingham, who  represents  the  respondent,  made  his  submissions  and
    invited me to find that there was no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

5.   The  nature  of  the  appellant's  claim  is  well  summarised  between
    paragraphs 3 and 8 of the determination.

6.   Ms Pickering raises three areas of challenge.

7.   The first lies in the approach taken by the Judge to credibility.

8.   It has been noted at paragraphs 19 and 20  that  the  Judge  noted  two
    aspects of the appellant's  account  which  called  into  question  his
    reliability as a witness.  One was  the  fact  that  in  his  screening
    interview the applicant had indicated that he had  not  been  arrested.
    In his description as to the locality where he had been taken after his
    arrest he gives one account, the Godal Cheshmeh  district,  whereas  in
    another account he says that the place was unnamed.

9.   Ms Pickering submits that  they  are  relatively  minor  matters  which
    should  have  been  considered  within  the  overall  context  of   the
    consistency of the appellant's account.

10.  Her second challenge is that the Judge was  unduly  dismissive  of  the
    expert evidence, unfairly criticising the expert in paragraph 22 of the
    determination  and  his  opinion  based  on   the   scanned   documents
    notwithstanding the caveat to that opinion which is set out at  page  9
    of the expert report.

11.  Those two challenges raise the difficult situation in  determining  the
    issue of error of law on appeal.  The Court of Appeal  in  D  v  Higher
    Courts have consistently stressed that it is  not  the  function  of  a
    decision maker to substitute his or her own view of the facts for those
    of the decision maker who had the advantage of seeing the appellant and
    making findings of fact.

12.  It seems to me that the  comments  which  are  made  by  the  Judge  in
    paragraphs 19 and 20 are properly open to be made.  It was  not  simply
    that the appellant denied being arrested in his screening interview but
    it was the finding of the Judge that in his substantive  interview  the
    appellant had given a different reason for  not  having  mentioned  the
    fact of his arrest, namely that he misunderstood the question.

13.  It is to be recognised that another Judge may not have placed the  same
    significance upon those inconsistencies as did Judge Fisher.   However,
    the issue of weight is essentially a judicial function and  should  not
    be interfered with unless such amounts to a finding which is Wednesbury
    unreasonable or perverse.

14.  In fairness to Judge Fisher it has been noted  that  he  has  borne  in
    mind in paragraph 21 matters that are to the advantage of the appellant
    but nevertheless comes to the  conclusion  that,  notwithstanding  such
    matters,  the  inconsistencies   are   such   as   to   override   that
    consideration.  Within its narrow confines it does not seem to me  that
    that is an improper approach to take.

15.  Similarly, with the expert,  it  is  clear  that  the  Judge  has  paid
    careful regard to what the expert has to say in paragraphs 18 and 22.

16.  The difficulty of course with the evidence relating  to  the  documents
    is that they are considered in one paragraph by the expert, in the last
    paragraph on page 9.  Ms Pickering invites me to note the caveat  which
    is expressed in the last line of that  paragraph,  namely  "I  have  no
    reason to doubt the authenticity  of  these  documents  in  so  far  as
    examinable from scanned copies".   There  may  be  some  merit  in  the
    concern expressed  by  Ms  Pickering  that  the  Judge  in  seeking  to
    criticise the expert for his conclusion does not  also  recognise  that
    caveat.

17.  Once again, given the limited context of that remark, I do not find  it
    to be untoward or outside that which is properly permissible.

18.  It is, however, the final ground of  appeal  which  most  concerns  me,
    namely that there has been no clear findings of fact on  most  material
    issues.

19.  It is fundamental to a proper determination that the  full  context  of
    the claim is recognised and findings of fact are made upon it.

20.  The fundamental context in this case is of the appellant who claims  to
    have lost his appointment as a part-time university  lecturer  and  his
    work within the tax office in the Iranian Ministry of  Finance.   There
    is no clear finding one way or the other as to whether that preliminary
    position is accepted or not.  No such finding is made if indeed  it  is
    capable of being made.  It is difficult to put all that follows in  its
    proper context.  Indeed if the appellant was so  employed  the  obvious
    question as a starting point for the consideration of his claim must be
    what happened to him and why has he come to the United Kingdom  leaving
    his family in Iran.

21.  Such a finding should then  lead,  in  my  estimation,  to  the  proper
    examination of the documents.  In this case I find that there has  been
    a degree of  shorthand  in  that  approach.   Although  the  Judge  was
    entitled to express the view that he should approach the expert  report
    with some care, there has been no analysis of  the  documentation  that
    has been presented.  It is clearly the limiting factor  that  they  are
    scanned copies and indeed those in my bundle are far from clear.   They
    are  however  documents  which  cover  a  number  of  aspects  of   the
    appellant's life.  They are  documents  for  example  relating  to  the
    warnings given to the appellant for administrative  violations  at  his
    work.  There are the court documents and there are the bail  documents.
    All may be false or some may be viable  and  others  not.   That  is  a
    matter for the Judge to consider in the course of the analysis.

22.  What weight can be placed  to  those  documents  must  depend  to  some
    extent upon what the documents purport to contain and  to  what  extent
    that is consistent or inconsistent with the context of the  appellant's
    claim.  The relevant  question  was  clearly  relating  to  weight  and
    reliability and the extent to why the originals have not been presented
    when clearly they are in the possession of the appellant's family.   It
    is said that his brother put up his house as surety for the  appellant.
    There are no documents relating to what the authorities  have  or  have
    not done as a consequence of that.  It is not a requirement that  there
    be corroboration clearly when such corroboration is reasonably able  to
    be provided then its absence may be a significant factor.

23.  I am concerned that although the Judge has criticised the expert  there
    has been no independent consideration of those documents and any  clear
    findings made upon them.

24.  The third issue relates to the return of the appellant.  As  the  Judge
    quite rightly indicated it is the view of the expert that there  was  a
    risk on return as set out in some detail in his report. The comment  is
    given little weight in the light that it  conflicts  with  the  country
    guidance.  There needs however to be some  consideration  of  what  the
    evidence is on that matter,  both  for  and  against,  and  a  balanced
    conclusion arrived at.

25.  For those reasons I do not find that the  case  of  the  appellant  was
    given the consideration in the detail that it ought to have been.  That
    is not to say of course that the findings should  be  other  than  have
    been set out but  any  findings  should  be  clearly  justifiable  with
    reasons within the overall context and detailed consideration.

26.  For those reasons the decision shall be set  aside  and  shall  be  re-
    made.

27.  I  bear  in  mind  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Direction.  There would need to be a re-hearing  of  the  evidence  and
    possibly consideration of further evidence.  Although this is a  matter
    that could perhaps be considered further by the Upper Tribunal, I  have
    been invited by both parties to say that  this  does  come  within  the
    Practice Direction and should in the circumstances be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a re-hearing.

28.  In all the circumstances I will do so.

29.  Whether evidence is or is not to be called is of course  a  matter  for
    the parties.  It is not for me to  direct  on  that  issue  other  than
    perhaps to express the view that it might be more helpful to  a  proper
    examination of the documents if  the  expert  could  perhaps  expand  a
    little bit more on why he says that they are  genuine.    Reasons  will
    also need to be given as to why the original  documents  could  not  be
    dispatched and the further details as to the family situation given.  [
    it is to be recognised that the appellant is contending that his family
    are under suspicion and have incurred the wrath of the  authorities  on
    his account and that is a factor of course that must be borne  in  mind
    in the eventual analysis.]

Directions

1.   The decision of Judge Fisher shall be set aside.

2.   There shall be a de novo hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   An interpreter in the Farsi language is required.

4.   Any further submissions or evidence should be submitted no  later  than
    five days prior to the  hearing  in  order  for  all  parties  to  have
    sufficient time to seek all relevant documentation.

5.    The  hearing  should  not  be  listed  before  six  weeks   from   the
    promulgation of these directions.

6.   Any further directions that shall be required will  be  issued  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.






Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

