
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10645/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|Without an Oral hearing                       |On 21st November 2013        |
|On 18th November, 2013                        |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                              Shahbir Tarakhil

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   Having regard to the Decision and Directions sent  to  the  parties  by
    the Upper Tribunal by prepaid first class post on 10th  June,  2013,  a
    copy of which is at Appendix A of this determination,  and  not  having
    received any response from either party as of 15th  November,  2013,  I
    hereby set aside the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Moore
    promulgated on 10th April, 2013, following the hearing at Taylor  House
    on 10th March, 2013.

2.   In making his findings of fact, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not
    demonstrate that he had considered the expert report, either adequately
    or at all, and in the circumstances I believe that he erred in law.

3.   I am satisfied  that  this  is  a  case  which  falls  squarely  within
    paragraph 7 of the Senior President's  Practice  statement,  given  the
    length of time the parties would have to wait  for  the  matter  to  be
    relisted before me, and that it could, conversely, be heard  relatively
    speedily by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  view  of  the  overriding
    objective informing the onward conduct of this appeal, I  have  decided
    that this appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  hearing
    afresh before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  judge,  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Moore.  None of the findings of fact made by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Moore are preserved.






                                    18th November, 2013



Richard Chalkley
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
















                                 APPENDIX A

IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
Immigration and Asylum Chamber  Appeal No: AA/10645/2012


             THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Name of appellant before First-tier Tribunal:    Shahbir Tarakhil
Respondent before First-tier Tribunal:  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department
Application by appellant


                            NOTICE OF DECISION OF
                    APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION TO APPEAL



It is unnecessary to hold an oral hearing of the application for  permission
to appeal because I consider that it can  properly  be  dealt  with  on  the
papers.

Permission to appeal is granted.


                                   REASONS
                 (including any decision on extending time)


1.   I believe that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was perfectly entitled  to
    conclude  as  he  did  at  paragraph  43  of  the  determination.   The
    respondent cannot be expected to perform miracles; the British  Embassy
    have explained why tracing is not possible and the grounds  simply  say
    that this is inadequate; they do not suggest what more  the  respondent
    could do in the circumstances.

2.   As to the second challenge,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  actually
    refers  to  the  guidance  for  assessing  the  claims  of  minors  and
    acknowledges the appellant's age at paragraph 33 of the  determination.
    However, he did not demonstrate that in making his findings of fact  he
    considered the expert's report and in that respect I  believe  that  he
    may have erred in law.  I grant permission for this reason alone.

DIRECTIONS

a)   Subject to any comments, observations or submissions either  party  may
    wish to make to the Upper Tribunal within 21  days  of  the  date  this
    decision was posted to the parties, I propose  to  decide  this  appeal
    under Rule 34 and to set it aside without preserving  any  findings  of
    the judge.

b)   I believe that this appeal may  be  one  which  falls  squarely  within
    paragraph 7 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statement,  given  the
    length of time the parties would have to wait  for  the  matter  to  be
    relisted before me in Field House and that  it  could,  conversely,  be
    heard relatively speedily by the First-tier Tribunal, and  in  view  of
    the overriding objective informing the onward conduct of this appeal, I
    am likely to decide that this appeal  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh before a First-tier  Tribunal  judge  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore.






Richard Chalkley
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
5th June, 2013

