
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10601/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 19th July 2013                               |On 6th August 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                             RIZWAN-UL-HAQ VIRK
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Ahmed, instructed by Thompson & Company
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Designated Judge
    Dearden made following a hearing at Bradford on 2nd January 2013.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 1st January  1968.   He
    arrived in the UK on 22nd September 2012  and  claimed  asylum  on  the
    basis of his fear of persecution in Pakistan as an Ahmadi.

 3. The judge accepted that the Appellant was an Ahmadi but  did  not  find
    that the Appellant had given a credible account of having been attacked
    on two occasions in Pakistan.  He was not satisfied that the  Appellant
    had preached to persons there and  concluded  that  he  had  chosen  to
    practise his faith on a restricted basis because that  was  his  desire
    rather than as a result of fear.  As a consequence there  would  be  no
    real risk of persecutory ill-treatment on return.

The Grounds of Application

 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in his considerations  of  the  Appellant's  account  of  his
    difficulties in Pakistan.  Specifically the judge  had  said  that  the
    Appellant's evidence was that he had  been  preaching  for  fifteen  or
    twenty years without difficulty and that he appeared perfectly  content
    with his position during that time. He did not accept that the problems
    in November 2011 and July 2012 had happened in  the  manner  described.
    However the judge failed to take into account  the  objective  evidence
    referred to in the skeleton argument, namely the  significant  evidence
    before the Tribunal in the country guidance case of MN & Others  [2012]
    UKUT  00389  that  the   situation   for   Ahmadis   had   deteriorated
    significantly, and it was incumbent  on  the  judge  to  consider  this
    explanation for the Appellant's evidence.

 5. Secondly, the judge found it implausible  that  in  November  2011  the
    Appellant, who claimed to have received life threatening  injuries  was
    nevertheless able to hire a rickshaw and go to hospital. The judge  had
    misread the Appellant's overall evidence and had not taken into account
    all  of  the  evidence  in  the  interview  record,  namely  that   the
    Appellant's own description of his injuries was that one finger and his
    right thumb had been broken and he was suffering from the mental  shock
    of the attack rather than physical injuries.  Moreover the  judge  said
    that the hospital would have  provided  documentary  evidence  but  the
    Appellant's own case was that the hospital did not provide any  letter.



 6.  Finally  the  Appellant  provided  an  original  newspaper  which  was
    significantly corroborative of his account but the judge rejected it as
    "anyone could  have  placed  this  advertisement"  which  was  a  clear
    application of the wrong standard of proof.  The fact that a  piece  of
    evidence is found by itself not to be  convincing  cannot  properly  be
    treated as detracting from the Appellant's case per se.

 7. Permission to appeal was given by Judge Baker on 1 February 2013.





Submissions

 8. Mr Ahmed relied on his grounds and submitted that  the  judge  had  not
    reached his conclusions on the credibility  of  the  Appellant  in  the
    context of the background evidence underlined in the  country  guidance
    case which showed a recent increase in  attacks  against  Ahmadis.   He
    should have put his findings in that context and there  was  no  reason
    why the Appellant's account had not been accepted.

 9.  With  respect  the  evidence  of  the  attack  in  November  2011  the
    Appellant's evidence that he was in a life  threatening  situation  was
    not a medical assessment from an expert but his own view. Moreover  the
    judge appeared to be looking for corroboration which on the Appellant's
    evidence was simply not available.

10. Finally the judge had erred with respect to  the  documentary  evidence
    which he had not taken into account in the light of the evidence  as  a
    whole as he was required to do. The judge had not given cogent  reasons
    for his decision and his determination was inadequate.

11. Mrs Pettersen submitted that the judge had properly considered the case
    of MN and entitled to rely on the Appellant's own account of  suffering
    life threatening injuries as a basis for concluding that his ability to
    hire a rickshaw was not credible.  Neither was there any error  in  his
    treatment of the documentary evidence which in any event did  not  take
    the case any further.

Findings and Conclusions

12. This is a clear and careful determination in which all of the  relevant
    issues were properly considered and the judge was entitled to reach the
    decision that he did for the reasons which he gave.

13. With respect to the first ground the judge stated that he assessed  the
    Appellant's case against the country guidance case of MN  and  recorded
    the submission that the Appellant's evidence  was  entirely  consistent
    with that case and with the COIS Report.  The judge was entitled to say
    that the Appellant had been perfectly content  with  his  position  for
    fifteen or twenty years, and that he had  been  preaching  during  that
    period. It was open to him not to accept that the problems had occurred
    in 2011 and 2012 as described. Moreover that was not  the  only  reason
    for finding the Appellant's account not to be credible. The judge  said
    that the Appellant had been untruthful about the number of  times  when
    he had spoken about his religious beliefs and there is no challenge  to
    his conclusions in the grounds.  Nor is  there  any  challenge  to  the
    judge's view that a committed Ahmadi would  permit  two  of  his  three
    Pakistani passports to have stated his religion as Islam.   Whilst  the
    judge did not state in terms that, according  to  the  evidence  placed
    before the Tribunal in MN, the situation for Ahmadis  had  deteriorated
    recently, in the context of the determination as a whole, the  omission
    is immaterial.

14. With respect to the judge's  conclusions  on  the  credibility  of  the
    claimed attack itself,  he was simply relying on  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence at interview.  In answer to question 99 the Appellant said:

         "I had wasted a lot of blood.  I was nearly close to dying.   There
         was a lot of bruises on my head.  Because due to those  injuries  I
         was half conscious I couldn't drive the car.  My intention  was  to
         get to hospital quickly so I hired a rickshaw."

15. It was put to him by the interviewing officer that the  Appellant  said
    that he was close to dying but  the  only  treatment  he  received  was
    bandage and cleaning.  The Appellant said that his injuries were  still
    there.  He did not say that his injuries  were  not  life  threatening.
    The judge was perfectly entitled to find that the  Appellant's  account
    of his injuries was not consistent with his story.

16. There was no requirement for corroboration.  In stating that  it  would
    have been possible to provide some documentary evidence bearing in mind
    that it was almost twelve months between the incident and the Appellant
    leaving Pakistan the judge is  merely  commenting  that  such  evidence
    would have assisted the Appellant in discharging the burden  of  proof.
    The Appellant said that the hospital did not provide any letter but  he
    did not say whether it would have been possible for him to request one.



17. Finally the judge's comment that the newspaper report  was  of  limited
    probative value is unassailable.  The newspaper simply states that  the
    Appellant used to work as a manager of the  insurance  company  and  no
    longer has any relationship with it.  It warns against  persons  making
    business with him in connection with the company.  It would be entirely
    reasonable for the company to  discourage  any  person  from  having  a
    business relationship with a former employee.

18. This is a full and well-reasoned determination of the Appellant's  case
    and the grounds disclose no error.

Decision

19. The judge's decision will stand.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

