
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10282/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Sent           |
|on 3 September 2013                           |on 6 September 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     ZS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr T Ruddy, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant  identifies  himself  as  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan.   An
   anonymity order is in place.  He made his asylum claim  and  underwent  a
   screening interview on 26 October 2009, when  he  gave  his  age  as  16.
   However, an age assessment by the local authority stated that it was very
   obvious that he was then over 18, and he was assigned a date of birth for
   record purposes of 1 January 1991.   He was advised at that time  of  the
   dispute over his age and that he had a right to submit  further  evidence
   of his claimed date of birth, but no such evidence has been forthcoming.

2) Consideration of the substantive claim was delayed because  of  the  time
   the appellant had spent in Greece, which should therefore have  been  the
   country responsible for  a  substantial  determination.   The  claim  was
   eventually decided in the UK and was rejected for  reasons  explained  in
   the respondent's letter dated 31 October 2012.  The claim was  not  found
   to be credible, but it was held that in any  event  the  appellant  could
   relocate to Kabul.

3) First-tier Tribunal Judge Watters  dismissed  the  appellant's  claim  by
   determination dated 20  December  2012.   The  judge  did  not  find  the
   appellant's evidence reliable, and did not deal with the  alternative  of
   internal relocation.

4) Mr Ruddy relied on the  grounds  of  appeal,  set  out  at  length  in  7
   paragraphs.  They are all challenges to the adverse credibility findings.
    The internal relocation issue is again not mentioned.

5) Mr Matthews submitted as follows.  The respondent's position had  clearly
   been from the outset that there were very serious inconsistencies between
   the appellant's  statement  at  screening  interview  and  what  he  said
   subsequently.  These went well beyond matters which  might  be  explained
   away by misunderstandings or interpretation difficulties.  The  appellant
   said at screening interview that his father had died years ago  and  that
   he came to  the  UK  because  of  his  uncle's  cruelty.   This  bore  no
   resemblance to his later account that his brother joined the army and his
   father joined the police, that the Taliban kidnapped his brother and when
   a rescue attempt  was  made  the  Taliban  killed  his  father,  his  two
   brothers, and others, and then tried to recruit him as a suicide  bomber.
   These allegations were made years after  the  screening  interview.   The
   delay in deciding the claim was due to the record of the appellant having
   been in Greece, but that did not explain why he would not have  addressed
   these discrepancies much earlier.  It was correctly pointed out at Ground
   1 that the appellant did challenge a matter put to him at  the  screening
   interview and denied having said that he met an agent  in  Peshawar,  but
   that was a long way from showing misunderstanding over the  whole  nature
   of  his  statements.   While  a  simple  error  in  interpretation  or  a
   misunderstanding could arise, the discrepancies here went  much  further.
   The judge had not dealt directly with every  aspect  of  the  appellant's
   purported explanations, but his statement only  amounted  to  a  repeated
   insistence on his later account, and there was no need for the  judge  to
   set it out in any further detail.  Ground 2 was  only  disagreement  with
   the judge's negative finding on what the appellant said about the Taliban
   not harming women.  Ground 3 goes to the finding at paragraph 23 that the
   appellant's father's bodyguards would not have left  the  family  at  the
   mercy of the Taliban when threatening letters had  been  received.   That
   Ground was simply disagreement on the facts.  It was reasonable to  infer
   that bodyguards would be made aware of an existing  threat  and  of  good
   reasons to stay at  the  house  to  provide  protection.   That  is  what
   bodyguards are for.  There was no obligation to put such a finding to the
   appellant for additional comment, and in any event the appellant did  not
   now offer a further explanation.  The finding at paragraph 24 (Ground  4)
   that the appellant was not a likely candidate as a suicide bomber was not
   essential to the case, and was a view the judge  was  entitled  to  take.
   Ground 5 was another submission that the judge failed to take account  of
   all the appellant's evidence, and was subject to  the  same  answer.   At
   Ground 6,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  form  doubts  around  the  late
   production of the documents.  Ground 7 added nothing of substance.

6) Mr Ruddy in response accepted that  substantial  credibility  issues  had
   been raised from the outset, based on discrepancies.  He argued that  the
   judge's error was  in  overlooking  the  appellant's  explanations  given
   throughout his statement and his evidence-in-chief.  The  judge  was  not
   entitled to follow the lines of the refusal  letter  without  considering
   those explanations.  The appellant did not just deny what he was recorded
   as having said at screening interview, he explained what he  did  say  at
   the screening interview.  While the judge did not have to deal with  each
   and every point of evidence, it was a material error to overlook such  an
   explanation, and there was nothing to show that the appellant's statement
   was considered in relation to the essential issues in the  case.   As  to
   Ground 2, there was background evidence of a risk to  women  who  engaged
   directly in activities not approved of by  the  Taliban.   That  did  not
   support the respondent's side of the case, and the  judge  misinterpreted
   the appellant's evidence that the Taliban did not generally  harm  women.
   At paragraph 23 of the determination, regarding the bodyguards, this  was
   not only a matter of fair notice to the  appellant.   The  judge  made  a
   mistaken and unjustified assumption that the bodyguards would know  about
   the threatening letters and the risk.  As to Ground 4, the appellant  was
   saying that he was being forced to become a suicide bomber, and that  was
   an issue distinct from whether he was an  obviously  suitable  candidate.
   It was accepted that Ground 5 covered points  similar  to  those  arising
   under Ground 1.  As  to  Ground  6  and  the  documentary  evidence,  the
   appellant gave evidence that he had only recently  been  in  touch  again
   with his sister, an explanation which had to be taken into  account,  and
   the judge also failed to consider the terms of the documents  themselves.
   Taking the grounds as a whole, the judge had failed to consider what  the
   appellant said in his statement and at the  hearing.   The  determination
   was of a nature which could have been arrived at  without  the  appellant
   providing a statement or a hearing taking place.  The whole point  of  an
   appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was to enable an appellant to  put  his
   case and to have it considered.

7) I reserved my determination.

8) At Ground 3, the appellant says he did not have fair notice of the  point
   about the bodyguards.  In general, a judge is entitled  to  consider  the
   case  put  to  him  without  airing  concerns  for  further  submissions,
   particularly where an  appellant  has  been  represented.   I  detect  no
   unfairness.  In any event, as made plain at paragraph 15 of HA and  TD  v
   SSHD [2010] CSIH 28, procedural impropriety does not vitiate  a  decision
   if no prejudice has been suffered.  There is a sensible  reason  for  the
   finding, as pointed out in the submission by Mr Matthews.  I do not  find
   this Ground to be made out.

9) Apart from the fair notice issue, the Grounds are generally of  a  nature
   attacking the adequacy of the Judge's reasons  for  the  overall  adverse
   credibility finding.  I was not referred to any authority on how  alleged
   error of law of this nature ought to be tested.

10) On inadequacy of reasoning  the  dictum  of  Lord  President  Emslie  in
   Wordie Property Co Ltd v Secretary of State for Scotland 1984 SLT 345  at
   348 may be taken as a starting point:

    The decision must, in short, leave the informed reader and the court in
    no real and substantial doubt as what the reasons for it were and  what
    were the material  considerations  that  were  taken  into  account  in
    reaching it.


11) The Court of Appeal in England and Wales  gave  general  guidance  in  R
   (Iran) and Others v SSHD [2005] Imm  AR  435  at  542.   (The  regulatory
   framework has since changed, but the principles remain the same.)
   1. ... Adjudicators were under an obligation to give  reasons  for  their
      decisions  (see  reg  53  of  the  Immigration  and   Asylum   Appeals
      (Procedure) Regulations 2003), so that a breach of that obligation may
      amount  to  an  error  of  law.  However,  unjustified  complaints  by
      practitioners that are based on an alleged failure to give reasons, or
      adequate reasons, are seen far too often.  The  leading  decisions  of
      this court on this topic are now Eagil Trust  Co  Ltd  v  Pigott-Brown
      [1985] 3 All ER 119 and English v Emery Reimbold & Strick  Ltd  [2002]
      EWCA Civ 605, [2002] 1 WLR 2409. We will adapt what was said in  those
      two cases for the purposes of illustrating the relationship between an
      adjudicator and the IAT. In the former Griffiths LJ said at p 122:
      "[An adjudicator] should give his reasons in sufficient detail to show
      the [IAT] the principles on which he has acted and  the  reasons  that
      have led him to his decision. They need not  be  elaborate.  I  cannot
      stress too strongly that there is no  duty  on  [an  adjudicator],  in
      giving his reasons, to deal  with  every  argument  presented  by  [an
      advocate] in support of his case. It is sufficient  if  what  he  says
      shows the parties and, if need be, the [IAT], the basis  on  which  he
      has acted, and if it be that the [adjudicator] has not dealt with some
      particular argument but it can be seen that there are grounds on which
      he would have been entitled to reject it, [the IAT] should assume that
      he acted on those grounds unless the appellant can point to convincing
      reasons leading to a contrary conclusion."
   1. In English Lord Phillips MR said at para 19:
      "[I]f the appellate process is to work  satisfactorily,  the  judgment
      must enable the [IAT] to understand why the [adjudicator] reached  his
      decision. This does not mean that every factor which weighed with  the
      [adjudicator] in his appraisal of the evidence has  to  be  identified
      and explained. But the issues the resolution of which  were  vital  to
      the [adjudicator]'s conclusion should be identified and the manner  in
      which he resolved them explained. It is  not  possible  to  provide  a
      template for this process. It need not involve a lengthy judgment.  It
      does require the [adjudicator] to identify and  record  those  matters
      which were critical to his decision. If the critical issue was one  of
      fact, it may be enough to  say  that  one  witness  was  preferred  to
      another because the one manifestly had a clearer recollection  of  the
      material facts or the other gave answers which demonstrated  that  his
      recollection could not be relied upon."
12)  I also have  regard  to  HA  v  SSHD  [2007]  CSIH  65,  in  particular
   paragraph 17:

      In the light of the cases cited to us it is convenient at  this  stage
      to formulate some propositions about the  circumstances  in  which  an
      immigration  judge's  decision  on  a   matter   of   credibility   or
      plausibility may be held to disclose an error of law. The  credibility
      of an asylum-seeker's account is primarily a question of fact, and the
      determination  of  that  question  of  fact  has  been  entrusted   by
      Parliament to the immigration judge (Esen, paragraph 21).  This  court
      may not interfere with the immigration judge's decision on a matter of
      credibility simply because on the evidence it would, if  it  had  been
      the fact-finder, have come to a different conclusion (Reid,  per  Lord
      Clyde at 41H). But if the immigration judge's decision on  credibility
      discloses an error of law falling within the range identified by  Lord
      Clyde in the passage quoted above from Reid, that  error  is  open  to
      correction by this court. If a decision on credibility  is  one  which
      depends for its validity on  the  acceptance  of  other  contradictory
      facts or inference from such facts, it will be erroneous in  point  of
      law if  the  contradictory  position  is  not  supported  by  any,  or
      sufficient, evidence, or is based on conjecture or speculation  (Wani,
      paragraph 24, quoted with approval in HK  at  paragraph  30).  A  bare
      assertion of incredibility or implausibility  may  disclose  error  of
      law; an immigration judge must  give  reasons  for  his  decisions  on
      credibility  and  plausibility  (Esen,  paragraph  21).  In   reaching
      conclusions on credibility and plausibility an immigration  judge  may
      draw on his common sense and his ability, as a practical and  informed
      person, to identify  what  is,  and  what  is  not,  plausible  (Wani,
      paragraph 24, page 883L, quoted with approval in HK  at  paragraph  30
      and in Esen at paragraph 21). Credibility, however, is an issue to  be
      handled with great care and sensitivity to cultural differences (Esen,
      paragraph 21), and reliance on inherent improbability may be dangerous
      or inappropriate where the conduct in question has taken  place  in  a
      society whose culture and customs are very different from those in the
      United Kingdom (HK at paragraph 29). There will be cases where actions
      which may appear implausible if judged by domestic standards  may  not
      merit rejection on that ground when considered within the  context  of
      the asylum-seeker's social and cultural  background  (Wani,  paragraph
      24, page 883I, quoted  with  approval  in  HK  at  paragraph  30).  An
      immigration judge's decision on credibility or implausibility may,  we
      conclude, disclose an error of law if, on examination of  the  reasons
      given for his decision, it appears either that he has failed  to  take
      into account the relevant consideration that the  probability  of  the
      asylum-seeker's narrative may be affected by its cultural context,  or
      has failed to explain the part played in his decision by consideration
      of that context,  or  has  based  his  conclusion  on  speculation  or
      conjecture.

13) A distinction has to be drawn between appeals which raise issues of  law
   and  those  which  are  essentially  argument  about  findings  of  fact,
   presented in language of legal error.   Fault  should  not  be  found  by
   burrowing out areas of the evidence which have been dealt with less fully
   than others, and presenting that as a legal  flaw.   If  there  are  good
   reasons for rejecting the credibility  of  a  claim  put  forward  by  an
   appellant there is not a further requirement to analyse one  by  one  his
   expressions of disagreement and of insistence upon his case, unless these
   disclose  further  specific  issues  requiring  separate  decision.   The
   appellant's points in his statement did not rise to that standard.

14) Read fairly and as a whole the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal
   is an adequate explanation to the appellant of why his case  has  failed.
   The appeal amounts to a challenge to the factual decision reached, rather
   than  to  identification  of  any  error  of  law.   The  judge  came  to
   permissible conclusions, adequately  explained.   The  grounds,  although
   expressed in terms of legal error, do not amount to more than re-argument
   of the case.

15)   This  was  also  a  case  defeated  on  the  alternative  of  internal
   relocation, an issue from which the appellant has  sought  to  shift  the
   focus.

16) The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  dismissed.   The  determination  of
   the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.





                               [pic]
                                5 September 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
