
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10371/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 9th March 2016                        |On 4th April 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                   mr D M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Albania,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State  dated  9th  July
    2015 to refuse his application for asylum in the United Kingdom.  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Young dismissed the appeal and  the  Appellant  now
    appeals to this Tribunal with permission.

 2. The background to this appeal is that  the  Appellant  claims  that  he
    lived in Tirana in Albania with his mother and  two  brothers,  one  of
    whom is now in Germany. He claims that his family have been in a  blood
    feud with another family since 2010 when there was a fight between  his
    two cousins and another man  who  was  killed  in  October  2010.   The
    Appellant's father left the family home as a result of threats from the
    other family. The Appellant's cousin was killed and the man who  killed
    his cousin was killed by another cousin in June 2013. During this  time
    the Appellant was at  school  and  was  kept  indoors  after  his  16th
    birthday in May 2014.  The Appellant left Albania in September 2014.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded at paragraph 66:

         "In the evidence  that  was  given  and  in  consideration  of  the
         statements made at the asylum interviews it did appear to  me  that
         the appellant has been consistent in his account of  the  feud  and
         that from the point he was initially  interviewed  through  to  the
         appeal hearing.  At the hearing he did take time to understand  and
         answer the questions that were put  to  him  clearly  and  he  also
         helped to clarify any  matters  that  he  was  unsure  of  as  that
         questioning proceeded.  In the circumstances I did  not  find  that
         his account was incredible in asserting that there had  been  feuds
         between the two families and would not reject  his  claim  on  that
         basis."

 4. The judge went on to consider the guidance in the  case  of  EH  (blood
    feuds) Albania CG [2012]  UKUT  0348  (IAC)  which  gives  guidance  on
    establishing whether a person is at risk based on a  blood  feud.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded that there is  an  effective  legal
    system for the detection, prosecution and punishment of acts arising as
    a result of blood feuds based on the fact that two individuals had been
    arrested, prosecuted and imprisoned as a result of their involvement in
    this particular blood feud [77]-[78].  The judge also  noted  that  the
    Appellant's mother had visited the  local  police  but  concluded  that
    there was nothing to support any representation made to the  police  or
    that the  authorities  have  ignored  the  Appellant's  mother  in  her
    enquiries.  The judge concluded at  paragraph  87  that  he  could  not
    accept that either there was an insufficiency of protection or that the
    other family were of such influence that they  could  arrange  to  have
    released their family member early  from  detention  by  bribery.   The
    judge went on to consider internal relocation  and  concluded  at  [93]
    that the Appellant;

         "... is clearly a resourceful individual.  He does  not  appear  to
         have any health or psychological issues.  It would not appear to be
         unduly harsh or unreasonable for him to relocate outside  the  area
         to avoid the risk.  He has shown resilience in coming from  Albania
         to the United Kingdom and attempting to establish a  life  in  this
         country.  There would not appear to be any real reason why he could
         not re-establish his life in Albania.  He gives no reason for being
         unable to live elsewhere in Albania other  than  that  the  [other]
         family would track him down but  I  am  not  able  to  accept  that
         claim."

 5. In the Grounds of  Appeal  the  Appellant  contends  that  the  judge's
    decision contains a number of errors of law resulting  from  procedural
    unfairness  in  that  material  evidence  was   not   afforded   proper
    consideration.  It is contended that the  judge  did  not  give  proper
    consideration to objective evidence which it is claimed shows that  the
    criminal justice system  in  Albania  is  not  sufficiently  robust  to
    provide sufficient protection to the Appellant.  It is contended  that,
    if the judge had properly considered the information available  to  him
    within the objective bundle, he  would  have  made  a  finding  to  the
    contrary.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    in coming to his decision the judge did not consider all of the country
    information to which he was referred by the Appellant's representative.



 7. At the hearing before me Mr Kotas pointed out that the application  for
    permission to appeal made to the First-tier Tribunal was  made  out  of
    time and that the judge granting permission did not refer to  that.  Mr
    Kotas indicated that in the circumstances he would not object  to  time
    being extended.

 8. As permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal, in my capacity as
    a First-tier Tribunal Judge, I hereby extend time for  the  application
    for permission to appeal in  accordance  with  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules  2014  in
    light of the short period by which the time limit was exceeded  and  in
    the interests of justice given the Appellant's young age and the issues
    in the case.

 9. At the hearing before me Mr Palmer made no substantive  submissions  in
    relation to the grounds of appeal. The grounds essentially assert  that
    the judge failed to take into account the background evidence.  However
    the evidence quoted in the grounds is general  and  does  not  identify
    capable of making a material difference to  the  judge's  decision.  Mr
    Palmer did take me to any background evidence before  the  judge  which
    contradicted the  judge's  conclusions  or  which  could  have  made  a
    difference to the outcome of the appeal. This ground of appeal  is  not
    made out.

10. Mr Palmer submitted that in  addition  to  the  issues  raised  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal there were a number of  Robinson  obvious  points  of
    legal error.  He submitted that there was an obvious error at paragraph
    74 where the judge identified the difficult issues by the Appellant  as
    being  "(1)  the  likely  attitude  of  the  police   and   authorities
    authorities (sic)  in  considering  whether  there  is  sufficiency  of
    protection in Albania".  He suggested that this sets out the wrong task
    because the correct task actually relates to the legal system  and  its
    ability to protect the Appellant.  However I note that  the  judge  was
    applying the guidance from EH which  refers  to  the  past  and  likely
    future attitude of the police and other authorities  towards  the  feud
    and I am satisfied that the judge made no  error  in  relation  to  the
    rehearsal of the test. The difficult issues identified by the judge  at
    paragraph 74 reflects the guidance in EH that in determining whether an
    active blood feud exists the Tribunal should consider, inter alia,;

         "(iv) the past and likely future attitude of the police  and  other
         authorities towards the feud and the protection of  the  family  of
         the person claiming to be at risk, including any past  attempts  to
         seek prosecution of members of  the  aggressor  clan,  or  to  seek
         protection from the Albanian authorities."

11.  Mr Palmer further submitted that the judge made an  obvious  error  in
    relation to the internal relocation. Alternatively  he  submitted  that
    the judge's assessment of internal relocation was glaringly  irrational
    and failed to take into account the Appellant's age.  He submitted that
    it is irrational to say that a 17  year  old  can  relocate  internally
    outside his home area, especially in light of the judge's findings that
    the Appellant's family are  in  self-confinement.   He  submitted  that
    there is no evidence that the Appellant would be protected as an orphan
    in Albania, that he was brought to the UK by a human smuggler  and  was
    under the care of social services in the United Kingdom.

12. I do not accept that there is any merit in this submission.  The  judge
    gave clear reasons for his decision that the Appellant could internally
    relocate at [92] and [93].  The judge noted the Appellant's ability  to
    relocate to the United Kingdom and the fact that he does not  have  any
    health or psychological issues.  The judge was  clearly  aware  of  the
    Appellant's age and I am satisfied that  the  judge  made  findings  in
    relation to internal relocation on the basis  of  the  evidence  before
    him.  Mr Palmer submitted that in terms of  the  decision  on  internal
    relocation the judge failed to consider that if the Appellant is  self-
    confined he  would  have  to  live  indoors  to  protect  himself  from
    prosecution.  This issue was not raised in the grounds  of  appeal  and
    there is no Robinson obvious error in the judge's approach to  internal
    relocation.

13. Mr Palmer submitted that the judge did not make sufficient findings  in
    relation to sufficiency of protection and that the judge said only that
    the mere existence of the police is enough.  However it is  clear  that
    the judge took into account all of the evidence before him in  relation
    to the efforts the Albanian authorities are  taking  to  address  blood
    feuds in considering sufficiency of protection.  I  consider  that  the
    judge reached a conclusion open to him on the evidence in  relation  to
    sufficiency of protection. This issue was not raised in the grounds  of
    appeal and there is no Robinson obvious error in the  judge's  approach
    to sufficiency of protection.

14. Mr Palmer further submitted that the judge failed to  apply  evidential
    safeguards in relation to the Appellant's evidence and in particular he
    submitted that the judge erred in concluding at paragraph 86 that there
    was nothing to support the Appellant's assertion that a member  of  the
    opposing family had been released by bribes.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge is saying that  the  Appellant,  a  child,  could  have  obtained
    "reports and other documentary evidence" and  he  submitted  that  this
    amounted  to  a  procedural  unfairness  against  the  Appellant.    He
    submitted that the real problem is that the judge found  the  Appellant
    credible in some respects but not in others because of  the  additional
    proof that he required.  I do not consider  that  the  judge  made  any
    error in relation to this.  It is clear that the judge accepted most of
    the Appellant's evidence.  There is nothing to say that a judge has  to
    accept all of the evidence of a minor.  I note that the Appellant  made
    no challenge in the grounds to any of the findings of fact.  I consider
    that the judge has been balanced in relation to his dealings  with  the
    Appellant's evidence.  This issue was not  raised  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal and there is no Robinson obvious error in the  judge's  approach
    to the Appellant's evidence.

15. I have considered all of the submissions and the decision of the  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal in the round and I  am  satisfied  that  the
    judge made no material error.  The grounds  have  not  been  made  out,
    there are no Robinson obvious errors as put forward by Mr Palmer.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contains  no  material
    errors of law.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.

18. The anonymity Direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is continued.




Signed                              Date: 23rd March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Date: 23rd March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

