
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10235/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 November 2015                  |On 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     DAH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith, counsel instructed by Lambeth Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


      1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ A Khawar, heard on  19
         February 2015, in which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against
         a decision to refuse to grant her asylum.

Background


      2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  7  June  2012.  Her
         asylum claim was refused on 1 March 2013, however she  was  granted
         Discretionary Leave to Remain until 1 July 2013 owing to  being  an
         unaccompanied minor. She sought further leave to remain on 21  June
         2013 and the refusal of that application is  the  subject  of  this
         appeal.

      3. The basis of the  appellant's  asylum  claim  is  that  she  is  an
         Eritrean national and a Pentecostal Christian. The appellant states
         that she was born in Eritrea but went to live in Ethiopia with  her
         parents about a year after her birth.  The  appellant  returned  to
         Eritrea in the year 2000 but left around two years later to  reside
         in Egypt. She  returned  to  Eritrea  between  2008  and  2010  but
         encountered  persecution,  including  detention,   owing   to   her
         religion. Thereafter she left the country.

      4. The Secretary of State  refused  the  appellant's  application  for
         further leave with reference to a SPRAKAB report,  which  concluded
         that the appellant spoke Amharic to a native level. The  respondent
         considered that the appellant was an Ethiopian national.  Reference
         was also made to the reasons provided for refusing the  appellant's
         asylum claim, in which her claim to be a Pentecostal Christian  was
         rejected. Consideration was also given to the  appellant's  private
         life in the United Kingdom, both within and outside the Immigration
         Rules, however her removal was considered appropriate.

      5. During the course of the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
         only the appellant gave evidence. The FTTJ rejected the appellant's
         claimed nationality owing to the  SPRAKAB  report  as  well  as  on
         credibility grounds. Furthermore, the appellant's claimed faith was
         not accepted, also on credibility grounds.  The appeal also  failed
         under Article 8 ECHR.

Error of law


      6. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis that, in  essence,  it
         was arguable that the FTTJ had no regard  to  material  matters  in
         relation to the appellant's nationality and did  not  consider  the
         limitations of the  SPRAKAB  report.  The  FTTJ  made  no  findings
         regarding the risk  to  the  appellant  as  a  perceived  political
         opponent of the Eritrean government. Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun, in
         granting permission, considered that the  grounds  raised  arguable
         errors.

      7. The Secretary of State's response of  1  September  2015  indicated
         that the respondent  opposed  the  application  for  permission  to
         appeal as it was considered that the  FTTJ  appropriately  directed
         himself;  that  the  grounds  were  "almost"  the   definition   of
         disagreement and that the FTTJ took a rounded view of the case.

The hearing


      8. Mr Whitwell submitted the judgment in  RM  (Sierra  Leone)  v  SSHD
         [2015] EWCA  Civ  541.  No  further  reference  was  made  to  that
         decision, in view of Ms Smith's concession that the SPRAKAB  report
         was not being disputed.

      9. Ms Smith developed the grounds of application and placed particular
         emphasis on the FTTJ's emphasis on the fact  that  Amharic  is  the
         appellant's main language, without having regard to the appellant's
         particular background. In terms of the respondent's SPRAKAB  "order
         form,"  I  was  asked  to  note  that  important  aspects  of   the
         appellant's history were  absent  from  the  information  given  to
         SPRAKAB. Ms Smith also took me to the  background  material  before
         the FTTJ in relation to the town of Assab  in  Eritrea,  where  the
         appellant has always claimed to live, when she was in Eritrea.

     10. It was also argued, on the appellant's behalf, that the  FTTJ  made
         assumptions regarding language which failed to  take  into  account
         the facts of the appellant's case, as presented. Finally, Ms  Smith
         argued that the FTTJ's negative findings regarding the  appellant's
         attendance at an Ethiopian church bordered on the irrational.

     11. Mr Whitwell reiterated the respondent's view that the grounds  were
         no more than disagreement with the FTTJ's conclusions. He  disputed
         that the FTTJ considered language to be determinative; arguing that
         it was merely a weighty factor. In this he referred me to  [24]  to
         [28] of the decision and reasons. Mr Whitwell argued that the  FTTJ
         had considered other evidence submitted by the appellant  from  the
         church and the Eritrean community but had concluded that  this  was
         not sufficient to alter his findings. He took me  to  [34]  of  the
         decision, where the FTTJ had remarked on the  absence  of  evidence
         from the Ethiopian Embassy to indicate that the appellant  was  not
         Ethiopian. Contrary to what was argued on behalf of the  appellant,
         Mr Whitwell took me to parts of the FTTJ's decision  where  he  had
         noted at [25], that the appellant did not live in Eritrea for large
         parts of her life and at  [27],  she  had  been  cared  for  by  an
         Ethiopian nanny in Egypt.  With regard to the  town  of  Assab,  Mr
         Whitwell argued that Amharic was  a  secondary  language  and  that
         there had been no expert evidence before  the  FTTJ.  Finally,  the
         FTTJ had noted at [35] that the appellant did  not  speak  Tigrinya
         and consequently his conclusion that the  appellant  was  Ethiopian
         was open to him on the evidence.

     12. In reply, Ms Smith maintained that the issue of language was highly
         influential. From the outset, the appellant had said  that  Amharic
         was her first language and that she understood  some  Tigrinya  and
         Arabic. With regard to the FTTJ's findings on religion at [37], she
         argued that he had already decided the nationality  issue  by  this
         point. The appellant had only lived in Eritrea, in Assab, for three
         short periods of her young life. The SPRAKAB report did not set out
         the questions posed and the appellant's  replies.  Whereas  in  her
         asylum interview, the appellant had been questioned extensively  on
         Eritrea  and  Assab  and  there  had  been  on  criticisms  of  her
         responses. The FTTJ had failed to take into account the appellant's
         diverse background.

Decision on Error of Law

     13. The core issue in the appellant's case is that of  nationality.  If
         she is an Eritrean national, it is not in dispute that she  has  an
         arguable case  to  be  considered  a  refugee.  Notwithstanding  Mr
         Whitwell's arguments, the  FTTJ  took  the  appellant's  linguistic
         ability to be determinative. Indeed at [35]  of  the  decision  and
         reasons he states as follows;

             "I conclude on the evidence before me that the Appellant is in
             fact Ethiopian and not Eritrean in view of  her  contradictory
             evidence and particularly in view of the fact that she  speaks
             Amharic fluently and does not speak Tigrinya or Arabic."

     14. The appellant has never claimed to speak Tigrinya  and  has  always
         maintained that her first language is  Amharic.  She  has  provided
         extensive reasons  for  this,  given  her  claim  to  be  Eritrean.
         Firstly, she states that she left Eritrea at a very young  age  and
         returned there only for short periods of time interspersed by  many
         years living elsewhere. Secondly, she says  that  her  mother  died
         when she was very young and that she was cared for by  an  Amharic-
         speaking nanny in Egypt, while her father worked.  Thirdly,  during
         the years when the appellant claimed to live in Eritrea, she states
         she resided in Assab, a town where the  objective  evidence  before
         the FTTJ, contained at  pages  B49-50  of  the  appellant's  bundle
         describes Amharic as the "lingua franca." The FTTJ failed  to  take
         any of these factors into  consideration  in  concluding  that  the
         appellant's inability to speak Tigrinya was fatal to her  claim  to
         be an Eritrean national.

     15.  The  SPRAKAB  report  concludes  that,  following  analysis,   the
         appellant was  considered  to  speak  Amharic  at  "native"  level.
         However, the information provided  to  SPRAKAB  by  the  respondent
         prior to the analysis taking place, failed  to  mentioned  relevant
         aspects of the appellant's account and  background.  In  fact,  the
         same matters which were not considered by the FTTJ.

     16. The respondent's SPRAKAB  order  form  did  not  recount  that  the
         appellant's Eritrean mother died when the  appellant  was  aged  3;
         does not say that the appellant was deported  to  Assab;  that  she
         went to live in 2002 in Egypt; that she had an Ethiopian  nanny  or
         that that she returned to Assab in 2008 until 2010.  The FTTJ ought
         to have considered the limited information provided to SPRAKAB  and
         therefore the limitations of the analysis in determining the amount
         of weight to attach to the said report.

     17. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there are errors of  law
         such that the decision ought to be set aside to be remade. None  of
         the findings of the FTTJ are to stand.

     18. I considered whether this appeal should  be  remade  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal on a future  date,  there  being  no  Amharic  interpreter
         booked; however in view of fact  that  the  appellant  has  changed
         representatives since the First-tier hearing, that expert  evidence
         is intended to be adduced as well as the appellant's  pregnancy,  I
         consider it appropriate to  remit  the  matter  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

     19. Further directions are set out below.

     20. No anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ, however I consider  it
         appropriate to make the following direction:

         "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the
         Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise,  no  report  of  these
         proceedings or any form of publication thereof  shall  directly  or
         indirectly identify the original appellant. This direction  applies
         to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to  comply  with  this
         direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings. "

Conclusions


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision to be re-made.

    Directions


       . This appeal is remitted to be heard de novo by any First-tier
         Tribunal Judge except FTTJ A Khawwar.

       . The appeal should be listed for a hearing at Hatton Cross.

       . An interpreter in the Amharic language is required.

       . Time estimate is 3 hours.


Signed      Date: 22 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

