
[pic]
st

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10145/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At  Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28th September  2015              |On 21st December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  MR B S K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A.Masood of Aden and Co, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr.E.Tujan, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 1. The proceedings before the First  tier  Tribunal  were  anonymised.  No
    application has been  made  to  change  this  and  so  this  should  be
    maintained. I am  influenced  by  the  fact  that  there  are  children
    affected by this decision.

 2. Although it is the respondent who is appealing for convenience  I  will
    continue to refer to  the  parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born on 21st March 1973.

 4. The background facts are uncontentious. He came to the  United  Kingdom
    in 1999 at the age of 22.He unsuccessfully claimed asylum in  1999  and
    in 2000 his appeal was dismissed by an Adjudicator. He  then  left  the
    United Kingdom, travelled to India, and then  returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom. In October 2004 he was granted permission from what  was  then
    the Immigration Appeal Tribunal to appeal the  Adjudicator's  decision.
    This appeal was dismissed in a decision promulgated  in  January  2006.
    The appellant did not attend.

 5. On the 15 July 2007 he married Mrs J K. She is a British national whose
    family originally came from Afghanistan and  are  now  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom. She came here when she was 17 years of age. They have a
    daughter G, born in May 2008 and a son, S, born in January 2010. On the
    16th July 2010 the appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain.

 6. In November 2013 he was convicted in the Crown Court of  conspiring  to
    commit fraud. Another person took a driving test pretending to be  him.
    He  was  sentenced  to  12  months  imprisonment.  He  had  a  previous
    conviction on 6 November 2002, driving  with  excess  alcohol.  He  was
    again convicted on 15  April  2004  of  driving  with  excess  alcohol,
    driving whilst disqualified and driving with no insurance. On 23  April
    2004 he was convicted of driving  whilst  disqualified  and  having  no
    insurance.

 7. Following his last conviction a deportation order was made. He appealed
    and in his grounds again raised the issue of asylum. The  asylum  claim
    was that he was at risk in Afghanistan because he is a Sikh. There were
    no features specific to the appellant which placed  him  at  particular
    risk.

 8.  His  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Judge  Khan.  In  a  decision
    promulgated on 30 January 2015  his  appeal  was  dismissed  on  asylum
    grounds and under article 3. However the judge allowed his appeal under
    the immigration rules dealing with deportation and in  the  alternative
    under article 8.

 9. In seeking permission to appeal the respondent contended that there was
    no provision in a deportation appeal to  allow  on  article  8  grounds
    outside the rules. It was also  contended  that  in  dealing  with  the
    immigration rules and deportation the immigration judge failed to  give
    adequate reasons as to why  the  appellant  met  the  exceptions  under
    paragraph 399 and why it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  his  wife  and
    children to either leave United Kingdom with him or the  family  to  be
    split. It was also contended that the immigration judge failed to  have
    adequate consideration to the public interest considerations.

10. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Mandalia. No merit was seen in the first ground advanced
    and reference was made to the judge's comment at paragraph  39  of  the
    decision that there was no need to go outside section 117 or  paragraph
    399 of the rules as the article 8 proportionality exercise was subsumed
    into these. Permission to appeal was granted on the adequacy of reasons
    and public interest grounds.

The Upper Tribunal hearing

11. Mr Tujan pointed out that at paragraph 33 of his  decision  Judge  Khan
    stated that if he were dealing with the appellant alone he  would  have
    no hesitation whatsoever in dismissing his  appeal  and  in  concluding
    deportation was in the public interest. It was contended on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State that the  judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons as to why the appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh for
    his wife and children.

12. I was referred to the decision of MAB (paragraph 399;  "unduly  harsh")
    USA [2015] UKUT 00435 (IAC) where the Upper Tribunal gave  guidance  as
    to the meaning of "unduly harsh" in paragraph 399 and section  117C(5).
    The focus was to be  on  the  impact  on  the  individuals  and  not  a
    balancing exercise between the public interest  and  the  individuals.`
    Unduly  harsh'  was  understood  to  impose  a  higher  threshold  then
    `uncomfortable', `inconvenient', `undesirable', `unwelcome', difficult'
    or `challenging'. The consequences would be harsh if they  were  severe
    or bleak and unduly meant they would be inordinately  or  `excessively'
    harsh, bearing in mind all the circumstances of the individual.

13. Mr Masood submitted that adequate reasons were given at  paragraphs  36
    through to 38. The judge had set out the circumstances  applicable  and
    the family life that existed and concluded it could not continue if the
    appellant were deported, particularly against  the  background  of  the
    difficult conditions in Afghanistan. He submitted that the respondent's
    appeal amounted solely to  a  disagreement  with  the  outcome  of  the
    decision.

14. Mr Masood sought to reargue the appellant's asylum claim as  raised  in
    the rule 24 notice. In the event that I found an error of law Mr Masood
    submitted that the appellant should not be returned because he faced  a
    risk of religious persecution in Afghanistan.  He  contended  that  the
    country guidance decision of SL could not be relied upon because it was
    based on inaccurate data about the situation of Sikhs. He  referred  me
    to the decision of DSG and Others (Afghan  Sikhs:  departure  from  CG)
    Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 148 (IAC) mentioned in his  skeleton  argument.
    He said that was raised in the section 24 Notice

15. Mr Tujan submitted that this was  procedurally  incorrect  and  if  the
    appellant sought to challenge the dismissal of his asylum claim by  the
    First-tier Judge then he would have had to have permission to appeal on
    this. He submitted the matter could not be raised by way of  a  section
    24 notice and cited the decision of EG and NG Ethiopia [2013] UKUT 143.

16. All parties agreed that if an error of law were found the appeal should
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.

Consideration

17. EG and NG (UT rule 17: withdrawal; rule 24: scope) Ethiopia [2013] UKUT
    00143 (IAC) stated that a  party  that  seeks  to  persuade  the  Upper
    Tribunal to replace a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  a
    decision that would make a material difference to one  of  the  parties
    needs permission to appeal. The  Upper  Tribunal  cannot  entertain  an
    application purporting to be made  under  rule  24  for  permission  to
    appeal until the First-tier Tribunal has  been  asked  in  writing  for
    permission to appeal and has either refused it or declined to admit the
    application. Consequently, I agree with Mr. Tujan that the  appellant's
    asylum claim cannot be considered in the present proceedings.

18. The challenge to the decision relates to the adequacy  of  the  reasons
    given and the consideration of the public interest. The judge indicated
    (para 33) that the appeal would not  have  been  allowed  but  for  the
    effect of the decision upon the appellant's wife and children.  It  was
    accepted that the relationship between the appellant and his  wife  and
    children was genuine and subsisting. Furthermore, his wife and children
    were British citizens. The  judge  refers  to  the  rules  as  being  a
    complete code for considering article 8 and that the public interest is
    reflected in section 117 of the 2002 Act.

19. At paragraph 35 the judge found that at the time of the  index  offence
    the appellant had indefinite leave to remain and was in employment.  He
    could speaks English. The judge then turned  to  the  position  of  the
    children. At paragraph 36 his conclusion that it would be unduly  harsh
    for them to live in Afghanistan and gave  reasons.  Firstly,  they  had
    never lived there  having  spent  their  entire  lives  in  the  United
    Kingdom. Their school reports indicated they  were  well  settled.  The
    judge concluded the appellant and his wife  were  devoted  parents  and
    that the children were very close to their parents. For the children to
    go to Afghanistan would be a major disruption in their lives  and  that
    simply because of their youth it did not mean they could easily adjust.

20. The judge considered the alternative  situation  of  the  family  being
    broken up. He concluded they  could  not  maintain  a  relationship  by
    telephone, e-mail or Skype. He concluded it was unrealistic to  suggest
    the relationship could be maintained by visits to Afghanistan, pointing
    out the Foreign & Commonwealth Office advise against all but  essential
    travel.

21. Similar considerations were referred to in relation to the  appellant's
    wife. Her parents are in the United Kingdom with  indefinite  leave  to
    remain. She is a British citizen. The relationship between her and  the
    appellant  is  genuine  and  subsisting.  At  paragraph  37  the  judge
    correctly states that the appellant did not have  indefinite  leave  to
    remain at the time of marriage but pointed out he had leave  from  July
    2010 until revoked because of the deportation order.

22. The judge stated the relationship between the appellant  and  his  wife
    was formed at a time when  he  was  in  the  United  Kingdom  lawfully.
    Factually this was not correct.  It  is  not  apparent  how  the  judge
    reached this view given his acknowledgement that at that stage  he  did
    not have indefinitely leave to remain. There is nothing in  the  papers
    to suggest at that time he had a right to be here, his  appeal  to  the
    asylum and immigration Tribunal having been dismissed in December 2005.
    He was not granted leave until five years later. I  do  note  a  letter
    from his then solicitors dated  16  November  2009  to  the  respondent
    indicating he would be attending to make  further  representations.  It
    was seen this led in turn to the grant of indefinite leave  to  remain.
    However there is nothing to indicate he had any leave in the interval.

23. The fact the appellant did not have leave when  the  relationship  with
    his wife  was  formed  has  statutory  implications.  Paragraph  399(b)
    applies only where the relationship with the partner  was  formed  when
    the deportee was in the United Kingdom lawfully and  their  immigration
    status was not precarious. This was not the situation. However there is
    an overlap because the provision does apply because of the  appellant's
    children where the same question arises, namely, whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for them to live in Afghanistan or to live in  the  United
    Kingdom without the appellant.

24. At paragraph 39 the judge, having concluded  the  consequences  of  the
    decision would be unduly harsh for the  appellant's  wife,  poses  what
    appears to be the correct position: if  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his wife was  formed  when  he  was  not  United  Kingdom
    lawfully. The judge said he would  have  reached  the  same  conclusion
    outside the rules. However, applying article 8 directly  he  must  have
    regard to Part 5 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.
    Section  117B  states  that  llittle  weight  should  be  given  to   a
    relationship formed with a  qualifying  partner  established  when  the
    person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully. Section 117 C (5) refers to
    exception  2   where  an  appellant  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying partner  or  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship  with  a  qualifying  child  and  the  effect  of
    deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

25. But for the children the challenge to the  judge's  decision  would  be
    significantly stronger. Whilst the judge  was  factually  incorrect  in
    proceeding on the basis the appellant was here lawfully the issues  are
    duplicated in the consideration of the children .Consequently,  I  find
    this error made no material difference to the outcome.

26. Immigration Judge Khan has prepared his decision with considerable care
    and this had regard to the relevant statutory provisions  and  balanced
    the competing considerations. It is my conclusion  that  he  has  given
    more than adequate reasons for  his  conclusions  in  relation  to  the
    children. The children are affected no only by the country but  by  who
    is going with them. I believe there was a factual error by the judge in
    concluding  the  appellant  was  here  lawfully  when  he   began   his
    relationship with his wife.  In my view, the  error  made  no  material
    difference to the outcome.

27. The deportation  decision  could  only  result  in  two  outcomes:  the
    appellant's wife and children joining him in Afghanistan or the  family
    being split up. Conditions in Afghanistan are difficult. This has  been
    highlighted by the country guidance decision of TG and  others  (Afghan
    Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT  00595  (IAC)  promulgated
    subsequent  to  Judge  Khan's  decision.  Whilst  Sikhs  do  not   face
    persecution per se they face  considerable  difficulties.  Muslims  are
    unlikely to employ them. There are  difficulties  accessing  places  of
    religious worship and issues of appropriate education for  children  in
    light of discrimination against Sikhs and  the  shortage  of  education
    facilities. It clearly is in the children's best interests for them  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  Furthermore,  it  is  clearly  in  their
    interest to be a family unit which consists of two  loving  parents  to
    support them. Consequently, the  alternative  of  the  breakup  of  the
    family unit would be unduly harsh in the circumstance.  The  judge  set
    out these factors out these factors and properly balanced them  against
    the public interest.

Decision.

28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  appeal  did  not
    involve a material error of law and shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly



Anonymity.

29. The First-tier Tribunal made an order for  anonymity  which  should  be
    maintained until changed.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

