
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/10531/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 22 April 2015                     |On 4 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     acd
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Querton, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes back before me following my decision after a  hearing
    on 14 January 2015 that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in its
    decision on the appellant's appeal.

 2. That appeal  was  on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  against  the
    respondent's decision dated 27  November  2014  to  remove  him  as  an
    illegal entrant.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon, born on 3  February  1986.   He
    arrived in the UK on 14 October 2014 in possession of a visitor's visa,
    valid until 6 February 2015.  He made a claim for asylum on 15 November
    2014.

 4. My written decision explaining the basis on which I concluded that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law is set out as  an  annex  to  this
    determination to  which  reference  should  be  made  for  the  further
    background to the appeal and the basis of the appellant's claim.

 5. As I explain in the error of law decision,  certain  findings  of  fact
    made by the First-tier Tribunal were to be preserved.  They can be seen
    at [37] of the error of law  decision.   I  summarise  those  preserved
    findings as follows:

      i) All of [31] of the First-tier Tribunal's determination which  reads
         as follows:

             "I find that the Appellant has given a consistent  account  of
             his arrest on 14th June 2014, his detention and  escape  three
             days later.  He gave the same account, of the  events  arising
             from 14th June 2014, in his interview, witness  statement  and
             during cross-examination.  I accept  that  the  Appellant  was
             arrested, detained for three  days,  threatened,  deprived  of
             food and water, and escaped.  He travelled  through  the  bush
             with TJ and got a lift in a lorry to Douala  where  he  stayed
             with a friend of TJ's until he came to the UK."

         The preserved finding in this respect includes that  the  appellant
         was  accused  during  interrogation  of  being  a  member  of,   or
         associated with, Boko Haram, and that  he  was  beaten  and  kicked
         during his detention.

     ii) During his detention the police took the appellant's phone  and  ID
         card.  The appellant escaped with TJ and stayed  at  TJ's  friend's
         house from June to October 2014.

    iii) The police did not come looking for the appellant at  any  premises
         after his escape and that no enquiries were made  of  his  wife  or
         mother as to his whereabouts whilst the appellant was in Cameroon.

     iv) The appellant was not smuggled out of  Cameroon.  He  obtained  his
         visa on 6 August 2014 having attended the British embassy in person
         and had his photograph and fingerprints taken.  He travelled to the
         UK on his own passport without difficulty.

      v) The appellant had not given a credible account of being  unable  to
         contact his wife.

 6. Further documentary evidence on behalf of the appellant  subsequent  to
    the error of law decision consists of an updated witness statement from
    the appellant, an expert report from  Charlotte  Walker-Said  dated  17
    April 2015 and some further country background materials.  There was no
    further oral evidence.

    Submissions

 7. On behalf of the appellant I was referred to  those  findings  of  fact
    preserved from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  In addition to
    the fact that the appellant escaped detention, I was reminded that  his
    account was that his  phone  and  ID  card  were  taken.   Thus,  those
    findings amount to a history of persecution.

 8. I was referred  to  the  appellant's  skeleton  argument  which  itself
    highlights those features of the expert report relied on on  behalf  of
    the  appellant.   I  was  referred  to  the   decision   in   FK   (SDF
    member/activist - risk) Cameroon CG [2007] UKAIT  00047  which  it  was
    submitted related only to a specific political party but it  was  found
    in that case that that particular appellant would be  at  risk  of  re-
    arrest.

 9. So far as this appellant is concerned, apart from the fact that his  ID
    card and phone were retained, age makes  it  more  likely  that  he  is
    someone who would stand out as linked to Boko Haram.   His  arrest  was
    made following a discovery of arms in a truck and he would be  returned
    at a time when the country's resources are focused on Boko  Haram.   He
    is likely to be stopped and re-arrested.

10. I was referred to background evidence in relation to the likelihood  of
    persecution and ill-treatment in detention.

11. In addition  to  paragraph  339K  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  it  was
    submitted that country background information and the  expert  evidence
    confirms that there would still be a risk to the  appellant.   Internal
    relocation would not be an option available to him.

12. On behalf of the respondent Mr Wilding  submitted  that  it  cannot  be
    shown that the appellant would now  be  at  risk,  notwithstanding  the
    preserved findings.  The difficulty that  the  appellant  faces  is  in
    terms of how he left the country, which flies in the face of  what  the
    expert says about why he would be at risk on return.  The expert report
    itself refers to the extent of surveillance at airports in  2013.   The
    appellant left via the airport with a visa,  using  his  own  name  and
    ordinary channels.  The same is evident  at  page  17  of  the  report.
    There was significant security around the airport when  Ms  Walker-Said
    was there in May 2014.  Although the appellant's ID card was taken,  he
    managed to get through the airport with a passport.  It is  clear  that
    by the time he left he was of no interest to the authorities.

13. What is said in the report about attention being directed  towards  him
    because of a lack of previous formal employment and little schooling is
    inconsistent with what is in the appellant's  witness  statement  about
    his studies and the work he did in Cameroon.  He was a  trader,  buying
    and selling goods.

14. Although the report says that the appellant would be identified  as  an
    escapee, it does not deal with the basis on which any technology  would
    be able to identify him.  In the US State Department  Report  ("USSDR")
    dated October 2013 it states  under  the  sub-heading  "Administration"
    that record keeping on prisoners was inadequate, although the  Ministry
    of Justice had begun to computerise files.  In  his  witness  statement
    the appellant says that he was held at a house rather than a prison  or
    some other formal  place  of  detention.   Accordingly,  his  detention
    appears to have been informal.  The fact that there  was  no  follow-up
    after he left detention indicates that there was no  interest  in  him.
    Similarly, there would be no on-going interest if he  were  to  return.
    He is not likely to be recognised and would not be at risk.

15. In reply, Ms Querton submitted that the expert opinion was based on the
    findings of fact.  The expert was aware that the appellant had left  on
    his own passport.  Her use of the word "lucky" in terms of how  he  was
    able to leave may not be the most appropriate terminology but  it  does
    not detract from her opinion.

16. So far as  the  appellant's  informal  employment  is  concerned,  this
    relates to someone who is employed and drawing a regular wage.  In  his
    witness statement the appellant says that he moved to the north to find
    employment and thus he was not part of the formal employment sector.

17. So far as record-keeping and security is concerned, the expert evidence
    is that matters have moved on since the  appellant  left,  despite  the
    inadequate earlier record keeping.  Efforts  to  combat  terrorism  and
    resources available to law enforcement have increased.

18. The expert report takes into account the fact that the appellant  would
    be returning as a failed asylum seeker, although the  country  guidance
    case does not refer to such a risk and the  expert  was  not  asked  to
    comment on it in its own right.

    My Conclusions

19. It is clear from the expert report  of  Ms  Walker-Said  and  from  the
    background information put  before  me  that  the  security  forces  in
    Cameroon have been and continue to be  responsible  for  serious  human
    rights abuses.  Aside from what is in the expert report,  one  sees  in
    the Amnesty International Report dated 25 February 2015 in the  initial
    summary,  that  it  states  that  arbitrary  arrests,  detentions   and
    extrajudicial executions of people suspected of being members  of  Boko
    Haram were reportedly carried out by security agents.  Under  the  sub-
    heading "Background", with reference to various human rights abuses, it
    states that "Most of these violations were committed in the context  of
    the fight against Boko Haram."

20. The US State Department Report for Cameroon of 27 February 2014, in its
    summary on the first page state as follows:

         "The most important human  rights  problems  in  the  country  were
         security force torture and abuse,  particularly  of  detainees  and
         prisoners, denial of fair and speedy public trial, and restrictions
         on freedom of assembly and association.

         Other major human rights abuses included security  force  killings,
         life-threatening prison conditions, arbitrary arrest and detention,
         prolonged and sometimes  incommunicado  pre  trial  detention,  and
         infringement on privacy rights."

21. At Section 1(c) it states that security forces reportedly detained  and
    tortured persons at specific sites, including temporary  holding  cells
    within  police  or  gendarme  facilities  and  cells  located  at   the
    Directorate General for External Intelligence.

22. Various other aspects of  the  background  material  and  the  expert's
    report provide  evidence  of  those  abuses.   No  submissions  to  the
    contrary were made on behalf of the respondent.

23. Similarly, the background evidence is replete with  references  to  the
    extent to which the security forces have been concerned with the threat
    presented by Boko Haram and  the  intensification  of  efforts  by  the
    security forces to crack down on those involved with  or  suspected  of
    being involved with Boko Haram.  Again, no submissions to the  contrary
    were made on behalf of the respondent.   Indeed,  to  some  extent  the
    respondent's position depends on security forces'  activities  in  this
    respect, in that it is submitted that if the appellant had been of  any
    continuing interest to the authorities in Cameroon,  there  would  have
    been some sign of it before he left and he would not have been able  to
    leave using his own identity through ordinary channels at the airport.

24. It is in reality on those  propositions  which  the  respondent's  case
    rests.  That is to say, after the  appellant's  escape  from  detention
    there is no evidence that the security forces searched for him, and the
    lack of  risk  is  evident  from  the  means  of  his  departure.   The
    respondent's argument boils down to this: although  the  appellant  was
    accused of involvement  with  Boko  Haram  in  the  past,  and  beaten,
    threatened, detained and intimidated as a result, there was  and  would
    be no further adverse interest in him.

25. The respondent relies on the information in the  USSDR  to  the  effect
    that record keeping  on  prisoners  was  inadequate,  as  well  as  the
    appellant's account that he was kept in what would appear to have  been
    an informal place of detention.  Thus,  it  is  argued  that  there  is
    unlikely to have been a record of his detention.

26. I recognise the  force  of  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.  However, I am nevertheless satisfied  that  the  appellant
    has established that on return to Cameroon there is a real risk that he
    would be persecuted.

27. In the first place, it is important to bear in mind paragraph  339K  of
    the Immigration Rules, to which I have referred in  the  error  of  law
    decision.  I do not consider that it could be said that there are  good
    reasons to consider that the persecution that he suffered in  the  past
    would not be repeated.

28. Although the findings of fact made by the First-tier  Tribunal  are  to
    the effect that the appellant had not given a credible account  of  the
    police looking for him after his escape or of having made any effort to
    find him through his wife or mother, as I said  in  the  error  of  law
    decision at [30] there is background evidence in relation to the police
    that needs to be taken into account.  The US  State  Department  Report
    for 2013 states that:

         "Police were ineffective, poorly trained and corrupt.  Impunity was
         a problem.  Citizens often resorted to vigilante action rather than
         calling police."

29. That the appellant has not established that the police made efforts  to
    find him after his escape, is relevant but  not  determinative  of  the
    issue of risk on return.

30. Ms Walker-Said states on page 4 of her report that:

         "The threat that he would be stopped  by  the  police  or  security
         forces was most likely very present when he left  Cameroon  and  he
         was  simply  lucky  enough  to  leave  the  country  without  being
         detected.  The threat of being discovered and having  the  security
         forces learn of his arrest record continues, even  if  he  was  not
         caught at the airport upon exiting the country."

31. I do consider that it would have been of more assistance had the report
    given some explanation, analysis or opinion as  to  how  the  appellant
    would have been able to leave the country without being  detected,  the
    appellant's  explanation  having  been  rejected  by   the   First-tier
    Tribunal.  It is plainly a matter that needs to be taken into account.

32. However, it is important to separate  speculation  or  conjecture  from
    fact.  As already indicated, the  respondent's  position  is  that  the
    appellant was apparently not the subject of further  enquiry  after  he
    escaped and he left the country without detection; ergo, he was not  of
    interest.   In  my  judgement  the  conclusion  contended  for  by  the
    respondent does not necessarily follow from the  facts.   There  is  an
    alternative explanation in terms of the inefficiency  of  the  security
    forces.  Other possibilities can be speculated upon, for  example  that
    he was simply 'lucky' to use Ms Walker-Said's  term.   The  inescapable
    facts, as found by the First-tier  Tribunal,  are  that  he  was  found
    travelling  in  a  vehicle  that  contained  arms.   He  was  arrested,
    detained, ill-treated and questioned about association with Boko Haram.
     He was not released but escaped.  In the context of a country  seeking
    then, as now, to deal with a very real security threat from Boko Haram,
    it seems to me to be inconceivable that the security forces  would  not
    be intensely interested in a  person  such  as  the  appellant  on  his
    return, on the basis of those facts.

33. I asked the parties whether there was evidence of whether returnees are
    questioned at the airport, but neither party  was  aware  of  any  such
    evidence.  The extracts from background material provided on behalf  of
    the appellant include the USSDR but not that part of it that deals with
    freedom of movement. I have considered it for myself. It states that:

         "Security forces at roadblocks and checkpoints  in  cities  and  on
         most highways often extorted bribes and harassed travelers.  Police
         frequently stopped travelers  to  check  identification  documents,
         vehicle registrations, and tax receipts as security and immigration
         control measures.  There were credible reports that police arrested
         and beat individuals who failed to carry their identification cards
         as required by law."

34. This is consistent with the information  in  the  expert  report  which
    states on  page  17  that  documentation  is  key  to  getting  through
    checkpoints and that that documentation would  reveal  the  appellant's
    identity.  The report states that it is  highly  likely  that  security
    forces would either recognise him or have access to  information  about
    his previous arrest.

35. The chances of him being recognised, it seems to me, are remote  unless
    he happens to be encountered by those that previously detained  him  or
    unless  those  at  a  checkpoint  or  roadblock  recognise   him   from
    photographic evidence held, for example, on a database.   There  is  no
    evidence about that, although it is accepted that  the  appellant's  ID
    card was retained by the security forces when he was arrested.

36. On page 6 of the expert's report it states that:

         "The airports in Cameroon have ramped up security  even  in  recent
         months since [the appellant's] departure.   In  2013,  airports  in
         Yaound� and  Douala  were  equipped  with  new  video  surveillance
         technology and new equipment was placed throughout the airports and
         security measures have only increased since then with the influx of
         American  and  French  technology  for  surveillance   and   cross-
         referencing entrants and migrants with police records."

    It seems, therefore, that since the appellant's departure airports have
    increased their security, which is also consistent with what is said in
    the background reports to be increased security.

37. It is also pertinent to refer to another passage from the expert report
    at page 17 which states that when the author was  in  Cameroon  in  May
    2014, all roads leading to and from the  airport  had  roadblocks,  and
    passports and personal identification was checked at  every  roadblock.
    It was explained to her that critical central points like airports  and
    regional government offices had roadblocks leading to them  to  prevent
    an invasions by Boko Haram, smuggling by them or illegal entry by their
    militants or intermediaries.  In these circumstances, it is  reasonable
    to conclude that on  his  return  the  appellant  would  encounter  the
    security forces, probably sooner rather than later, for example at  one
    of the many checkpoints or roadblocks.  I have referred  to  the  USSDR
    about reports of people being arrested and beaten for failing to  carry
    identification cards, as required by  law.   This  resonates  with  the
    expert evidence.

38. The  appellant's  ID  card  has  been  retained.   Neither  party  made
    submissions to me or referred me to  any  evidence  about  whether  the
    appellant would be able to obtain another one prior to return.   It  is
    reasonable to conclude that he would be without it on his  return.   It
    would only take simple questioning to establish why he does not have an
    ID card, and the appellant  could  not  be  expected  to  lie  (see  RT
    (Zimbabwe) and others v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2012] UKSC 38).

39. It is in any event reasonable to conclude  that  there  would  be  some
    record of his having been detained, notwithstanding that  it  does  not
    appear to have been at a formal or official place  of  detention.   The
    fact of his ID card having been retained is some evidence of  a  formal
    detention and intention to document him.

40. Ms Walker-Said states at page 14 of her  report  that  the  police  are
    "typically very adept at finding suspects once they return home."   She
    refers to police networks and informal secondary networks  being  used.
    On page 9 she  states  that  she  has  learned  that  the  police  have
    information showing networks that are both  formal  and  informal,  the
    informal networks being through traders,  migrants,  merchants,  chiefs
    and rural and urban go-betweens who provide the police information.

41. The appellant's history of dealings with the security forces  in  terms
    of his arrest and detention, the intensity of the security crackdown in
    relation to Boko Haram, and the clear evidence of human  rights  abuses
    committed by  the  security  forces,  combine  to  establish  that  the
    appellant would be at real risk of persecution on his return.

42. In coming to that view I have not sought to resolve the dispute between
    the parties about what is said in the expert report  in  terms  of  the
    appellant being a person who has a lack of education or  background  of
    employment, which would increase suspicion of him. Mr Wilding on behalf
    of the respondent rejected that description of the  appellant.   It  is
    sufficient to note what is  said  in  the  report  about  a  heightened
    interest that young people in  particular  attract  from  the  security
    forces in Cameroon, and to note that the  appellant  is  still,  at  29
    years of age, a young man.

43. In  conclusion  therefore,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    established to the required standard that on return  there  is  a  real
    risk  of  persecution  for  a  Convention  reason,  namely  an  imputed
    political opinion.

44. For the same reasons, I am satisfied that there is a  real  risk  of  a
    breach of his Article 3 rights.

45. In the light of those conclusions, I do not consider  it  necessary  to
    undertake the technical and formal process of determining the Article 8
    ground of appeal.

Decision

46. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  That decision having been set aside, I re-make  the
    decision allowing the appeal under the  Refugee  Convention  and  under
    Article 3 of the ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  10/07/15

                                    ANNEX

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon, born on 3  February  1986.   He
    arrived in the UK on 14 October 2014 in possession of a visitor's visa,
    valid to 6 February 2015.   His claim for asylum, made on  15  November
    2014, was refused.

 2. On 27 November 2014 a decision was made to remove  him  as  an  illegal
    entrant.  The appellant appealed against that decision and  his  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Frances  on  12  December  2014,
    whereby she dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  Permission to  appeal
    in respect of her decision having been granted, the appeal came  before
    me.

    The basis of claim

 3. The basis of the appellant's claim is summarised in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal and it  is  not  suggested  that  that  summary  is
    inaccurate.  I summarise here the salient features of  the  appellant's
    claim, based on the summary in the determination of Judge Frances, with
    some amendments or additions.

 4. The appellant claims that he owned a shop  which  sold  women's  beauty
    products.  He met a man named M at a wholesale  market  in  Maroua  and
    started transporting goods for him in a vehicle.

 5. On 14 June 2014, when transporting goods with  three  other  men,  they
    were stopped by the police who found firearms in  bags  of  rice.   The
    appellant and the others were arrested and taken to a house where  they
    were accused of trafficking arms for a Nigerian terrorist organisation,
    Boko Haram.  The appellant was detained for  three  days.   During  his
    detention he was kicked and beaten, and not provided with food or water
    or any access  to  toilet  facilities.   When  being  interrogated  the
    appellant was accused of having links with Boko Haram and questioned as
    to whether the weapons were for them.  They  were  threatened  that  if
    they did not say who they worked for they would be killed.   His  phone
    and ID card were taken from him.

 6. On the third day of his detention the house in which they were kept was
    attacked by men with guns.  The people attacking the house rescued  the
    driver, U, and the appellant and another man, TJ, used the  opportunity
    to escape.

 7. After spending a night in the bush, the following day they  obtained  a
    lift to Douala from a lorry driver.  The appellant stayed at the  house
    of TJ's friend.  Between the time of his escape and coming to the UK in
    October 2014 the appellant was in hiding.

 8. A person by the name of J made arrangements for the appellant to obtain
    a visa from the British Embassy, using the appellant's passport that he
    had obtained in May 2014 for the purpose of going  to  Nigeria  to  buy
    goods.

 9. The appellant was able to pass through the airport en route to  the  UK
    because J introduced him to another man who brought  him  clothes  like
    the ones worn by airport workers.  He did not  therefore  pass  through
    passport control.

10. He spoke to his wife on 6 December 2014 and she told him that  two  men
    had arrived at their house asking as to his whereabouts.  His wife said
    that they were police officers although they were in plain clothes.  He
    has since been unable to contact his wife.  His wife also told him that
    a man had phoned her pretending to be a friend of his.

    Findings made by Judge Frances

11. The following is a summary of the findings made by Judge  Frances.   At
    [31] she concluded that the appellant had given a consistent account of
    his arrest on 14 June 2014, his detention and escape three days  later.
    She accepted that he had been arrested and  detained  for  three  days,
    threatened, deprived of food and water and escaped.

12. At [32] she concluded that his claim to be of interest  to  the  police
    after his escape was not credible  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the
    determination.  She found that the appellant was of no interest to  the
    police after he escaped from detention.  Furthermore,  his  account  of
    how he obtained a visa and his journey to the UK was not credible.   At
    [36] she concluded that the appellant had not established that  he  was
    smuggled out of Cameroon, and found that he had travelled to the UK  on
    his own passport.  It was  concluded  that  the  appellant  was  of  no
    interest to the authorities prior to coming to the UK.

13. Judge Frances was not satisfied that the appellant had given a credible
    account of any visit being made by the police to the  appellant's  wife
    or in relation to his inability to contact her  now.   The  appellant's
    claim that he would be of  interest  to  the  police  on  suspicion  of
    trafficking arms for Boko Haram or his claim that he is perceived to be
    a member of Boko Haram were also found not to be credible.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions

14. Having considered the skeleton  argument  and  the  grounds  of  appeal
    submitted on behalf of the  appellant,  I  invited  Mr  Logo  first  to
    respond to the points made.  Mr  Logo  submitted  that  although  Judge
    Frances had accepted that there had been ill-treatment of the appellant
    she did not accept that the appellant had been regarded as someone  who
    was a  member  of  Boko  Haram.   Furthermore,  the  appellant  in  the
    screening interview had stated that he is a Catholic and  there  is  no
    background evidence that Catholics are associated with Boko Haram.   At
    [31] of the determination Judge Frances did not  expressly  state  that
    she accepted the claim that he had been accused of being involved  with
    Boko Haram.

15. In subsequent paragraphs the judge had  explained  in  detail  why  the
    persecution that the appellant had been subjected to in  the  past  was
    not likely to be repeated.  He had been detained in June  but  remained
    in Cameroon until October 2014 without having come to the attention  of
    the authorities.  He travelled  to  the  British  High  Commission  and
    obtained a visa without coming to harm.  There had been no  attempt  to
    contact the appellant by the authorities.

16. In the light of the background of police corruption it is possible that
    what had happened may have been the actions of rogue  elements  of  the
    police.  The appellant had been able to travel on his own passport with
    no assistance and had gone through passport control.   That  would  not
    have happened if the authorities had any adverse interest in him.  This
    is particularly so bearing in  mind  the  appellant's  claim  that  the
    police retained his ID card.

17. So far as ground 3  is  concerned,  relating  to  the  judge's  alleged
    failure to have regard to the country  guidance  decision  of  FK  (SDF
    member/activist-risk) Cameroon CG [2007] UKAIT  00047,  that  case  was
    very specific to a particular group and does not establish as a general
    rule that those escaping from detention would be at risk.

18. Mr Neale submitted that the appellant's religion was irrelevant,  given
    that the police falsely accused him of being linked  with  Boko  Haram.
    Furthermore, there is no evidence that the police knew of his religion.



19. At [31] the judge had accepted his account of ill-treatment.  There  is
    no indication that she rejected his  account  of  the  details  of  his
    interrogation, and if she had rejected it, she would have had  to  have
    said so.

20. Paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules is highly  significant.   There
    was no justification for the judge's finding that  the  police  had  no
    interest in the appellant, there having been no  consideration  of  the
    question of whether the police were simply not able to find him.   This
    is significant when considering his case that he went to a friend of  a
    friend's house in a different part of the country. Furthermore, in  the
    asylum interview the appellant said that he  had  been  living  with  a
    friend in north  Cameroon  but  his  family,  including  his  wife  and
    children, lived in Douala, which is in another part of Cameroon.  There
    was no consideration of the risk to the appellant as  an  escapee  from
    police custody.  I was referred to the  decision  in  Demirkaya  [1999]
    INLR 441 in relation to the significance of past persecution.

21. The finding that he was of no interest to the police after  he  escaped
    is not a finding that is based on the evidence.

    My conclusions

22. I announced at the hearing that I was satisfied that Judge Frances  did
    err in law in her assessment of the question of risk  on  return.   The
    following are my reasons.

23. At [31] Judge Frances said as follows:

         "I find that the Appellant has given a consistent  account  of  his
         arrest on 14th June 2014,  his  detention  and  escape  three  days
         later.  He gave the same account, of the events arising  from  14th
         June 2014, in his interview, witness statement  and  during  cross-
         examination.  I accept that the Appellant  was  arrested,  detained
         for three  days,  threatened,  deprived  of  food  and  water,  and
         escaped.  He travelled through the bush with TJ and got a lift in a
         lorry to Douala where he stayed with a friend of TJ's until he came
         to the UK."

24. I reject Mr Logo's submission that Judge Frances did not find that  the
    appellant had  been  accused  of  association  with  Boko  Haram.   The
    appellant's case as set out in his witness statement was  that  he  was
    accused during interrogation  of  having  links  with  Boko  Haram  and
    questioned about whether the weapons were for that group.  It is  clear
    from [31] that the  judge  accepted  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    detention.  As submitted by Mr Neale, there is no indication  from  the
    determination that the judge rejected any part of his  account  of  his
    detention and interrogation.  For the avoidance of doubt, it is  to  be
    noted that he also said that  he  was  beaten  and  kicked  during  his
    detention.  Again, although Judge Frances does not expressly  refer  to
    that aspect of his account,  it  is  implicit  that  she  accepted  it.
    Similarly, it is also significant that  his  account  is  that  he  was
    threatened by the police that he would be killed if he did not say  who
    he was working for.

25. Thus, it is necessary to assess the risk on return on the premise  that
    the appellant was accused of being involved with Boko  Haram  and  that
    firearms were found in the vehicle in which he was travelling.

26. Paragraph 339K of HC 395 (as amended) provides as follows:

         "The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution  or
         serious harm, or to direct threats  of  such  persecution  or  such
         harm, will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-
         founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm,
         unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution  or
         serious harm will not be repeated."

27. What is said  in  paragraph  339K  is  consistent  with  the  ratio  of
    Demirkaya which found that past persecution was probative of  a  future
    risk of persecution unless, to summarise, there  are  good  reasons  to
    believe that there is no real risk of future persecution.

28. Notwithstanding Judge Frances' actual findings in terms of whether  the
    police had to the appellant's knowledge expressed an  interest  in  him
    after his escape, for example by having  visited  his  wife,  a  matter
    which Judge Frances has rejected, the fact remains that it is  accepted
    on Judge Frances' findings that the appellant had been  detained,  ill-
    treated, accused of  involvement  with  a  terrorist  organisation  and
    escaped from detention. In my judgement, those accepted facts  required
    an assessment on their own terms in respect of the risk of  persecution
    on return.

29. In the  circumstances,  I  do  consider  that  on  this  occasion  this
    experienced judge fell  into  error  in  concluding  that  because  the
    appellant had not established that there had been  any  visits  to  the
    family or any enquiries about him, and that  in  that  respect  he  had
    embellished his account, it meant that there would be no risk to him on
    return.  The facts that were accepted in terms of past persecution  and
    escape from detention,  as  well  as  accusations  of  belonging  to  a
    terrorist organisation,  required  an  independent  and  self-contained
    assessment of risk on return.

30. My conclusions take into account  the  background  evidence  which  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal and to which I was referred in terms of,
    for example, police inefficiency.  Thus, in  the  US  State  Department
    Report for 2013 it is stated that:

         "Police were ineffective, poorly trained and corrupt.  Impunity was
         a problem. Citizens often resorted to vigilante action rather  than
         calling police."

31. I also note whist is said in the USSDR  about  there  being  continuing
    reports that security forces tortured,  beat,  harassed  and  otherwise
    abused citizens, prisoners and  detainees.   Whilst  that  evidence  is
    likely to have been a factor in Judge Frances' conclusions in terms  of
    the appellant's account of his ill-treatment, it was also  evidence  to
    be taken into account in terms of the assessment of risk on return.

32. Again, although in general terms Judge Frances referred  to  background
    evidence showing that the police had intensified efforts to track  down
    suspected Boko Haram members, in coming  to  her  conclusion  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk on return that is also a  factor  to  be
    taken into account independently from  the  question  of  the  lack  of
    evidence of any  interest  in  the  appellant  whilst  he  remained  in
    Cameroon.

33. In relation to ground 1,  being  the  complaint  about  Judge  Frances'
    failure to adjourn, that was a ground on which permission to appeal was
    refused. It does not therefore, require further consideration by me.

34. In relation to the  contention  that  Judge  Frances  failed  to  apply
    relevant country guidance, in submissions on behalf  of  the  appellant
    before me it was submitted that  in  reality  that  is  a  matter  that
    overlaps with the issue of the assessment of risk on  return.   In  the
    circumstances, again I do not consider that  further  consideration  of
    that separate ground is required.

35. Being satisfied that Judge Frances  erred  in  law,  I  set  aside  her
    decision. I consider that the appropriate course is for  the  re-making
    of the decision to take place in the Upper Tribunal.  In the  light  of
    the detailed findings  of  fact  made  by  Judge  Frances,  it  is  not
    appropriate for the matter to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    and in particular taking into account the limited nature of the enquiry
    now to be undertaken: risk on return.

36. Having canvassed the views of the parties,  I  also  decided  that  the
    appeal should no longer be subject to the fast track  procedure  having
    regard to rule 5 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.
     I am not satisfied that the appeal can  justly  be  determined  if  it
    remains a fast track case.  This  conclusion  takes  into  account  the
    submissions made on behalf of the appellant to the effect  that  it  is
    hoped that expert evidence will be adduced in relation to the  question
    of risk on return.  Whilst I make  no  direction  in  respect  of  such
    evidence, I do consider that the assessment of risk on return would  be
    better informed by  further  evidence,  whether  background  or  expert
    evidence.

37. I indicated to the parties the extent to  which  I  consider  that  the
    facts as found by Judge Frances  should  be  preserved.   They  are  as
    follows:

    .    The whole of [31], including that the appellant was accused during
         interrogation of being a member of, or associated with, Boko Haram,
         and that he was beaten and kicked during his detention.

      . During his detention the police took the appellant's phone  and  ID
        card.  The appellant escaped with TJ and stayed  at  TJ's  friend's
        house from June to October 2014.

    .    That the police did not come looking  for  the  appellant  at  any
         premises after his escape and that no enquiries were  made  of  his
         wife or mother as to his whereabouts whilst the  appellant  was  in
         Cameroon

    .    The appellant was not smuggled out of Cameroon.  He  obtained  his
         visa on 6 August 2014 having attended the British embassy in person
         and had his photograph and fingerprints taken.  He travelled to the
         UK on his own passport without difficulty.

    .    The appellant had not given a credible account of being unable  to
         contact his wife.

38. The parties are to note the directions for the forthcoming  hearing  as
    set out below:

                               DIRECTIONS

1.   The decision is to be re-made in  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  is  to  be
    listed for hearing no earlier than six weeks from 14 January 2015.

2.   No later than 14 days before the next date of hearing the  parties  are
    to file and serve any further evidence relied on.


