
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10060/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 September 2015                 |On 24 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     MA
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Madubuike
For the SSHD:    Mr Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.


    1. This appeal is anonymised because it refers to an asylum claim.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of  Eritrea  who  claimed  asylum  in  the
       United Kingdom on 29 July 2014.   This claim was refused by the  SSHD
       on 8 November 2014 for reasons set out in a detailed letter  of  that
       same date.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against
       a decision to remove her on asylum grounds.

Summary of asylum claim

    3.  The  appellant  contends  that  she  has  a  well-founded  fear   of
       persecution for reasons relating to the  past  adverse  interest  the
       authorities had in her as a result of her  husband's  desertion  from
       military service as well as  the  fact  that  she  has  left  Eritrea
       illegally.

Procedural history

    4. This is a matter that has previously been  considered  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Pickup.  He dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  in  a
       detailed  decision  dated  12  March  2015.   The  decision  contains
       extensive  reasoning  for  finding  the  appellant's  account  to  be
       incredible.

    5. In a decision dated 7 July 2015 Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Mailer
       considered it arguable that Judge Pickup failed  to  have  regard  to
       relevant background evidence when making his credibility findings.

    6. The SSHD has submitted a rule 24 notice dated 30 July 2014  in  which
       it  is  submitted  that  Judge  Pickup  was  entitled  to  find   the
       appellant's  account  incredible  given   the   inconsistencies   and
       discrepancies identified.

Hearing

    7. At the beginning of the hearing I indicated  a  preliminary  view  to
       both representatives to the effect that the Judge had erred in law in
       failing to take into account the background  evidence  supportive  of
       the appellant's claim and  also  failed  to  take  into  account  the
       appellant's  witness  statement  rebutting  the  SSHD's  reasons  for
       refusal letter ('refusal letter').

    8. Mr Harrison agreed that these constituted material errors of law such
       that the decision should be set aside and remade  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.

    9. Both representatives agreed that the decision  needed  to  be  remade
       completely and that given the nature and extent  of  those  findings,
       this should be done in the First-tier Tribunal.  I have had regard to
       para 7.2 of the relevant Senior President's  Practice  Statement  and
       the nature and extent of the factual findings  required  in  remaking
       the decision, and I have decided that this is an appropriate case  to
       remit to the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

   10. The decision under  appeal  is  undoubtedly  detailed.   It  endorses
       almost it in its entirety the reasons provided in the refusal  letter
       for  rejecting  the  appellant's  evidence.   The  rejection  of  the
       appellant's claim is clear.  The Judge regards  the  "inconsistencies
       and discrepancies [to be] such that [he] cannot accept  any  part  of
       the  appellant's  factual  case"  [34].   These  inconsistencies  and
       discrepancies are identified in the paragraphs beforehand [28-32]  as
       well as subsequently [38-39].  The Judge's findings are not expressly
       attributed to the refusal letter but it is very clear that  the  vast
       majority of his findings relate  to  inconsistencies  taken  directly
       from the refusal letter under the heading "you have been targeted  by
       the Eritrean authorities because your husband deserted the  military"
       at [a to n].  There is nothing  wrong  with  a  Judge  agreeing  with
       reasons provided in the refusal letter.  However where, as  here,  an
       appellant relies upon background evidence to specifically support  an
       aspect of her claim rejected as  implausible  or  incredible  in  the
       refusal letter the Judge is obliged  to  consider  this  and  provide
       reasons why he prefers the analysis in the refusal letter.  Similarly
       where, as in this case, an appellant  prepares  a  witness  statement
       seeking to rebut the reasons offered in the refusal letter the  Judge
       is obliged to address this and to offer sufficient  reasoning  as  to
       why he prefers the arguments within the refusal letter.

   11. In this case the Judge has failed to  take  into  account  background
       evidence supportive of the appellant's claims.   I  accept  that  the
       Judge has referred to background evidence but this relates mainly  to
       that which is highlighted within  the  refusal  letter  and  not  the
       background evidence relied upon on behalf of  the  appellant.   There
       are three examples of this within the Judge's decision.   First,  the
       Judge has accepted the refusal letter's argument that  the  appellant
       would not be held responsible for her husband's  desertion  when  she
       did not become his guarantor [30] without considering the evidence in
       the OGN at 3.12.15 that families of  deserters  are  often  punished.
       Second, the Judge has drawn adverse  inferences  from  the  husband's
       failure to contact his family members [31] without  considering  that
       this might be explained by the fact that the family  members  may  be
       punished if they have this information.

   12. Third, the Judge accepted the reasoning in the refusal letter that it
       is implausible that the authorities did not pursue the appellant when
       she dropped out of school  [38]  when  she  explained  that  she  was
       engaged at the time and there was evidence in  the  OGN  (3.12.5  and
       3.12.6) to support the claim that married woman may not  be  pursued.
       In addition,  the  appellant  carefully  explained  in  her  rebuttal
       witness statement dated 19 February 2015 why she  in  particular  was
       not pursued.  The Judge  has  referred  to  the  background  evidence
       relied upon by the SSHD in the refusal  letter  and  the  appellant's
       first statement  but  has  not  taken  into  account  the  background
       evidence relied  upon  by  the  appellant  or  her  rebuttal  witness
       statement on this issue.

   13. The Judge has also endorsed the point made in the refusal letter that
       the appellant was inconsistent as to when she left Eritrea [34].  The
       Judge points out that she stated that she left the day after  release
       from detention on 21 August 2013 but in her screening  interview  she
       said she left on 1 September 2013.  This wholly fails  to  take  into
       account the fact that the appellant said at her asylum interview that
       she left Eritrea on  1  September  (Q9).    She  said  that  she  was
       released from detention on 21  August  (Q97)  because  she  was  sick
       (Q106) and she was taken to a hospital (Q129), where she  stayed  for
       10 days (Q130) and then she left Eritrea a day after  discharge  from
       hospital (Q133).  That  chronology  of  events  is  repeated  in  the
       appellant's witness statement at [11-13] and in her rebuttal  witness
       statement [4].  It  is  wholly  consistent  with  her  claim  in  the
       screening interview that she left Eritrea on 1 September.  The  Judge
       has not engaged with  or  addressed  this  evidence  and  has  merely
       accepted the (erroneous) contention in  the  refusal  letter  at  [h]
       without  taking  into  account  or  carefully  scrutinising  all  the
       evidence available.

   14. I accept that the First-tier  Tribunal  has  decided  to  reject  the
       appellant's account for a number of reasons, all of which I have  not
       addressed above.  However, I am not confident that the decision would
       have been the same on the basis of the other reasons.  The  errors  I
       have focussed upon are sufficiently wide-ranging and  fundamental  to
       lead me to the view that the conclusion on credibility is unsafe  and
       must be remade entirely.

Decision

   15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
       material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

   16. The appeal shall be remade by First-tier Tribunal de novo.

Directions

        1) The appeal shall be reheard de novo by the  First-tier  Tribunal
           sitting in Manchester (TE: 2.5hrs) on the first date  available.
           Tigrinya interpreter necessary.

        2) 14 days before the hearing date the  appellant  shall  file  and
           serve an indexed and paginated bundle (to replace  all  previous
           bundles)  containing  only  those  documents  relevant  to   the
           rehearing that are not contained in the SSHD's bundle, including
           a more detailed and  comprehensive  rebuttal  witness  statement
           cross-referencing to the background evidence  and  responses  at
           interview.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
17 September 2015
