
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10245/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26 June 2015                      |On 2 July 2015                       |
|Prepared on 26 June 2015             |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    V. T.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rasoul, Counsel instructed by Blavo & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  illegally  and  claimed
         asylum on 24 July 2014. That application was refused on 12 November
         2014, and in consequence a removal decision was made in relation to
         her.

      2. The Appellant appealed to the Tribunal against the removal decision
         and her appeal was heard  on  7  January  2015,  and  dismissed  by
         decision of Judge Trotter, promulgated on 2 March 2015. He was  not
         satisfied that she was an Eritrean citizen as she  had  claimed  to
         be, having found that her evidence had not been truthful.

      3.  The  Appellant's  application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal, as drafted, raised two complaints;  (i)  that
         the Judge had not given adequate reasons for his rejection  of  the
         report of Mr Price a Consultant Psychologist,  and  (ii)  that  the
         Judge had not given adequate reasons for his findings  in  relation
         to the Appellant's claim to be member of  the  Pentecostal  Church.
         That application was granted by Judge Chohan on 18 May 2015.

      4. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice of 5 June 2015 in  which  she
         asserted that the Judge had given adequate reasons for his  adverse
         credibility findings and that it was plain from a fair  reading  of
         the decision that the report of Mr Price had not been overlooked.

      5. Thus the matter comes before me.

    Error of Law?

      6. Ms Rasoul accepted that if the Appellant was an  Ethiopian  citizen
         as the Judge had found her to be, then she was not at risk of  harm
         if she  were  perceived  upon  return  to  that  country  to  be  a
         Pentecostal Christian. Thus the arguments advanced focused upon the
         rejection of the claim to be an Eritrean citizen.

      7. During the course of the hearing it emerged that the  word  "uncle"
         in line 9 of paragraph 21 must be a typographical error. Ms  Rasoul
         accepted that it was of no consequence,  and  that  this  paragraph
         should be read as if the word were struck through.

      8. Despite the terms in which she had drafted the grounds  of  appeal,
         Ms Rasoul accepted that the Judge had in fact made  no  finding  in
         the course of his decision which had rejected Mr Price's report out
         of hand. The premise upon which the first ground  was  drafted  was
         therefore flawed.

      9. Ms Rasoul also accepted that the Judge had  made  reference  to  Mr
         Price's report in both paragraph 8[1], paragraph 15,  paragraph  19
         and paragraph 20 of his decision. She accepted  that  she  did  not
         therefore seek to advance the proposition that either the existence
         or the content of that report had been overlooked.

     10. Ms Rasoul also accepted that in the course of his report  Mr  Price
         had not offered a formal diagnosis of any mental  health  condition
         suffered by the Appellant. The highest that his report went was  to
         offer the opinion that the flashbacks and nightmares that  she  had
         reported to him were recognised symptoms of PTSD. He did not  offer
         a diagnosis of PTSD, and the evidence  before  the  Judge  did  not
         suggest that any other expert qualified to do so had offered such a
         diagnosis. Thus, contrary  to  the  argument  that  Ms  Rasoul  had
         advanced when drafting the grounds, Mr Price had  not  offered  his
         expert opinion that a diagnosed condition of PTSD  was  responsible
         for the Appellant's inability to give details of her experiences in
         Eritrea.

     11. Instead Ms Rasoul argued before me that because Mr Price had  found
         the Appellant to be a consistent and credible  historian,  and  had
         concluded that she was telling him the truth  when  recounting  her
         experiences, the Judge was obliged to reach the same conclusion. It
         is clear from his report that Mr Price considered that his role was
         not limited to that of offering an expert opinion upon whether  the
         Appellant  was  suffering  from  any   recognised   mental   health
         condition, and that instead his  proper  role  was  to  advise  the
         Tribunal upon whether he believed the Appellant to be  telling  the
         truth in all aspects of her account. I have not seen any letter  of
         instruction, so I cannot say whether or not he was  led  into  this
         course by those who instructed him. It is however  perfectly  clear
         that he ventured far beyond his proper remit as an expert, and  not
         only strayed into the function  of  the  Tribunal,  but  sought  to
         discharge that function for himself, in seeking to offer an opinion
         on the issue of whether the Appellant was  a  truthful  witness  on
         issues that were not obviously within his sphere of expertise.

     12. When pressed on whether this argument was actually open to her,  it
         is fair to say that Ms Rasoul resiled from  it,  and  she  accepted
         instead that the weight to give to  any  item  of  evidence  was  a
         matter for the Judge, and that the Judge was not  bound  to  accept
         any of Mr Price's conclusions.

     13. In those circumstances I asked  Ms  Rasoul  to  summarise  how  she
         argued the Judge had erred. In  response  Ms  Rasoul  advanced  the
         complaint that in paragraph 21 of his decision the Judge had  given
         inadequate reasons for the conclusion that the  Appellant  was  not
         from Eritrea. In so doing it was clear  that  she  sought  to  take
         paragraph 21 of the decision in isolation from the remainder.  That
         is not a legitimate approach. The Judge is  entitled  to  have  his
         decision read as a whole.

     14. In this case, as the Judge recognised and recorded,  the  Appellant
         faced  serious  credibility  issues.  She  had   failed   to   make
         application for asylum in either Italy or France, and  had  claimed
         in explanation to have spent only one day in either  country  [14].
         She had not given a credible account of how her travel  to  the  UK
         had been financed, or who had done so. Indeed  Ms  Rasoul  accepted
         before me that upon the evidence before him the Judge was perfectly
         entitled to find that she had displayed a  "substantial  degree  of
         dishonesty" in her evidence about how she had travelled to the  UK,
         and how this had been financed [23]. That finding was plainly  made
         in the light of the submissions made by the presenting officer upon
         the Appellant's evidence that the Judge had recorded at some length
         [16].

     15. Moreover when she had first  been  interviewed  the  Appellant  had
         denied knowledge  of  any  language  other  than  Amharic,  despite
         claiming to have lived in Sudan for about 11 years,  and  in  Libya
         for a further 18 months (much of it in  detention).  Although  from
         birth to the age of 22  she  always  claimed  to  have  lived  with
         relatives who were Eritrean, and had also claimed to have lived  in
         Eritrea from the age of 9 to the age of 11, she had then denied the
         ability  to  speak  Tigrinyan.  The  Judge  noted  that   she   had
         inconsistently claimed  to  have  been  able  to  speak  both  some
         Tigrinyan and some Arabic under cross-examination. Her  explanation
         for not having previously claimed to be able to do  so  being  that
         she felt her communication level in both languages was low.

     16. In these circumstances the criticisms advanced of the decision  are
         in reality no more than a disagreement with the Judge's conclusions
         on whether the Appellant is genuinely a citizen of Eritrea  as  she
         had claimed to be.  Another  Judge  might  have  expressed  himself
         differently, or  rehearsed  the  evidence  before  him  in  greater
         detail, but the approach taken to the  evidence  in  this  decision
         does not disclose any error of law that requires the decision to be
         set aside and remade.

    Conclusions

     17. Not only is there nothing wrong with the Judge's reasoning  on  the
         issue of whether the Appellant had discharged the burden  of  proof
         that lay upon her to establish her claim that she is a  citizen  of
         Eritrea, but it is adequately set out in his decision; MK (Duty  to
         give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641.

DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 2
    March 2015 contains no error of law in  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to  be  set  aside  and
    remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.

Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 26 June 2015


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.

Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 26 June 2015
-----------------------
[1] The reference to "very understandable reasons" for her inability to
give a clear chronology of events.

