
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10449/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 24 March 2015                       |              On 14 April 2015       |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                             Syed Sultan HUSSAIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Syed Sultan Hussain, was born on 1 January 1985 and is a
    male citizen of Pakistan.  The appellant had claimed asylum on entry to
    the United Kingdom and had been detained  at  Harmondsworth  under  the
    "fast track" procedure.  It was at Harmondsworth  on  9  December  2014
    that the appellant's appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    Kanagaratnam).  The appeal was dismissed.  The  appellant  appealed  to
    the Upper  Tribunal.   At  that  stage,  he  was  not  represented  and
    permission was not granted.  He renewed his application for  permission
    to the Upper Tribunal, this time on different grounds drafted by  Legal
    Justice Solicitors.   The  grounds  solely  challenged  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision solely on the basis of the decision of the Court of
    Appeal in Detention Action [2014] EWCA Civ 1634.  The grounds  asserted
    that the "process in which the appeal was heard before IJ  Kanagaratnam
    was unfair and unlawful and the matter should be reheard".   The  Court
    of Appeal held that the  evidence  before  it  in  that  case  did  not
    "provide the sort of  substantial  fact-based  justification  that  the
    Supreme  Court  ...  indicated  would  be  necessary  to   justify   an
    interference with a fundamental right".

 2. Mr Diwnycz, for the Secretary of State, provided the Tribunal  and  the
    appellant with copies  of  reviews  of  the  appellant's  detention  in
    Harmondsworth which had been carried out  following  his  arrival  from
    Pakistan [16 November 2014] and his detention at Harmondsworth IRC  [12
    November 2014] throughout the period of the appeal process  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The reason for  the  initial  detention  and  the
    reason given for  continued  detention  of  the  appellant  by  way  of
    periodic review (generally every 7 days) remained the same, namely that
    the appellant is a single man with no known dependants or family living
    in the United Kingdom and he was considered by the Secretary  of  State
    throughout that period of being at risk of absconding.  The  factor  in
    the appellant's continued detention appears also to have been the  fact
    that he held a valid travel document and thereby rendering him suitable
    for being dealt with under the "fast track" because he would be able to
    be removed without delay on his own passport.

 3. The Court of Appeal in Detention Action at [63], held:

         Accordingly, despite the elusive way this emerges from the text  of
         the DFT Guidance, I have concluded that, until  a  person's  appeal
         rights are exhausted, if he or she continues to satisfy the  "quick
         processing criteria" the policy empowers the Secretary of State  to
         detain pursuant to those criteria rather than the general detention
         criteria. For these reasons, despite the force of  the  submissions
         on behalf of Detention Action, I  have  concluded  that  where  the
         "quick processing criteria" continue to be met,  post-decision  DFT
         detention pending appeal does not breach the Secretary  of  State's
         policy in the DFT Guidance.

 4. The appellant was eventually granted temporary admission and he was not
    detained when his appeal  was  considered  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  at
    Bradford on 24 March 2015.  I was careful to explain as  clearly  as  I
    could to the appellant the basis upon which his former  solicitors  had
    drafted the grounds of appeal.  We are, in this case, dealing with  the
    historic legality of the appellant's detention at  the  time  that  his
    appeal was considered by the First-tier Tribunal; if his detention  was
    not legal (in the light of Detention Action) then it would appear  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal cannot stand.   However,  I  am
    satisfied  that  in  the  period  following  the  appellant's   initial
    detention and up to and including the promulgation  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision the appellant's detention was not  arguably  illegal.
    The  fact  that  the  appellant  was  subsequently  granted   temporary
    admission and the fact that he has not absconded during the  period  of
    that temporary admission does not, in my opinion,  cast  doubt  on  the
    legality of the detention.  I find that the appellant's  detention  was
    lawful on the basis of the documentary evidence of the regular  reviews
    carried out by those officers of the Home Office  responsible  for  the
    appellant's detention.  I consider that it was open to the Secretary of
    State to continue to detain the appellant on the basis that he did  not
    have sufficient close ties with any individual in the United Kingdom to
    give rise to the substantial possibility that  he  would  not  abscond.
    The fact that the appellant had  a  valid  Pakistani  passport  is,  in
    itself, not a good reason for having detained him in the absence of any
    other factors; the fact that the  appellant  might  be  easily  removed
    because he had a  valid  passport  is  simply  a  matter  touching  the
    administrative convenience of those detaining the appellant and is  not
    justification for his detention.  However, the fact that the  appellant
    was alone in the United Kingdom without any family or personal ties  to
    anyone living here was at the outset of the detention and  subsequently
    a reasonable justification for the denial of his fundamental  right  to
    liberty.

 5. Having decided that the appellant's detention was lawful and  that  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal has not been set aside on  the
    basis of the grounds advanced by the appellant's former solicitors, the
    question remains whether the decision of Judge Kanagaratnam was  flawed
    by error of law.  As I have noted, the renewed  grounds  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal make no reference to the merits of the judge's decision whilst
    the appellant's own handwritten grounds seeking permission to the First-
    tier Tribunal were, in my opinion, correctly denied permission by Judge
    Bennett who found that they  were  no  more  than  "a  summary  of  the
    appellant's claim".  I gave the appellant every opportunity to tell  me
    why he believed the First-tier Tribunal's decision was  flawed  in  law
    but, once again, he did little more than to assert a  case  which  that
    Tribunal had validly rejected.  Accordingly, having read the First-tier
    Tribunal determination carefully, I can identify no error of law in it.
     Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 6 April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 6 April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

