
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10135/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Sent           |
|on 13 August 2013                             |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             LATIFULLAH ORIAKHEL
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:      Mr N Ruddy, Jain Neil & Ruddy Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) This determination refers to parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

2) The appellant identifies himself as a citizen of Afghanistan, born on  13
   August 1996.  The SSHD did not accept his age as claimed, and  attributed
   to him the date of birth of 1 January 1994.

3) The SSHD refused the appellant's asylum claim for reasons explained in  a
   letter dated 25 October 2012.

4) First-tier Tribunal Judge  Quigley  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  by
   determination dated 17 December 2012.

5) These are the SSHD's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal:

    Failing to give  reasons  or  any  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on
    material matters


   a) At paragraph 38 of the determination the Immigration Judge said:


    I witnessed the  appellant  give  evidence  before  me,  and,  although
    certainly not an expert on age assessment, I found his  appearance  and
    manner to be that of a young person under the age of 18 years.  For all
    these reasons, I accept the appellant's testimony that he is  16  years
    old as claimed.


    ... there is an absence of reasoning in this finding:  the  Immigration
    Judge does not say what it was about  the  appellant's  appearance  and
    manner which led [her] to conclude that the  appellant  was  under  18.
    Given [her] admission that she is  "certainly  not  an  expert  on  age
    assessment", it is submitted that at the very  least,  the  Immigration
    Judge should have explained what  in  [her]  view  made  the  appellant
    appear to be younger than 18, particularly  given  [her]  criticism  at
    paragraph 37 that "there is no evidence before me  as  to  how  the  UK
    Border Agency arrived at its conclusions on age assessments."


   b) ... that latter comment is also erroneous: it is incorrect to say,  as
      the Immigration Judge does, that there was no evidence before [her] as
      to how the UK Borders Agency arrived at its  conclusions  on  the  age
      assessment, when the thinking behind this conclusion  is  clearly  set
      out in the Reasons for Refusal Letter of 25 October 2012 at paragraphs
      13, 14 and 15 which read as follows:


       13. You claim to be 16 years old with a  birth  date  of  13  August
           1996.  When you were first  encountered,  Cambridgeshire  Social
           Services assessed you as being over the age of 18 years old.


       14. Since that time, the UK  Border  Agency  has  not  received  any
           additional information that would substantiate your age as being
           as you claim.  No notification has  been  received  to  indicate
           that you have  attempted  to  challenge  the  decision  made  by
           Cambridgeshire Social Services.

       15. The authority of local  authority  social  work  teams  to  make
           decisions on a person's age is established in a number of  court
           judgements, including R9B) v London  Borough  of  Merton  [2003]
           EWHC 1689 (Admin).  In light  of  there  being  no  evidence  to
           establish your age and no challenge to the local  authority  age
           assessment, weight  has  been  attached  to  the  Cambridgeshire
           Social Work  Services and it is not accepted that you are 16  as
           you claim.  Instead it is considered that you are over  the  age
           of 18 years old.

      Making a material misdirection in law

   c) At paragraph 14 of the determination the Immigration Judge states:


      I note from paragraph 14  of  the  Respondent's  Reasons  for  Refusal
      Letter that, in view of  the  Respondent,  no  notification  has  been
      received to indicate that the appellant has attempted to challenge the
      decision made by Cambridgeshire Social Services.   That  statement  is
      clearly not correct as the appellant has  been  consistent  throughout
      that his date of birth is 13 August 1996.  To that extent, it is clear
      that he does not agree with the decision made by Cambridgeshire Social
      Services.


      ...  this  statement  is  erroneous:  the  appellant  may  well   have
      consistently maintained that his date of birth is 13 August 1996,  but
      that by itself does  not  indicate  that  any  attempts  was  made  to
      challenge the finding of Cambridgeshire County  Council  that  he  was
      older than 18.


   d) At paragraph 47 the Immigration Judge states:


      It seems to me that the Respondent has accepted  the  core  aspect  of
      this appellant's claim.  That is that he  has  already  received  here
      threatening letters from the Taliban.  It is clear that the  appellant
      has not waited until he was physically harmed  or  killed  before  his
      father decided that he had to leave Afghanistan.   I  find  that  this
      appellant would be at threat from the Taliban if he were to return  to
      Afghanistan.


      ... far  from  accepting  the  core  of  the  appellant's  claim,  the
      Secretary of State did not accept it, and the Immigration Judge  erred
      in finding that she did.  See paragraph 33 of the Reasons for  Refusal
      Letter:


      As detailed in the objective evidence above, "night  letters"  have  a
      significance in Afghan culture and it is considered  likely  that  you
      would be aware of  the  use  of  such  letters,  whether  your  family
      received them or not and such information could be used  to  fabricate
      an asylum claim.  Taking into account the  inconsistent  evidence  you
      have given about these letters, as detailed above, it is not  accepted
      that your family received letters from the Taliban as you claim.

6) Mr  Mullen  submitted  that  the  judge  gave  too  much  weight  to  her
   impression of the appellant, rather than to the evidence,  and  that  the
   appellant had not challenged the assessment of his age in his grounds  of
   appeal to the First-tier Tribunal or at the hearing.

7) I pointed out that in the statement which he  provided  for  purposes  of
   that hearing, the appellant maintained  his  claim  about  his  age.   Mr
   Mullen said that it was not enough for the appellant simply to  say  that
   his age was 16, and it was  not  enough  for  the  judge  to  go  by  her
   impression.  The appellant had  the  opportunity  to  challenge  the  age
   assessment but did not do  so.   He  did  not  provide  evidence  of  his
   identity or his date of birth, such as an Afghan passport.  It  has  been
   possible to obtain such a document for a number of years.

8) I also observed  to  Mr  Mullen  that  the  SSHD's  bundle  of  documents
   provided  to   the   First-tier   Tribunal   included   "Age   Assessment
   Documentation", but this comprised only a record  of  the  conclusion  by
   Children's Services of the  local  authority  in  Peterborough  that  the
   appellant was "over 18".  The bundle contained a copy of only  the  front
   or cover page of the document, not the assessment itself.

9) Mr Mullen  accepted  that  the  grounds  going  to  age  assessment  were
   weakened by the facts  that  the  SSHD  had  not  provided  its  own  age
   assessment and had not  been  represented  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
   However, he referred to SH (Assessment of Age) Afghanistan  [2005]  UKIAT
   00156, headnoted:

    If the evidence does not establish the claimant's age, the  Adjudicator
    is entitled simply to say so.  If age is disputed, it is unlikely to be
    appropriate for an Adjudicator to assess  the  claimant's  age  on  the
    basis of his appearance in the court room.


10) Turning to paragraph (d) of the grounds, Mr Mullen  submitted  that  the
   judge misread the SSHD's position, which was that the appellant's  family
   had not received threatening "night letters" from the Taliban.

11) Mr Mullen said that even if the grounds relating to age assessment  were
   not made out, the error as to whether a concession had  been  made  about
   the threatening letters required a rehearing of the case.

12) I indicated to Mr Ruddy that I was not  satisfied  that  any  error  was
   made out in relation to the age assessment, but he would require to  deal
   with the point at paragraph (d) of the grounds.

13) Mr Ruddy submitted that if the determination was read as a whole it  was
   not based on a misunderstanding of the SSHD's position, but on  a  proper
   analysis of the  claim.   He  accepted  that  taking  only  the  first  2
   sentences of paragraph 47 of the determination  along  with  the  end  of
   paragraph 33 of the refusal  letter,  the  judge  appeared  to  have  got
   matters wrong.  However, the  refusal  letter  at  paragraphs  30-32  was
   rather to the effect that threatening letters might have  been  received,
   although not from the Taliban, and not  representing  a  serious  threat.
   The judge at paragraph 43 of her determination thought that the SSHD  was
   not disputing the fact that the Taliban sent 3 letters to the appellant's
   home, in spite of the general  denial  at  paragraph  33,  but  that  the
   respondent was  rather  disputing  the  potential  consequences  for  the
   appellant.  The judge went on at paragraphs 44  and  45  to  analyse  the
   SSHD's logic, which she thought  was  to  the  effect  that  because  the
   appellant had not yet been harmed there was  no  real  risk  of  harm  on
   return.  Mr Ruddy said that the judge correctly saw that as  flawed,  and
   at paragraph 47 found that the appellant and his father  had  not  waited
   for harm to ensue before reaching the decision that the appellant  should
   leave Afghanistan.  The judge returned to this  issue  at  paragraph  56,
   where she again said that the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
   subject to violence following upon the letters did not mean that  he  was
   not at real risk  at  some  future  date.   She  referred  to  background
   evidence that night letters are followed  up  with  real  violence,  even
   murder.  That clarified any error into which the judge might have  fallen
   at paragraph 47.  The  judge  reached  her  conclusion  not  based  on  a
   misunderstanding of the concession, but on a detailed  consideration  and
   analysis of the evidence.  Notably she had made  no  adverse  credibility
   findings against the appellant  in  the  determination,  and  the  SSHD's
   grounds alleged no error in that.

14) In reply, Mr Mullen sought to raise the point that the judge  failed  to
   deal with the question whether the appellant would be at risk  on  return
   even if his evidence was credible, pointing out that the  refusal  letter
   maintained that even if the  claim  were  "taken  at  highest"  he  could
   relocate.  I indicated that the attempt to raise that argument  came  too
   late.  There was no ground of appeal directed to the point.

15) On the age assessment issue, I consider that the judge was  entitled  to
   take some account of her own observation.  She reminded herself that  she
   is not an expert.  She was correct to  observe  that  the  appellant  had
   consistently maintained his age as originally stated.  The SSHD's grounds
   at paragraph (c) are unclearly stated, but perhaps the  underlying  point
   is that the appellant did not bring any expert or other evidence  of  his
   own.  He had that opportunity but he was not bound to do so.   There  was
   no  cross-examination,  because  the   respondent   did   not   field   a
   representative.  The judge had to make a decision on such evidence as she
   had.  I do not think that she erred.

16) The grounds identify an apparent error by contrasting  paragraph  47  of
   the determination with paragraph 33 of the refusal letter, but once  both
   the letter and the determination are read in full  I  prefer  Mr  Ruddy's
   submission that the judge did not decide the case by misapprehending  the
   SSHD's position but by considering the totality of the SSHD's reasons and
   the totality of the evidence before her.

17)  The  SSHD's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal   is   dismissed.     The
   determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  allowing  the  appellant's
   appeal, shall stand.

18) No anonymity order has been requested or made.





                               [pic]
                                14 August 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
