



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
AA/10411/2013

                                                   AA/10412/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th April 2014                               |On 25th April 2013         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Miss patricia nyamutamba - FIRST RESPONDENT
            MASTER KUPAKWASHE BRAYDEN MTENGWA - SECOND RESPONDENT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Appellant:     No representation

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents are citizens of Zimbabwe. The first Respondent  is  the
    mother of the second Respondent, a minor (date of birth 20th  September
    2010) and a dependant of the first Respondent.  The  Appellant  is  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department. For  ease  of  reference  I
    will refer to the Appellant as"the Respondent" as she  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to the first  Respondent  as  "the
    Appellant" and the second Respondent by his name, Brayden.

 2. On 7th November 2013 the Respondent made a  decision  refusing  to  the
    grant the Appellant asylum  and  on  27th  March  2013  made  a  second
    decision to remove the Appellant and Brayden from  the  UK  by  way  of
    directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 2009.

 3. The Appellant appealed  those  decisions  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Birkby)  which,  in  a  determination  dated  6th  January  2014
    dismissed the appeal on asylum and Humanitarian Protection grounds  but
    allowed the appeals of both the Appellant and Brayden on Article 8 ECHR
    grounds.

 4. The Secretary of  State  now  appeals  with  permission  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. The dismissal of the asylum/Humanitarian  Protection  appeals
    have not been challenged by the Appellants.

Background

 5. The following background is relevant.

      i) The Appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2000 in possession of a
         visit visa. She subsequently obtained leave to remain as a  student
         until 2003. When entering in 2000 she left her husband and their  9
         year old daughter Bevy Lyn, remaining in Zimbabwe.

     ii) In 2001 having obtained leave as a student  the  Appellant  brought
         Bevy Lyn over to the United Kingdom to join her. Her  husband  then
         entered the United Kingdom in 2002, but was removed in March  2002,
         returning again in September 2002. At this time  he  made  a  fresh
         claim to asylum. However the appellant and her husband subsequently
         separated. He formed a new relationship elsewhere and on the  basis
         of this new relationship was given a period of discretionary  leave
         to  remain  in  2012.  There  are  two  children   born   of   that
         relationship.

    iii) Despite the Appellant's husband forming  another  relationship  she
         gave birth to a second child by her husband. That child is  Brayden
         who was born on 20th September 2010. According  to  the  Appellant,
         she and her husband only separated in June 2012, although it is  of
         note that he had apparently formed the new  relationship  prior  to
         that date. It is recorded that the Appellant's husband has two sons
         from the new relationship, Malcolm born  on  26th  March  2007  and
         Ethan born on 13th December 2011.

     iv) The Appellant's daughter Bevy Lyn has also been granted  indefinite
         leave to remain. The Appellant therefore claims that to return  her
         to Zimbabwe would breach her Article  8  ECHR  family  and  private
         rights and those of Brayden. The basis of her claim is  her  family
         life with her daughter Bevy Lyn, family life between Bevy  Lyn  and
         Brayden and  Brayden's  relationship  with  his  father  and  half-
         siblings.




    The UT Hearing

 6. Mrs Pettersen appeared for the Respondent. The  Appellant  attended  in
    person. She informed me that she was no longer represented by Bake  and
    & Co Solicitors of Birmingham. This was confirmed by a  letter  on  the
    court record from that firm dated 4th April 2014. In  the  letter  they
    request that I take into account a skeleton  argument  which  they  had
    prepared on behalf of the Appellant. I confirm that I did so.   I  also
    ensured that the Appellant  understood the proceedings and informed her
    that she  would have the opportunity to address me fully.

 7. Mrs Pettersen essentially relied on the grounds seeking permission  and
    submitted that the Judge had erred in his approach  to  the  Article  8
    assessment.  None  of  the  facts  found  by  the  Judge  amounted   to
    exceptional circumstances in the sense that  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules not having  been met, refusal to vary leave would  result  in  an
    unjustifiably harsh outcome. This is particularly so in  the  light  of
    paragraph 48 of the Judge's determination  which  stands  unchallenged.
    She asked that I find an error of  law;  set  the  decision  aside  and
    remake it dismissing the Appellant's appeal.

 8. Miss Nyamutamba told me that she did not want  to  return  to  Zimbabwe
    with  Brayden.  She  said  that  she  has  medical  problems  including
    schizophrenia which is controlled  by  medication.  She  accepted  that
    medication is available in Zimbabwe, but said that she  would  have  to
    pay for it, whereas it is free here. In addition,  people  in  Zimbabwe
    look down on those with her condition. Her parents remain  in  Zimbabwe
    and live in a house, but they are old people who are now  retired.  She
    said she would not get employment and that any qualifications which she
    had gained in the UK (remaining on a student visa) would not  be  taken
    seriously there. Finally she  said  she  did  not  want  to  leave  her
    daughter and she wanted her son to grow up knowing his sister  and  his
    father and his half-siblings.

Has the Judge Erred?

 9. At paragraph 40 of his determination Judge Birkby wrote:

         "I do not believe that the Appellant left Zimbabwe fearing any kind
         of persecution or ill treatment. I believe that she has  fabricated
         her assertions with regard to fears in Zimbabwe in order to sustain
         a claim for asylum. I am not satisfied that on return  to  Zimbabwe
         now either she or her son, Brayden, would  face  any  form  of  ill
         treatment".

    He then wrote at paragraph 42 and 44:


         "The Appellant claimed at the hearing that her husband had regular
        contact  with  Brayden,  visiting  the  Appellant  and  Brayden  in
        Rotherham on average around every fortnight.  When Ms Mtengwa (Bevy
        Lyn) gave oral evidence, she stated that she  herself  had  regular
        contact with her father, but also that she visited her  mother  and
        Brayden in Rotherham on a regular basis.  Ms Mtengwa now  lives  in
        the Midlands.  There was an inconsistency when the Appellant stated
        that her husband and Ms Mtengwa would meet at times at their  house
        in Rotherham when the  husband  came  to  visit,  but  Ms  Mtengwa,
        although she stated that her father  did  visit  Rotherham,  stated
        that she never saw him there.


         Much of the evidence about family life  and  private  life  in  the
        United Kingdom has  indeed  been  consistent.   I  accept  that  Ms
        Mtengwa has been  educated  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  she  has
        recently completed her BTEC National Diploma in Sport Science.   At
        one time she wished to study Physiotherapy at  University  in  2014
        but she told me in oral evidence she now wishes to go into nursing.
         I accept that that is the case.  I also  accept  that  Ms  Mtengwa
        lived with the Appellant and her brother,  Brayden,  prior  to  the
        Appellant's application for asylum in 2013.  I  accept  that  since
        then the family have been separated since the Appellant  has  taken
        NAS accommodation in Rotherham.  Nevertheless, I believe  that  the
        relationship between Ms Mtengwa and the Appellant and Brayden is  a
        particularly close one.  I also accept that the  Appellant  herself
        has had medical problems.  There was no full  medical  report,  but
        there was a full medical history of the Appellant provided  to  the
        Tribunal.   The  Appellant   claimed   that   she   suffered   from
        schizophrenia although that was not clear from  the  documentation.
        What was clear from the documentation is  that  the  Appellant  has
        consistency  suffered  from  depression  and  indeed  a   form   of
        psychosis. It is clear to me that the Appellant  and  her  daughter
        have had a close relationship over  the  thirteen  years  that  the
        daughter has been in the United Kingdom.  Although Ms  Mtengwa  has
        not been promised indefinite leave, it may be that she  is  granted
        indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom in due course.   I
        accept that she and her mother have lived in  a  close  and  loving
        relationship during the time that they  have  been  in  the  United
        Kingdom.  I accept that that relationship is  just  as  close  with
        Brayden.  I also accept that both Ms Mtengwa and  Brayden  do  have
        contact with their natural father, although I do not  believe  that
        such contact is a regular as described.  I have taken careful  note
        of the corroborative documentation  submitted  in  support  of  the
        Appellant from her church and also from individuals.  One  of  such
        letters confirms that the Appellant has been involved  in  visiting
        people who have been the subject  of  violence  and  mental  health
        problems".

    The  Judge  then  concluded  at  paragraph  49  that  the  Respondent's
    decisions are not proportionate.

10. I consider that paragraphs 42, 44 and 49 reveal some difficulty in  the
    Judge's approach to the facts of this appeal. The  Judge  factors  into
    the proportionality assessment the following findings in paragraph 49,

         "I am also satisfied that her family life and that  of  the  second
         Appellant, her son, extends to family life with  Ms  Bevy  Mtengwa,
         who has lived for most of her life with the Appellant and for  most
         of Brayden's life with Brayden.   I believe  that  they  will  have
         endured a particularly close attachment bearing in mind the illegal
         nature of their being so long together in the United Kingdom. There
         is a strong emotional dependency as regards each to the  others  in
         my judgement....

         I also believe that it would be in  his  (Brayden)  best  interests
         that contact between Bevy Mtengwa and her father is maintained...

         I therefore conclude that the decision of the Respondent interferes
         with the rights to a private and family life of both Appellants  in
         this appeal...

         I have also concluded  that  the  Respondent's  decisions  are  not
         proportionate in all the circumstances.   Those  circumstances  are
         exceptional and unusual...

         If the Appellants were to have to return to Zimbabwe I believe that
         the contact between  Bevy  Mtengwa  and  the  Appellants  would  be
         severely restricted or indeed largely severed.  That would  not  be
         in the interests of anyone, including  in  the  best  interests  of
         Brayden.  Furthermore, Brayden's father has discretionary leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom as does his current  partner  and  his
         current partner's two children.  It is not clear whether they  will
         be granted further leave, but that remains a  serious  possibility.
         In those circumstances if Brayden and the Appellant were to  return
         to Zimbabwe their contact with  Brayden's  father  would  again  be
         severely restricted or it  would  cease.   That  would  not  in  my
         judgement be in Brayden's best interests".

11. I find no evidence to support such findings.  Further,  I  would  agree
    with the Respondent those findings sit ill with the Judge's finding  at
    paragraph 43 where he says as follows:

         "As a consequence I found that the Appellant's evidence with regard
         to the visits by  Brayden's  father  was  exaggerated,  but  I  was
         impressed by the evidence of  Ms  Mtengwa  who  I  found  to  be  a
         credible witness  with  regard  to  the  situation  in  the  United
         Kingdom".

    There also appears to be  an  inconsistency  with  the  conclusions  in
    paragraph 48 where he says as follows:

         "I have considered the assertions of the Respondent with regard  to
         Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant  has  been  in
         the United Kingdom for less than twenty years, as has her son.  She
         is separated from her husband. He is a failed  asylum  seeker  with
         limited leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   There  are  no
         insurmountable obstacles preventing the Appellant, her son and  her
         ex husband however and indeed the ex husbands children, who are all
         citizens of Zimbabwe and failed asylum seekers  from  returning  to
         Zimbabwe.  There is nothing to prevent  the  Appellant's  daughter,
         Bevy, from returning also. The Appellant's case under  Appendix  FM
         cannot be sustained".

12.  I find for the foregoing reasons  the  Judge  has  adopted  the  wrong
    approach when assessing  proportionality  and  that  his  reasoning  is
    flawed to the extent that the determination should be set aside and the
    decision remade.

Remaking the Decision

13. I did not find it necessary to receive further  evidence  in  order  to
    remake the decision. The facts are not challenged by the Respondent.  I
    find that the family life of the Appellant and Brayden will not  suffer
    because they would be removed  together  to  Zimbabwe.  Brayden's  best
    interests are served by being with his mother.

14. So far as his relationship with his sister Bevy Lyn is concerned, Judge
    Birkby found that she now lives in the Midlands and is hoping to  train
    as a nurse. To all intents she is living an independent life. She is 22
    years of age and although the Appellant hopes that she and Brayden will
    live with Bevy Lyn in the future, that  remains  an  aspiration  rather
    than a reality. In any event, Bevy Lyn  at  present  is  a  citizen  of
    Zimbabwe, as Judge Birkby found. There is nothing put  forward  in  the
    evidence adduced to show that she would be prevented   from  travelling
     to Zimbabwe and seeing her brother and mother there.

15. The relationship  between  Brayden  and  his  father  is  doubtless  an
    important one but equally, there is nothing in  the  evidence  to  show
    that contact would be severely restricted or cease  altogether  between
    them. Brayden's father is also a citizen of Zimbabwe and nothing in the
    evidence  shows  that  he  would  have  any  problem  returning  to  or
    travelling there.

16. The Appellant when she appeared before me  made  much  of  her  medical
    condition but I keep in mind that Judge Birkby found that  he  accepted
    that the Appellant suffers from depression and is subject to  psychotic
    episodes and is on medication. Nevertheless he was not  satisfied  that
    the Appellant would not have access to medication in Zimbabwe. He  also
    found that pursuant to the case of N, the Appellant did not qualify  to
    remain in the United Kingdom under Article 3 or Article 8 ECHR  because
    of her medical condition. Those findings remains unchallenged.

17. Therefore for the foregoing reasons I am satisfied  that  Judge  Birkby
    erred in law.

DECISION

18. Judge Birkby's determination is set aside because of an error of law. I
    remake the decision. These appeals are dismissed under Article 8  ECHR.
    Appeals dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made



Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signature                                             Dated

