
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10186/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 1st April 2016                             |On 4th May 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                     E B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms T Tabber (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Iqbal, promulgated on 20th January 2016, following a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 9th November 2015.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant under the Refugee Convention  and
    under Article 8 of the ECHR, but allowed it under paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules, whereupon the  Appellant  appealed  the  refusal
    decisions, and the matter has now come before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born on [ ]  1998.   He  appealed
    against the decision of the Respondent dated 19th June 2015.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that his father physically beat him,  as  well
    as treated him like a slave, and that there is no protection in Albania
    from the  police  Authorities  with  respect  to  what  happens  within
    families, such that he  was  unable  to  avail  himself  of  any  state
    protection.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed that the refusal letter accepted that the  Appellant
    provided sufficient information about his nationality and identity, but
    it was not accepted that his father used to beat him or use  him  as  a
    slave.  There were also inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence and
    much of it was vague on a variety of different issues.  The  background
    information was demonstrative of the fact that there  was  an  internal
    security forces present in Albania although they  were  susceptible  to
    corruption and there was inefficiency and incompetence on the  part  of
    individual members of the  police.   However,  the  Appellant  had  not
    sought protection from the police,  there  was  support  available  for
    victims of domestic violence in Albania and a system of willingness  to
    operate it (see paragraph 27).

 5. The judge found the Appellant to be  credible  and  consistent  to  the
    lower standard of proof (paragraph 31) and the judge  went  on  to  say
    that the Appellant's subjective account had been  corroborated  by  the
    best interest consideration report dated 8th December 2014 by  Frankie
    West of the Royal Borough of Kensington and London  Barnet  and  London
    Borough of Richmond (paragraph 32).  The judge went on to consider  the
    Appellant's reasons for not approaching the police  Authorities,  these
    being that his father was a previous army officer who had contacts with
    local police officers, but the judge went on to say  that,  "there  was
    nothing to stop the Appellant from approaching  outside  of  his  local
    area any Authorities in order  to  gain  protection  from  his  father"
    (paragraph 37).

 6. The judge then went on to consider the  expert  report  of  Dr  Antonia
    Young, dated 1st October 2015, where she stated that,

         "If credible on the basis of his past experiences,  I  consider  he
         would face a real risk of serious harm in  his  home  area  ...  it
         would  be  practically  impossible  for  him  to  obtain  effective
         protection for himself.  Realistically, police protection would  be
         virtually  impossible  to  access  due  to  both  extensive  police
         corruption and a lack of involvement with family matters.   Clearly
         they have been unable to effectively protect him thus far ..." (see
         paragraph 39 of the determination).

 7. The judge went on to hold that this could not be correct  quite  simply
    because the Appellant, by his own admission,  had  not  approached  the
    police Authorities, and so it could not be said that the failure of the
    police hitherto to provide him with protection was indicative of  their
    unwillingness or inability to do so (see paragraph 40).

 8. The judge also went on to refer to the case of MF [2014] EWCA  Civ  902
    where the court had held that on that occasion Dr Young's evidence  was
    "unjustifiably subjectively biased in favour  of  the  Appellant"  (see
    paragraph 41 of the determination).  I have to  say  straightaway  that
    this  is  an  unnecessary  and,  in  the   circumstances,   prejudicial
    observation, because the fact  that  Dr  Young's  report  had  on  that
    occasion been found to be unduly favourable to the Appellant, does  not
    mean that Dr Young's evidence cannot be relied  upon  in  other  cases.
    This does not follow at all.  Indeed, the case of SI (expert evidence -
    Kurd) Iraq CG [2008] UKAIT 00094 makes it clear that, "in  general  the
    Tribunal take the view that a country expert's opinion is to  be  given
    significant weight and if the Tribunal decides to come to  a  different
    view from an expert on key matters, proper reasons must be given.

 9. The judge then went on to  say  that  the  fact  that  there  would  be
    insufficient protection in northern Albania on account of  blood  feuds
    because of the prominence of "Kanun", it did not follow that  the  same
    would apply to cases of domestic  violence  (see  paragraph  42).   The
    judge went on to say that in this case the Appellant should  have  been
    in a position to "have some form of protection  outside  of  the  local
    police force" and that, "it is on this  basis  that  I  find  that  the
    Appellant does  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  ..."
    (paragraph 43).

10. The judge went on to allow the appeal under  paragraph  276ADE  because
    the Appellant was "still a child who would not have the support of  his
    immediate family on return to  Albania"  and  as  such  would  find  it
    difficult to integrate back into Albanian society as  an  unaccompanied
    minor (see paragraphs 45 to 46).

Grounds of Application

11. In the grounds of application  the  Appellant  states  that  the  judge
    failed to consider whether the option of internal relocation  was  ever
    reasonably open  to  the  Appellant,  in  circumstances  where  he  had
    concluded  that  the  Appellant  could  find  protection  elsewhere  in
    Albania.  It was also arguable that the judge erred by failing to  give
    adequate reasons for rejecting the expert evidence of Dr Young that the
    Albanian state did not provide a sufficiency of protection in cases  of
    domestic violence just as it failed to do so where there  was  a  blood
    feud.

12. On 12th February 2016, permission to appeal was granted.

13. On 1st March 2016, a Rule 24 response was  entered  by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State to the effect that the judge at paragraphs 36 to  37
    found that the Appellant did not approach the police in the local  area
    and that, this was not the same as saying that there was no  protection
    available in the local area.  The judge considered that it was possible
    for the Appellant to approach the Authorities outside  the  local  area
    which he had not done.  The reasons given by the judge at paragraph  38
    where he was referring to the refusal  letter  showed  that  there  was
    protection  available  for  victims  of  violence  and   the   Albanian
    Authorities were willing to operate the protection system.

Submissions

14. At the hearing before me on 1st April 2016,  Ms  Tabber,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant as Counsel, made the following two submissions.
     First, that the  Appellant's  case  was  that  he  feared  persecutory
    mistreatment or serious harm from his father  on  return  to  his  home
    area.  His case was that he did not believe that the local police would
    offer him sufficiency of protection.   This  is  because  it  would  be
    considered an internal family matter but also because his father was  a
    former soldier and many of  his  former  comrades  have  become  police
    officers in the area.  The judge found the Appellant to be  a  credible
    witness and this  finding  included  the  Appellant's  reason  for  not
    seeking protection of the Authorities (see paragraph 7).  However,  the
    judge then went on to hold (see paragraph 37) that the Appellant  could
    have  approached  the  Authorities  outside  his  local  area  to  gain
    protection from his father.  However, this implicitly  recognised  that
    the Appellant had no sufficiency of protection in his own  local  area.
    If the judge had found this to be the fact then, in  assessing  whether
    the Appellant could live elsewhere safely in Albania, it was  incumbent
    upon the judge to consider both whether relocation would be  safe,  and
    also whether relocation would be reasonable.  The judge considered  the
    question of safety outside the Appellant's local area, but the decision
    of the judge was silent as to whether it would be reasonable to  expect
    the  Appellant  to  internally  relocate  to  avail  himself  of   such
    protection.

15. Second, the judge found that sufficiency of protection exists  for  the
    Appellant on the basis of evidence cited in  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter (which included reports from the Refugee Board of Canada and the
    US State Department) but the evidence relied upon is not particularised
    in any way (see paragraph 38).  This was a serious failing  given  that
    the  Appellant  had  submitted  a  substantial  quantity  of  objective
    evidence to support his  appeal  on  the  question  of  sufficiency  of
    protection.  In this regard the judge also  gave  insufficient  reasons
    for rejecting the evidence of the country expert, Dr Antonia Young.  It
    was wrong for the judge to criticise the country expert on the  grounds
    that the country expert had expressed an opinion as to risk based on  a
    particular factual situation.

16. Dr Young had expressed an opinion based on the Appellant's account, and
    she had said that if the Appellant was found to be  credible  he  would
    face a serious risk in his local area, and it was entirely  permissible
    for the expert to offer this kind of an opinion.  Yet the expert  could
    not be  criticised  for  so  doing.   Moreover,  the  judge  could  not
    reasonably have levied criticism against Dr Young on the basis of  what
    was said about this expert in the case of MF (Albania) [2014] EWCA Civ.
     In that case, the Court of  Appeal  considered  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    criticism of Dr Young to have been "couched in rather harsh terms"  (at
    paragraph 18) and the Court of Appeal proceeded to give its own opinion
    of Dr Young, observing that, "she is indeed a person with  considerable
    experience of Albania and the incidents of blood feuds in that country.



17. Her evidence therefore deserved to be given considerable weight insofar
    as it was based on her experience" but the expert had on this  occasion
    allowed herself to be drawn into expressing views on  the  very  issues
    which the Tribunal had itself to determine.  Ms Tabber  submitted  that
    this is a far cry from saying that the  expert  is  discredited  as  an
    expert.  She is not.  The only reason her  report  was  found  to  lack
    objectivity in MF (Albania) was because she had expressed her own views
    on the Appellant's case, and that is not an error that is  not  unusual
    to find where experts are knowledgeable on the issues before them.

18. Finally, Ms Tabber  submitted  that  it  was  clear  from  the  country
    guidance case of EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012} UKUT 00348 that the
    Albanian state does not provide a  sufficiency  of  protection  against
    acts of serious harm perpetrated by non-state actors in all cases.

19. For his part, Mr Walker referred to the Rule 24 response in  this  case
    and emphasised that the judge had (at paragraphs 36 to 37)  found  that
    the Appellant had not approached the police in the local area and  this
    meant that it could not be shown that there was no protection available
    in the local area.  It was also possible  for  the  Appellant  to  seek
    protection in other areas.  Moreover  victims  of  violence  could  get
    protection.  With respect to the expert herself the judge  was  correct
    to say that she had engaged in speculation.

20. In reply, Ms Tabber submitted that the  basic  problem  here  was  that
    there was  a  complete  failure  to  consider  the  essential  relevant
    consideration, namely, as to whether  there  was  the  availability  of
    internal relocation to the Appellant.  It could not be said that it was
    safe and reasonable for him to find internal relocation elsewhere.  The
    judge had simply not considered the issue of reasonability.  The  judge
    had said that it would not be possible for the  Appellant  to  approach
    anyone in his own area of locality, so if he was to consider whether he
    could approach somebody else in another area, it was incumbent upon him
    to find whether this was reasonable for him to do.

Error of Law

21. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

22. First, this is a case where the judge has failed  to  consider  whether
    internal relocation is reasonably  available  to  the  Appellant.   The
    judge has accepted that the Appellant did not seek  protection  in  his
    own local area.  He has then gone on to say, on at least two occasions,
    that this did not prevent him from seeking  relocation  elsewhere.   If
    that was the case, then it was incumbent upon him to consider whether a
    safe place existed internally elsewhere, and whether it was  reasonable
    for him to seek out that safe place.  Whereas the judge  addressed  the
    former he did not address the latter.  Yet, evidence exists within  the
    determination that the latter may not have been  possible  because  the
    judge observed that, "the Appellant is still a child who would not have
    the support of his immediate family  on  return  to  Albania,  given  I
    accept that he has been a victim of domestic violence and has fled  the
    family home" (paragraph  45).   The  judge  also  observed  that,  "the
    Appellant has been granted leave as an unaccompanied minor, and this is
    on the basis that there are no  adequate  reception  facilities  for  a
    return of a minor" (paragraph 46).  Yet, despite these findings in  the
    context of paragraph 276ADE, there is no analysis of the  reasonability
    of internal relocation being sought.

23. Second, as far as criticism of Dr Antonia Young is concerned I can  say
    straightaway that no such criticism could have been  justified  on  the
    basis of a reference to MF [2014] EWCA Civ 902 for two reasons.  First,
    that was a different case, which was not the  same  case  as  the  case
    before the judge on the instant occasion.  Second, even in  that  case,
    the Court of Appeal had plainly recognised that Dr Young was "indeed  a
    person with considerable experience of Albania  and  the  incidents  of
    blood feuds in that country" and that the  criticism  of  the  Tribunal
    below of her had been "in rather harsh terms".

24. Third, however, insofar as  the  instant  case  itself  was  concerned,
    whereas it is true that the  expert  in  this  case  had  stated  that,
    "clearly they had been unable to  effectively  protect  him  [i.e.  the
    Appellant] thus far", thereby implying that he had  sought  protection,
    whereas he had not, this cannot be said to be the essence of Dr Young's
    report.  Quite apart from this, Dr Young had concluded in the  body  of
    her report in a manner that required specific attention by the Tribunal
    below.  The conclusions in the report have  nothing  to  do  whatsoever
    with whether the Appellant sought protection at all.  Paragraphs 31  to
    33 there required consideration.

25. Fourth, there was evidence before the  Tribunal,  independently  of  Dr
    Young's report (appearing at Annex A of the bundle before this Tribunal
    (which appears at page 12 of 22) referring to the USSD Report 2010 that
    included the observation that, "the Government did  not  fund  specific
    programmes to combat domestic violence or assist victims, although non-
    profit organisations provided assistance ...").  This had to be read in
    the context of the earlier observation (which appears at page 10 of 22)
    from the United States  State  Department's  Human  Rights  Report  for
    Albania (2010) which stated that,

         "Despite improvements in law enforcement training  and  management,
         the police  did  not  consistently  respect  the  human  rights  of
         citizens during the performance of their duty and  were  not  fully
         accountable to the rule of law.  In some instances, police impunity
         was a problem.  Police officers did not enforce the law equally  an
         individual's political or  criminal  connections  often  influenced
         enforcement of laws".

    These conclusions are not necessarily at variance with Dr  Young's  own
    report.  But in any event, they required consideration by the Tribunal.



Remaking the Decision

26. I have remade the  decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    Immigration Judge and the evidence before her and the submissions  that
    I have  heard  today.   I  am  remitting  this  matter  under  practice
    statement 7.2 back to the First-tier Tribunal on  the  basis  that  the
    nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding  which  is  necessary  in
    order for the decision in the appeal to be remade is such that,  having
    regard to the overriding objecting in Rule  2,  it  is  appropriate  to
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  All findings  that  are  in
    favour of the Appellant  will  stand.   The  Appellant  is  to  furnish
    updated objective evidence and the matter of internal relocation is  to
    be determined appropriately.

Notice of Decision

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original Tribunal.  I remake the decision as follows.  This  appeal
    is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  under  practice  statement
    7.2(b) to be heard at the  first  available  opportunity  with  updated
    objective evidence and, to be heard by a judge other than Judge  Iqbal.



28. An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th April 2016


