
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10078/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On  2 February 2016                  |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     BN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O James instructed by Asylum Justice


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Brien)  which  dismissed  BN's  appeal  on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds but allowed the appeal under
    Article 8.

 3. For convenience, I will refer  to  the  respondent  as  "the  claimant"
    throughout this determination.

Background

 4. The claimant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was  born  in  1997.   His
    precise age is a matter of dispute.

 5. The claimant arrived in the UK in July 2008 and he  was  arrested.   He
    claimed asylum on the basis that his father was an Army  Commander  who
    had been killed by the Taliban  and  that  he  was  at  risk  of  being
    kidnapped or forcibly recruited by the  Taliban  in  Afghanistan.   The
    Secretary of State refused the claimant's application for asylum  on  5
    October 2010 but granted him discretionary  leave  until  22  September
    2013 on the basis that he was an  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  minor.
    On 2 September 2013, the claimant applied for further  leave  but  that
    application was refused by the Secretary of State on  5  November  2014
    and a decision was made to remove him to Afghanistan under s.47 of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

The Appeal

 6. The claimant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  O'Brien
    rejected the appellant's account as "inconsistent  and  incredible"  in
    relation to his claim to be at risk in Afghanistan.

 7. Nevertheless, Judge O'Brien went on to consider the claimant's claim to
    remain in the UK under Article 8.  He  concluded  that  the  claimant's
    removal would breach Article 8.

 8. The Secretary of State appealed against  Judge  O'Brien's  decision  to
    allow the claimant's appeal under Article 8.

 9. On 13 October 2015, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Reid)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal  on  all  grounds.   Thus,  the
    appeal came before me.

10. The claimant did not appeal against Judge O'Brien's decision to dismiss
    the appeal on asylum and humanitarian  protection  grounds  and,  as  a
    consequence, the Judge's decision in respect of those matters stands.

The Submissions

11. Mr Richards, who represented the Secretary of State,  relied  upon  the
    grounds of appeal.

12. First, he submitted that the Judge had erred in law by failing to  make
    any finding in respect of the claimant's age.   The  claimant  accepted
    that he was born in 1997 and had been allocated a date of  birth  of  1
    January 1997.  Mr Richards submitted that the claimant was,  therefore,
    either 17 or 18 years of age at the date of the hearing on 3  September
    2015.  Mr Richards submitted that the Judge's failure to make a finding
    in respect of the  claimant's  age  vitiated  his  application  of  the
    Article 8 rules, namely para 276ADE of the Immigration Rules (HC395  as
    amended) and also his decision that a breach  of  Article  8  had  been
    established.

13. Secondly, Mr Richards submitted  that  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant would return to Afghanistan without any family to support him
    had failed to take into account the adverse credibility  finding  which
    the Judge had made in respect of the claimant's asylum and humanitarian
    protection claims.

14. Thirdly, Mr Richards submitted that in applying para 276ADE  the  Judge
    had been  wrong  to  find  that  the  claimant  met  the  "suitability"
    requirements in Appendix FM, in particular S-LTR.2.2  as  the  claimant
    had provided false information or made false representations by  giving
    a false account, rejected by the Judge, in making his asylum claim.

15. Finally, Mr Richards submitted that the Judge had  failed  properly  to
    apply s.117B in  carrying  out  the  balancing  exercise  required  for
    proportionality, in particular by stating that "less weight" should  be
    given to the requirement of maintaining effective immigration control.

16. Mr James, who  represented  the  claimant,  first  submitted  that  the
    "suitability" point did not arise.  He submitted that the claimant  had
    not made an  "application"  to  which  para  276ADE(1)(i)  applied  the
    suitability requirement in S-LTR.2.2 of Appendix FM.  Further,  in  any
    event, he submitted that there was a distinction between a case where a
    Judge found that a claimant had lied or not told  the  truth  and  this
    case where the Judge had simply not been persuaded  that  the  claimant
    had established his claim.

17. Secondly, Mr James submitted that the Judge had not materially erred by
    failing to make  a  finding  as  to  the  appellant's  age  as  he  had
    approached paragraph 276ADE on the alternate bases that  the  appellant
    was 17 or 18.  He submitted that the Judge was entitled to  find  under
    para 276ADE(1)(iv), if the claimant was 17, that  it  was  unreasonable
    for him to return to Afghanistan.  Likewise, the Judge  had  considered
    the application of para 276ADE(1)(vi) on the basis  that  the  claimant
    was 18.  Although the Judge had applied a "significant  obstacle"  test
    to the  claimant's  integration  in  Afghanistan  rather  than  as  was
    required a "very significant obstacle" test  to  his  integration,  the
    Judge's finding was sufficient to meet that requirement.

18. Thirdly, Mr James submitted that the Judge had properly found that  the
    appellant would have no family on returning to Afghanistan.  There  was
    reliable evidence that the Red Cross were unable to locate  his  family
    and, therefore, even though the claimant had not been believed  in  his
    asylum  claim  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  consider  the  claimant's
    circumstances on return on the basis that  he  would  not  be  able  to
    locate his family.

19. Finally, Mr  James  submitted  that  although  the  Judge  had  perhaps
    "clumsily" worded  his  application  of  s.117B  in  carrying  out  the
    balancing exercise in para 50 of his determination, he was entitled  to
    conclude that "less weight" should  be  given  to  the  requirement  of
    maintaining an effective immigration control because the  claimant  met
    the requirement of the Rules.

Discussion

20. In my judgement, there are a number  of  difficulties  in  the  Judge's
    determination in allowing the appeal under Article  8  which  make  his
    positive finding unsustainable.

21. First, in applying  para  276ADE  the  Judge  needed  to  consider  the
    application of that rule in discreet ways depending  upon  whether  the
    claimant was 17 or 18.  That is because para 276ADE(1)(iv) applies to a
    claimant who is under the age of 18 and who had lived  continuously  in
    the UK for at least 7 years discounting  any  period  of  imprisonment.
    Such a claimant will satisfy the requirement in para  276ADE(1)(iv)  if
    it "would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK".

22. By contrast, if the individual is aged 18 or above and  has  not  lived
    continuously  in  the  UK  for  20  years,  the  requirement  in   para
    276ADE(1)(vi) is that:

         "... there would be very significant obstacles to  the  applicant's
         integration into the country to  which  he  would  have  to  go  if
         required to leave the UK."

23. Without making a finding in respect of the claimant's  age,  the  Judge
    sought to apply both para 276ADE(1)(iv) and (vi)  separately.   If  the
    claimant met both requirements it could be argued that any  failure  by
    the Judge to make a  factual  finding  on  what  is  clearly  a  highly
    relevant matter (the claimant's age) would be immaterial.  The claimant
    would succeed  under  para  276ADE  whether  he  was  17  or  18.   The
    difficulty is that the Judge did not properly apply para  276ADE(1)(vi)
    to the claimant.

24. In paragraph 29 of his  determination,  when  setting  out  by  way  of
    summary, the relevant private life provisions in  para  276ADE  in  the
    case of an 18 year old he stated that the claimant must establish  that
    there would  be  "significant  obstacles  to  [his]  integration"  into
    Afghanistan. Likewise, in paragraph 48 he found that  there  "would  be
    significant obstacles to his integration into Afghanistan".

25.  Both  of  those  statements  misstated   the   requirement   in   para
    276ADE(1)(vi)  that  there  must  be  established   "very   significant
    obstacles".  The addition of the word "very" to the phrase in the Rules
    heightens the level of obstacles that must be established in order  for
    an individual to succeed.  That misdirection is an  error.   I  am  not
    satisfied that the Judge  would  necessarily  have  come  to  the  same
    conclusion if he had correctly directed himself that the claimant  must
    establish  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  his   integration   into
    Afghanistan.  The Judge's reasoning, which is  linked  to  his  finding
    that it would be unreasonable for the purposes of  para  276ADE(1)(iv),
    is found at paras 43-48 of his determination as follows:

         "43.     The Appellant does not know exactly when he was born,  but
             accepts it was some time in 1997.  He has been  allocated  the
             birthdate of 1 January 1997, and is deemed to be 18, but could
             quite easily be 17.

         44. The Appellant tells me, and I accept,  that  he  still  speaks
             some Dari but is now far from fluent.  He has now  spent  just
             over 7 years in the country, including  the  entirety  of  his
             time in education, and it is unsurprising that English is  his
             dominant language.  For the same reason,  I  accept  that  the
             Appellant cannot speak, read or write Pashto, and that he  has
             lost a great deal of his cultural ties with Afghanistan.

         45. Instead, he has  developed  very  close  ties  in  the  United
             Kingdom, including a sincere relationship with a girl he hopes
             to become engaged to and eventually marry, and a  loving  bond
             with his adoptive family.

         46. These are  matters  which,  in  my  judgment,  would  make  it
             unreasonable for the Appellant to be returned to Afghanistan.

         47. The Appellant's former foster mother was told  by  his  former
             solicitors that efforts had been made  by  the  Red  Cross  to
             locate the Appellant's family but had been unsuccessful.   The
             Respondent has also been  unable  to  locate  his  family.   I
             accept on the balance  of  probabilities  that  the  Appellant
             would return without any means of finding  or  contacting  his
             family.

         48. In the circumstances, even if the Appellant  was  aged  18,  I
             find  that  there  would  be  significant  obstacles  to   his
             integration into Afghanistan."

26. I have considerable difficulty in concluding that  those  circumstances
    necessarily amount to "very significant obstacles".  I do not say  that
    they could not amount to such obstacles but they cannot necessarily  do
    so.  Consequently, the Judge's misdirection results in his  finding  in
    respect of para 276ADE(vi) being unsustainable.  The Judge's finding in
    respect of para 276ADE(1)(iv) is only determinative if the claimant  is
    not 18 years of age.

27. As a consequence, this was not a case where the Judge  correctly  found
    that the claimant met the requirements of  para  276ADE  regardless  of
    whether the claimant was 17 or 18 years  old  and,  as  a  result,  his
    finding briefly reasoned in paras 50  and  51  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision was disproportionate is also flawed.  It  is  premised
    upon the claimant succeeding under para 276ADE whether he is 17 or  18.



28. Paragraphs 50-51 are as follows:

         "50.     Therefore, whether the  Appellant  is  17  or  18,  in  my
             judgment he satisfies  today  the  requirements  of  paragraph
             276ADE, notwithstanding that he might not have done so at  the
             date of the  decisions  under  challenge.   It  follows  that,
             although I give little weight to the Appellant's  family  life
             (as required under s117B(5) of the 2002 Act), I am entitled to
             give even  less  weight  to  the  requirement  of  maintaining
             effective immigration controls.

         51.      In the circumstances, I  conclude  that  the  Respondent's
             decisions  are  a  disproportionate  interference   with   the
             Appellant's Article 8 rights and permit  the  appeal  on  that
             basis."

29. As the wording of para 50 clearly demonstrates, in any event, the Judge
    also  misdirected  himself  as  to  the  effect  of  s.117B(5)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

30. As is  well  known  s.117B  sets  out  a  number  of  "public  interest
    considerations" which  must  be  considered  in  all  cases  where  the
    Tribunal is determining the "public interest  question"  under  Article
    8.2 in deciding whether a decision  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    breached Article 8 of the ECHR.  It states as follows:

         "... little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at the  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious."

31. There is no doubt that the claimant's immigration status  was,  indeed,
    "precarious".  At no time has he had anything better than limited leave
    to  remain  in  the  UK.   However,  s.117B(5)  only  applies   to   an
    individual's "private life" and not, as the Judge states in para 50, to
    the claimant's "family life".  The only relevant aspect of s.117B  that
    applied to an individual's "family life" is in s.117B(4)  which  states
    that:

         "Little weight should be given to -

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is within
         the United Kingdom unlawfully."

32. That provision, of course, had no application to the claimant.   He  is
    not in the UK "unlawfully".   To  the  extent  that  the  claimant  was
    relying upon "family life" with his girlfriend whom, the evidence  was,
    they wished to marry, the Judge made no finding as to  whether  or  not
    she was "a qualifying partner" but, in any event,  as  I  have  already
    pointed out s.117B(4) would not  apply  given  that  the  claimant  had
    limited leave to remain in the UK and so was not here "unlawfully".

33. It follows that the Judge also misdirected himself in carrying out  the
    balancing exercise in para 50 of his determination  applying  s.117B(5)
    which was simply inapplicable.  Whilst that was an error potentially in
    the claimant's favour, it  remains  part  of  a  brief  and  less  than
    adequately reasoned passage leading to the appeal being  allowed  under
    Art 8.

34. It may well be that the Judge was entitled to conclude, if the claimant
    did in fact meet the requirements of para 276ADE, that the  requirement
    of "maintaining effective immigration control" which is stated to be in
    the public interest by s.117B(1) of the 2002 Act  was  potentially,  at
    least, less weighty.  However, as I have already pointed out, that  was
    not a sustainable finding by the Judge.

35. Finally, the finding in paras 47-48 cannot  stand  including  that  the
    applicant would have no family in  Afghanistan.   Mr  James'  submitted
    that the Judge's finding in para 47 that the claimant had no family  on
    return is not flawed, I do not agree.  That latter finding is flawed by
    the Judge's failure  to  take  into  account  his  adverse  credibility
    finding in respect of the appellant's account.  Whilst  the  Judge  was
    entitled to take into account the efforts made  by  the  Red  Cross  to
    locate the claimant's family unsuccessfully, in reaching any finding as
    to whether the claimant has any family in Afghanistan he  was  required
    to take into account his adverse credibility and his rejection  of  the
    claimants account including what he said had happened to his father  in
    Afghanistan.  Consequently, I am satisfied that the Judge's finding  in
    para 47 is flawed and cannot stand.

36. Although the Secretary of State had not directly challenged the Judge's
    finding in para 46 that it would be unreasonable, assuming the claimant
    to be under 18, for him to  return  to  Afghanistan,  that  finding  is
    tainted by the Judge's view (wrongly arrived at) that the claimant  has
    established he has family in Afghanistan. It falls for  the  reasons  I
    gave in para 35 above.

37. For these reasons, the Judge's findings in respect of para  276ADE  and
    Article 8 as a whole are flawed and cannot stand.

38. Finally, there is the issue of  the  "suitability"  requirement  in  S-
    LTR.2.2 which is  relevant  to  a  consideration  of  paragraph  276ADE
    because of para 276ADE(1)(i) which is in the following terms:

         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on
         the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the  date  of
         application, the applicant:

             (i) does not fall for refusal under any  other  ground  in  S-
                  LTR.1.2 to S-LTR.2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; ..."

39. S-LTR.2.2. of Appendix FM provides as follows:

         "Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -

               a) false information, representations or documents have  been
                  submitted in relation to the application (including  false
                  information submitted to any person to obtain  a  document
                  used in support of the application); or

               b) there has been a failure to  disclose  material  facts  in
                  relation to the application."

40. If that provision  is  satisfied  then  by  virtue  of  S-LTR.2.1.  the
    applicant will "normally be refused on grounds of suitability".  It  is
    self-evidently a discretionary matter.

41. Mr James first submitted that the provision did not apply  because  the
    claimant had not made an application for leave  to  remain  under  para
    276ADE(1).  I do not accept that submission. It  is  clear  that  on  2
    September 2013 the claimant did make an application for  further  leave
    to remain  in  the  UK.   That  application  was  for  refugee  status.
    Paragraph 326B of the Rules in "Part 11" dealing with  "Asylum"  states
    that:

         "Where the Secretary of State is considering a claim for asylum  or
         humanitarian protection under this  Part,  she  will  consider  any
         Article 8 elements of that claim in line  with  the  provisions  of
         Appendix FM (Family Life) which are relevant to those elements  and
         in line with paragraphs 276ADE-276DH (Private Life) of these  Rules
         unless the person is  someone  to  whom  Part  13  of  these  Rules
         applies. "

42. Part 13 is concerned with individuals subject to deportation and has no
    application to this claimant.

43. Therefore, the claimant's application for asylum was, in effect, also a
    claim to remain under Article 8 including  consideration  of  paragraph
    276ADE.

44. Secondly, Mr James submitted that the  suitability  requirement  in  S-
    LTR2.2 did not apply on its own terms because this was not a case where
    the claimant could be said to have provided false  information  etc  as
    required by that provision.  This, Mr James  submitted,  was  simply  a
    case where a Judge had not been persuaded of the claimant's case rather
    than making a positive finding that it was untrue.

45. I accept that a Judge could reject an individual's asylum claim without
    making any finding that the individual had provided  false  information
    etc as part of  that  claim  and  application  under  Article  8.   For
    example, an individual's subjective fear on return  could  be  entirely
    genuine but objectively any risk could be found not to be well-founded.
     However, a finding that an individual's account is  "inconsistent  and
    incredible" is a finding that it is not true.  It is a finding that the
    claim  is  false.   It  is  not  necessary  for  the  Judge  to   state
    specifically that the claim is a "fabrication" if that is the substance
    of what he or she decides.

46. In this case, it is clear that the  Judge  found  that  the  claimant's
    account was not true because it was "inconsistent and incredible".  The
    claimant had, therefore,  provided  false  information.   It  must,  of
    course, be established that he (or another) acted dishonestly (see,  AA
    v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773). In his very brief conclusion in  para  49,
    the Judge did not address this issue.   The  Judge  was  wrong,  in  my
    judgement, to conclude in para 49 that the claimant's case did not fail
    of the suitability requirements incorporated in para 276ADE(1)(i).  The
    claimant fell, potentially, within the terms of  S-LTR.2.2  subject  to
    proof of dishonesty.  The only issue was, thereafter, whether  applying
    S-LTR.2.1. this was a case where "normally" the suitability requirement
    should be applied against the claimant.  Of  course,  the  Judge  never
    considered the exercise  of  that  discretion  and  that  is  a  matter
    (together  with  the  issue  of  dishonesty)  which  will  fall  to  be
    considered when the decision in respect of Article 8 is remade  if  the
    Secretary of State continues to rely on the  'suitability'  requirement
    in S-LTR.2.2.



Decision and Disposal

47. For these reasons, the Judge's  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 (including 276ADE) involved the making of an  error  of  law.
    That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

48. The Judge's findings are flawed in a number of  respects.   Bearing  in
    mind the nature and extent of fact finding  required  in  remaking  the
    decision in respect of Art 8, and having regard  to  para  7.2  of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement, this is an appropriate  case  to
    remit for a re-hearing in the First-tier Tribunal restricted to Art  8.
    His decision in respect of the claimant's asylum appeal and under Art 2
    and 3 of the ECHR shall stand.  Whilst his primary findings in paras 44-
    45 can stand, the remainder of his findings in respect of  para  276ADE
    and Art 8 are not preserved.




                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:


