
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10840/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th June 2016 & 5th December 2016         |On 5th January 2017           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    D s a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, HOPO (Hearing on 29th June
2016)
     Mr M Diwnycz, HOPO (Hearing on 5th December 2016)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Hussain of Legal Justice Solicitors (on both
dates)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Caswell made following a hearing at Bradford on 4th April 2016.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of  Iraq  born  on  12th  October  1981.   He
    arrived in the UK on 30th March 2015, illegally, and claimed asylum and
    humanitarian protection.  He was refused on 23rd July 2015.

 3. The facts in this case are not in dispute.  DSA lived in Fatuma Village
    near Makhmur in Iraq and is an ethnic Kurd and a Sunni Muslim.  On  7th
    August 2014 his village was shelled by ISIS.  He  managed  to  flee  to
    Erbil in Iraqi Kurdistan.

 4. It is the Secretary of State's case that the  claimant  can  safely  be
    returned to Erbil.

The Judge's Determination

 5. The judge accepted that the situation in Iraq had  changed  since  June
    2015, the date of the refusal letter, which argued that Erbil  was  not
    currently at risk from ISIS and was  accepting  Kurdish  refugees,  and
    recorded the submissions made on the claimant's behalf that the IKR was
    no longer violence free and safe.

 6. She considered the country guidance case of  AA  (Article  15C)  [2015]
    UKUT 544 which concluded that a Kurd who did not originate from the IKR
    could obtain entry for ten days as a visitor and then renew  the  entry
    permission for a further ten days.  If he  found  employment  he  could
    remain  for  longer  although  he  would  need  to  register  with  the
    authorities and  provide  details  of  that  employer.   There  was  no
    evidence that the IKR authorities proactively remove Kurds from the IKR
    whose permits have come to an end.

 7. She accepted the submission that he would not be able to stay in  Erbil
    or indeed gain entry  there  because  the  Rules  for  sponsorship  had
    changed.  The claimant said that the Rules now state that  the  sponsor
    must be a government employee or similar and have a monthly  income  of
    1.5 to 2 million rials.  Moreover, persons from his area were  regarded
    with suspicion as suspected ISIS fighters or  activists  and  Kurdistan
    was concerned with the threat from ISIS with the Kurdish region.

 8. She concluded as follows:

         "It follows that I find the appellant would face  a  real  risk  of
         persecution on the grounds of imputed political opinion if returned
         to his country and is entitled to be recognised as  a  refugee.   I
         also find that he faces a real  risk  of  treatment  breaching  his
         Article 2 and 3 rights if removed to Iraq.  In view of  my  finding
         that he is a refugee, the question of humanitarian protection under
         the Directive does not arise.  However, I should say, for the  sake
         of clarity that, if I had not found the appellant to be a refugee I
         would have allowed the appeal under the  Directive,  on  the  basis
         that the appellant faces a real risk of serious harm if returned to
         Iraq in the current conditions."

 9. The judge then said in her decision that she dismisses  the  appeal  on
    all grounds.




The Grounds of Application

10. The Secretary of State makes no reference in the grounds  to  the  fact
    that the judge has in fact dismissed the appeal, but  argued  that  she
    was not entitled to depart from the recent  country  guidance  decision
    and had failed to have regard  to  the  very  high  threshold  required
    outlined in SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940  which  sets  out  the
    test which  might  be  appropriate  to  depart  from  existing  country
    guidance.  Furthermore she had failed to give adequate reasons why  the
    claimant  succeeds  on  asylum  grounds  since  a  fear  of   ISIS   in
    insufficient to found a claim for asylum.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Page on 19th May 2016 for the
    reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

12. Mrs Pettersen relied on her grounds and Ms Hussain submitted  that  the
    judge was entitled to reach the conclusions which she did.

Consideration of whether the Judge erred in law

13. I am satisfied that this decision has to be set aside.

14. First, the test set out in SG is not met.

15. At [47] the Upper Tribunal said:

         "It is for these reasons as well as the desirability of consistency
         that decision makers and  Tribunal  judges  are  required  to  take
         country guidance determinations into account  and  to  follow  them
         unless very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence are adduced
         justifying their not doing so."

16. The oral  evidence  of  the  claimant,  unsupported  it  seems  by  any
    documentary evidence referred to  in  this  determination,  was  not  a
    proper basis upon which to conclude that the claimant would not be able
    to obtain sponsorship to enter the IKR.

17. Second, the conclusion that the claimant is entitled to refugee  status
    solely on the ground that his home area has been bombed by ISIS is  not
    a sufficient basis to conclude that the claimant would be at real  risk
    of persecution on the grounds of imputed political opinion.

18. Third, although not argued in the grounds, the judge clearly  erred  in
    stating that she dismissed the appeal on all grounds when it  is  quite
    apparent from the determination that she intended to allow it on asylum
    grounds.

19. It was not possible to re-make the decision  without  further  evidence
    and accordingly the appeal is adjourned for a further hearing with  the
    following directions:

           a) All the findings of fact made by the judge in relation to the
              claimant's personal circumstances are to stand.

           b) Both the Secretary of State and the claimant are  to  provide
              evidence at the next hearing in relation to  the  sponsorship
              of Kurds not originating from the IKR.

           c) Any expert report or written response  by  the  Secretary  of
              State to be filed with the Tribunal and the  other  party  21
              days before the hearing.  Such  reports/submissions  to  deal
              specifically with the issue of sponsorship and on travel from
              Baghdad to Erbil.

Resumed Hearing

20. Before the hearing Legal Justice Solicitors provided a report  from  Dr
    Rebwar Fatah addressing the viability of the claimant's return  to  the
    KRG.

Submissions

21. Mr Diwnycz relied on Dr Fatah's report which stated that Mr  Ali  would
    not need a sponsor to relocate to the IKR.  He is from Fatum Village in
    Makhmur, which, since 1991 has been part of the Erbil  governorate  and
    under the jurisdiction of the KRG.  He should not encounter significant
    difficulties entering into the region and, once there, he would  be  at
    much lower risk of violence as militia/insurgent groups do not  operate
    there.

22. Ms Hussain relied upon the caveat in Dr Fatah's report, that, in  order
    to move freely within the IKR he would need his CSID and if  he  wished
    to relocate there he  would  need  to  provide  details  to  the  local
    security.

23. He would be removed to Baghdad, and would have difficulty obtaining the
    documentation necessary to  relocate  to  the  IKR  since  it  was  not
    disputed that his village had been raised to the ground and he  had  no
    contact with his family.  It would be unreasonable  to  expect  him  to
    relocate to Baghdad, for the reasons set out in AA. He would be  unable
    to reach the IKR without travelling through contested areas.

Findings and Conclusions

24. Mr Ali is not a former resident of the Iraqi/Kurdish region.  According
    to the First-tier Judge's determination the village was in  a  disputed
    area between Baghdad and Kurdish Iraq.  His  village  was  within  Iraq
    itself, albeit that it is controlled by the Erbil governorate.

25. According to head note (5) of AA "Return of  former  residents  of  the
    Iraqi/Kurdish region will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will be to
    Baghdad".As he is not a former resident of the IKR he will be  returned
    to Baghdad.

26. Mr Ali has been considered as wholly credible both by the Secretary  of
    State and by the First-tier Judge.

27. AA considers the viability of internal relocation to  Baghdad  and,  at
    paragraph 15 considers that the following  factors  are  likely  to  be
    relevant in considering whether it  would  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
    harsh to do so:

         "(a) whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain one;

         (b)  whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are  less  likely
             to find employment);

         (c)  whether P has family members or friends  in  Baghdad  able  to
             accommodate him;

         (d)  whether P is a lone female (women  face  greater  difficulties
             than men in finding employment);

         (e)  whether P can find a sponsor to access a hotel  room  or  rent
             accommodation;

         (f)  whether P is from a minority community;

         (g)  whether there is support available for P bearing in mind there
             is some evidence  that  returned  failed  asylum  seekers  are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs."

28. The claimant does not  have  a  CSID.   He  cannot  speak  Arabic,  but
    Kurdish, and has no family  members  of  friends  in  Baghdad  able  to
    accommodate him.  He is from a minority community with no known support
    available to him.

29. I conclude, bearing in  mind  those  factors,  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect him to relocate to Baghdad.  He would  undoubtedly
    have to remain there for a certain period of time  whilst  he  obtained
    the relevant documentation.  In order to obtain a CSID he would have to
    either go to his home area or for someone to go there  on  his  behalf.
    There is no dispute that his village has been destroyed and it is in  a
    contested area.  It would plainly not be possible for him to  obtain  a
    CSID from there.

30. Having obtained one, he would  then  have  to  make  the  journey  from
    Baghdad to Erbil.

31. According to Dr Fatah's report, at paragraphs 182 and 183:

         "However, driven by events, there has also been increasing  tension
         between Shias and  Kurds.   While  GOI  forces  are  made  of  Shia
         militias there is also the risk that Kurds travelling from  Baghdad
         to the IKR will  also  be  at  risk  of  discrimination,  arbitrary
         procedures or even the threat of violence.  This is an  issue  that
         is unreported in  local  media,  although  it  is  well-known  that
         travelling through checkpoints can present a risk to civilians.

         In addition to the danger from checkpoints,  road  travel  in  Iraq
         from Baghdad to the IKR region can be significantly  dangerous  due
         to the security situation.  Travelling from Baghdad to the  IKR  by
         road requires taking one of three  routes,  Salahudeen,  Kirkuk  or
         Diyala.  Kirkuk remains  a  contested  area  while  Salahudeen  and
         Diyala are key centres of violence  and  remain  very  unstable  in
         Iraq, registering large civilian casualties.  It is plausible  that
         Mr Ali may be at risk from the violence in contested areas were  he
         to travel from Baghdad to the IKR."

32. There  is  the  alternative  of  air  travel,  but  that  requires  the
    possession of official documents.

33. Ms Hussain submitted that the claimant's appeal should  be  allowed  on
    the basis that, if the claimant were able to gain entry  to  Erbil,  it
    would not be reasonable to expect him to remain  there.   She  provided
    little  support  for  this  submission,  which  is  contrary   to   the
    conclusions set out in AA and, more importantly, contrary to the report
    from her own expert which concludes that Mr Ali would be  safe  in  the
    IKR.  Ms Hussain referred to the risk of destitution for him there, and
    to the information in the original bundle relating to  Syrian  refugees
    returned to Syria from Kurdistan.  That in itself is not sufficient  to
    outweigh the conclusions in AA.  The claimant is a  healthy  young  man
    with no significant health problems who was working in a  factory  when
    the bombing started and  therefore  has  some  skills  which  could  be
    utilised  upon  his  return,  including  the  ability  to  gain  lawful
    employment.  Moreover he will have gained experience and skills through
    his time in the UK and have the benefit of support  given  to  returned
    failed asylum seekers.

34. Whilst it is clear that if the claimant were to be able to  obtain  the
    relevant documentation, and if he were able to present himself  to  the
    IKR authorities, he would be able to reasonably  relocate  there  since
    the region is safe and the claimant, like the population, is an  ethnic
    Kurd, with  no  known  vulnerabilities,  and  he  could  reasonably  be
    expected to make his life there.

35. However, that is not his situation.  He would not be returned  directly
    to the IKR but to Baghdad.  It would not be reasonable to expect him to
    remain in Baghdad for the reasons set out in AA.  It is likely that  he
    would have to be there for a  significant  period  of  time  whilst  he
    organises his documentation, even if that were possible.  I  accept  Ms
    Hussain's submission that travel between Baghdad and the  IKR  at  then
    present time, given that the claimant  would  have  to  travel  through
    contested areas, is not safe.

36. In the grounds of application the Secretary of State argued that it was
    not open to the judge to decide  that  the  claimant  was  entitled  to
    refugee status on the basis of a fear of ISIS.  This was not  a  matter
    addressed in the reasons for refusal letter or  by  Mr  Diwnycz  today.
    The hearing focused simply on the viability of return to the IKR.

37. At his interview the claimant said that he feared being killed by  ISIS
    because Daesh killed everyone and did not discriminate.   They  shelled
    his village and destroyed it.

38. However the Kurds are a prominent  part  of  the  coalition  of  forces
    currently fighting IS in Mosul.  The Secretary of State does not appear
    to dispute that they are in charge of the claimant's home area.  If  he
    were to return there he would be at risk from them because he is a Kurd
    and that is sufficient to enable a grant of refugee status.

Notice of Decision

39. The original judge erred in law and her decision is set aside.   It  is
    re-made as follows.  The claimant's appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed[pic]                             Date 5 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

