
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/10351/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester IAC               |          Decision & Reasons       |
|                                      |Promulgated                        |
|On 8 March 2018                       |          On 9 May 2018            |
|                                            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                                     AMI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes, counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson
Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


         DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW AND DIRECTIONS FOR RESUMED HEARING

      1. I make an anonymity direction as the appeal concerns  a  protection
         claim.


   2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Alis promulgated on 29th June 2017.


   3. The factual matrix to this appeal is somewhat  complex.  The  relevant
      matters being that the Appellant is a citizen of Iraq. He had  entered
      the  United  Kingdom  lawfully  as  the  dependant   of   his   wife's
      application.  She was granted  entry  clearance  as  a  student.  Upon
      entering the United Kingdom  in  March  2013,  the  Appellant  claimed
      asylum.  The asylum and human rights claims were considered by a First-
      tier Tribunal Judge.  Ultimately,  the  whole  of  that  decision  was
      overturned on both aspects by the Upper Tribunal. The matter was  then
      remitted for hearing afresh before the First-tier Tribunal.


   4. That re-hearing took place before First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis.  The
      Appellant had relied on grounds relating to his protection claim,  the
      qualification directive and human rights, including  Article  8  ECHR.
      There was oral and written evidence from the Appellant and from  other
      witnesses.


   5. The Appellant's claim in outline was that he was born in and had lived
      in Baghdad. He is of Kurdish ethnicity. He is a Sunni Muslim.  He  had
      been a Deputy Officer in the Presidential Special Guard. He had joined
      the Air Defence Force for the Ba'ath Party under the regime of  Saddam
      Hussein.


   6. The Appellant and his wife married in 1999. They have had a child born
      to them in 2009. That child is here in the United Kingdom.


   7. In 2012 the Appellant's wife  had  received  a  scholarship  from  the
      Government of Iraq to come to study towards a PhD here in  the  UK  at
      Plymouth University. She had been sponsored  by  her  government.  The
      family arrived in the United Kingdom with valid  visas  and  they  had
      flown as a family from the main airport in Baghdad.


   8. The relationship between the Appellant and his wife  deteriorated  and
      in 2014 there was an incident when  there  was  violence  between  the
      couple.  The  police  were  called.  Following   the   incident,   the
      Appellant's wife had telephoned the police. She had also contacted the
      Iraqi consulate and had informed them that the couple were  separating
      and that the Appellant had claimed asylum; albeit he had not  done  so
      at that stage. The consulate had telephoned the Appellant's  wife  and
      had asked her questions too.


   9. The Appellant's wife and  son  now  live  in  Edinburgh.  The  contact
      arrangements (Children Act matters) are limited with  the  Appellant's
      son. Partly because of NASS requirements and partly because of  travel
      cost issues.


  10. The couple's divorce was finalised in May 2017. The Appellant's wife's
      and son's leave was due to expire in January 2018. Mr Holmes  told  me
      today that it has now been extended further until August 2018.


  11. The Appellant's counsel had submitted that the Appellant was  at  risk
      on return because he was a Sunni Muslim and a Kurd who had  previously
      worked for the Republican Special Guard. There was evidence  that  the
      Iraqi authorities in the United Kingdom knew that  the  Appellant  had
      applied for asylum.


  12. The Judge's findings noted, amongst other things, the following:


          1) The Appellant came to this country with his wife and  son  and
             their trip was not only authorised by the  Iraqi  authorities,
             but they also sponsored the appellant's wife and the whole for
             family for  the  trip.  They  had  left  Iraq  through  normal
             channels via Baghdad airport. This, as will be seen below,  is
             a  very  important  feature  of  this   case   which   differs
             significantly from the issues in the case  law,  including  in
             the Country Guidance. I cannot  ignore  this  feature  of  the
             case;
          2) The Appellant's employment in Iraq was not challenged  by  the
             Respondent. The Judge concluded that the Appellant was  a  low
             profile employee of the Republican Guard;
          3) Considering the enumerated and identified  inconsistencies  in
             the evidence, the Judge concluded that the Appellant's account
             of events in Iraq lacked credibility and his claim that he was
             at risk of persecution in Iraq though  those  aspects  of  the
             claim was rejected;
          4) There was no risk on Refugee Convention Grounds;
          5)  When  considering  issues  relating  to   the   Qualification
             Directive and the Country Guidance case of AA (Iraq)  (Article
             15 c) [2015] UKUT 544 and BA (Returns to  Baghdad)  CG  [2017]
             UKUT 18 the Judge specifically noted that:
               i) The Appellant was a Sunni Muslim of Kurdish ethnicity;
              ii) He held a low profile position in the Republic Guard;
             iii) He claimed asylum in the UK; and
              iv) He had siblings still living in the Baghdad area.
          6) The Judge referred to detailed parts of the case  law  in  his
             decision;
          7) The Appellant's evidence was that his brothers and sisters had
             not experienced any problems in  Baghdad  and  they  too  were
             Sunnis and Kurds.


  13. Importantly, the Judge summarised the issue at paragraph  71  when  he
      said,

             "The issue I have had to consider is whether this appellant as
             a Sunni would be at risk and whilst I rejected his claim about
             the  perceived  risk  from  his  former  employment   I   have
             nevertheless considered the additional factor  that  he  is  a
             Sunni returning from the West having failed  with  his  asylum
             claim,"


  14. The Judge referred to the case law further, including at paragraph  72
      of his decision when he said that the Upper Tribunal made it clear  in
      the  decision  of  BA  that  the  risk  on  return  depends   on   the
      circumstances of each case. He also noted  the  increasing  levels  of
      sectarian violence, but that  "something"  more  would  be  needed  to
      engage Article 15(c). The Judge also  noted  that  the  decision  made
      clear that the plight of Sunni Muslims in Baghdad was  not  good,  but
      that that alone was not sufficient to give rise  to  a  real  risk  of
      serious harm.

  15. In respect of Article 8 noted that the Appellant's ex-wife and  (then)
      7 year old son was in the UK and had been in the UK for 4  years.  The
      Judge considered various aspects, including that the Appellant's  wife
      was in the UK on a "limited" visa.

  16. Mr Holmes had referred to the grounds of appeal and had amplified them
      to say that there were three matters:

          1) The Judge had failed  to  consider  the  issue  of  the  Iraqi
             authorities. There had been third party enquiries;
          2) The Appellant's Sunni background; and
          3) There was no proper best interests assessment  in  respect  of
             the child.


  17. Mr McVeety said the Appellant's wife was in  the  UK  on  a  temporary
      visa. The burden was on the Appellant to deal with this. There was  no
      breach of section 55 Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. It
      was a very weak Article 8 ECHR argument. It was difficult to  see  how
      it could succeed. The issue in respect of the Appellant being a  Sunni
      Muslim was dealt with by the Judge at paragraph 70. The Appellant  was
      not at risk when he left Iraq legally 4 years ago. He  said  the  CSID
      issue was not  relevant.  The  Appellant  would  not  be  going  to  a
      contested area.

  18. Mr Holmes in reply said that the best interests was a relevant  factor
      for the purposes of Article 8. In what  circumstances  was  the  child
      being returned. Was it in the child's best interests to  be  returned?
      What about the separation from the  father?  The  Sunni  identity  was
      dealt with an odd place. The Judge  had  compartmentalised  it.  There
      were additional  matters.  There  was  a  difference  between  someone
      involved in the  present  regime  coupled  with  an  interest  in  the
      Appellant whilst he has been in the UK. The judge rejecting the  claim
      can only relate to matters which took place in Iraq itself.  The  fact
      that the Appellant's family  is  not  settled  in  the  UK  is  of  no
      significance. The risk was not only from  the  authorities,  but  also
      from the militia.


  19. Having reflected on matters and having considered the case law  of  AA
      (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
      944 and the Upper Tribunal's decision in BA (Returns  to  Baghdad)  CG
      [2017] UKUT 17, I conclude that there is no material error of  law  in
      the Judge's decision. I have also considered the Article 8 family  and
      private life issues with  the  section  55  Borders,  Citizenship  and
      Immigration Act 2009 duties at the forefront.


  20. Dealing first with the  protection  claim,  including  of  course  the
      asylum, humanitarian protection and Article  3  aspect  claim  to  the
      appropriate standard of proof, it is quite clear to me that this  case
      is very different to the types of cases ordinarily before the Tribunal
      and indeed very different from the case law of the Court of Appeal and
      the Upper Tribunal.


  21. It has to be borne in mind that  the  Judge  fully  had  in  mind  the
      background to the Appellant being here in the UK and how  he  came  to
      leave (not flee) Iraq. I entirely agree with Mr McVeety that the  fact
      that enquiries were made by the Iraqi authorities here in the UK about
      the sponsorship it had paid for the Appellant's wife studies in the UK
      has nothing to do with a risk on return, persecution, vengeance or the
      like. The telephone call had nothing to do with him being  sought  for
      such purposes. The submissions and grounds seek to side-step the clear
      findings made by the Judge.


  22. Those findings are numerous and include the following:


          1)  Inconsistencies  and  clear  reasons  for  rejection  of  the
             Appellant's credibility by the Appellant's own  evidence.  For
             example, at paragraphs 56 and 57 of the Judge's  decision  the
             events the Appellant claimed as having occurred in  Iraq  were
             roundly rejected;
          2) The Appellant had left Iraq on his own passport and  those  of
             his wife and son. Not only was  the  trip  authorised  by  the
             Iraqi authorities, it was the same regime  who  had  sponsored
             them to come to the UK (paragraph 50);
          3) Following the fall of Saddam Hussein, the  Appellant  did  not
             face any immediate problems due to his former employment as  a
             low profile employee of the Republican Guard. It was  in  2006
             that the Appellant decided to move some 5 kilometres  away  to
             his aunt's house;
          4) There was a big inconsistency in the evidence  as  to  whether
             the house was searched between 2006 and  2013.  The  Appellant
             said it was not, but his wife said it was;
          5) Applying the case law of AA and BA the  Judge  considered  the
             four aspects of the risk on return at paragraph 61. The  Judge
             considered other case  law  in  some  detail.  He  applied  it
             correctly.  The  Judge  specifically  considered  whether  the
             Appellant would be at risk on return to Baghdad  as  a  failed
             asylum seeker  from  the  UK  at  paragraph  71  onwards.  His
             reasoning was sufficient. To interfere with the decision would
             be no more than mere disagreement. The grounds ask me to  look
             at things differently but do not identify a material error  of
             law;
          6) In so far as Article 8 ECHR is concerned, the Judge dealt with
             this at some length. In the end though the facts of  the  case
             revealed a couple who had separated  and  lived  in  different
             cities. The Appellant's former wife has only temporary  leave.
             At the date of hearing it was due to expire in months. At this
             hearing I am told that has been extended by a few more  months
             (to August 2018).  That  is  hardly  akin  or  near  to  being
             Indefinite Leave to Remain.
          7)  At paragraph 77 the Judge considered  and  rejected  Appendix
             FM. The Judge noted the relatively limited contact which  took
             place between the Appellant and the son and  the  reasons  for
             it. The Judge noted that even telephone contact  was  limited.
             The Appellant's former wife expressed no fear or the  like  of
             returning to Iraq  once  she  completes  her  PhD.  The  Judge
             considered section 117 NIAA 2002.   The  Judge  did  not  cite
             section 55 Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  but
             he  properly  referred  to  the  child's  best  interests   at
             paragraph 82 of his decision. He noted that  the  couple  were
             divorced. In such cases the parties have to do the  best  that
             they can in respect of  the  non-resident  parent  seeing  and
             speaking to the child.  On  the  evidence  there  was  limited
             contact here in the  UK.  There  was  no  reason  why  such  a
             situation could not continue in the medium to long term whilst
             the Appellant's former wife completed her studies.


  23. Overall, in my judgment, the Judge's decision dealt with  the  various
      aspects to the Appellant's claim in an entirely complete way.  Despite
      rejecting the  Appellant's  credibility  about  past  claimed  events,
      nonetheless the Judge still went on to deal extensively with the  case
      law and various permutations of possible areas of risk on return. I am
      satisfied that there is  nothing  sufficient  within  the  Appellant's
      grounds or submissions which can properly be categorised as a material
      error of law in the Judge's decision.


  24. Similarly,  in  so  far  as  Article  8  is  concerned,  although  the
      experienced Judge did not refer to section 55 Borders, Citizenship and
      Immigration Act 2009,  (the case law makes quite clear that  there  is
      no need to do so) there is no error of law. That is because the  Judge
      did have the best interests of the child in  mind.  Having  considered
      the Appellant's former's wife's precarious leave, that the  child  has
      been in the UK for 4 years (albeit he is aged 7) and that  the  stated
      intentions of the Appellant's former wife were to return to Iraq after
      her studies with no concern about any fear or risk on return, then  it
      is clear that there is no error of law in relation to  the  assessment
      of family life. Similarly, there is nothing of substance  to  overturn
      the decision in respect of private life.



DECISION

    There is no error of law in the Judge's decision. The decision  of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal dismissing all aspects of the claim stands.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: Abid Mahmood                    Date: 30 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
