
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10030/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


| Heard at Manchester                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 1st May 2015                          |On 20th May 2015                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                          Mr Abdul Majid Marhemati
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Mason, Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson &
                    Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mr Adbul Majid Marhemati date of birth 6th March 1981 is
    a citizen of Iran.  Having considered all the circumstances  I  do  not
    consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the Decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gladstone promulgated on 16th January 2015, whereby  the
    judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 10th November 2014. The decision by the Respondent was
    to remove the Appellant from the UK.

 3. By decision made on the 18th February 2015 leave to appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal was granted. Thus the matter appears before me to determine in
    the first instance whether or not there is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    original determination.

 4. The first ground upon which the Decision is challenged relates  to  the
    judge's finding with regard to the appellant's claim to have  converted
    to the Baha'i faith. In paragraph 5 of the grounds it is submitted that
    the judge has failed to give adequate reasons for her conclusions  that
    she did not accept that the appellants had genuinely converted  to  the
    Baha'i faith, given  her  acceptance  of  evidence  from  the  witness.
    Further it is alleged that the judge has failed to  consider  the  fact
    that merely by reason  of  acting  as  members  of  the  Baha'i  faith,
    whether,  even  though  the  conversion  may   not   be   genuine   the
    "persecutors" would not perceive such as genuine conversion  and  would
    persecute the appellant by reason of  what  they  perceive  to  be  the
    situation. In making that submission reliance is placed on the case  of
    R v SSHD [2012] EWHC 2575 (Admin)  specifically  paragraph  24  of  the
    decision.

 5. The judge has carefully analysed the accounts given  by  the  appellant
    and his wife as to why they left Iran. The  judge  has  given  adequate
    reasons for finding that fundamental parts of  the  appellant  and  his
    wife's account were not true as set out in paragraph 115.

 6. The judge has also specifically considered the appellant and his wife's
    activities in the United Kingdom but given the  adverse  findings  with
    regard to credibility was not satisfied  that  the  appellant  and  his
    wife's conduct showed a genuine commitment to  the  Baha'i  faith.  The
    judge has properly assessed all the evidence and  given  valid  reasons
    for coming to the conclusion that she did. The  ground  amounts  to  no
    more than a disagreement with the findings of fact made by  the  judge.
    The judge has given valid reasons for making the findings that she did.



 7. The second ground of appeal relates to the appellants having  illegally
    exited from Iran. In the current country guidance  cases  SB  (risk  on
    return - illegal exit) Iran [2009] UKAIT 00053 and BA  (Demonstrator  -
    risk  on  return)  Iran  CG  2011  UKUT  00036  the  conclusion  having
    considered all the background evidence was that merely by  reason  that
    an individual had left Iran illegally was not of itself  sufficient  to
    expose a person to a risk of mistreatment constituting persecution or a
    breach of article 3 of the ECHR.

 8. The country guidance cases seemed to indicate that other  factors  have
    to exist, such as a known history of  having  been  involved  in  anti-
    government activities, demonstrations and the like, or  a  pre-existing
    interest in an individual from the government,  before  an  individual,
    who has left illegally, would be at risk on return.

 9. It is the  appellant's  case  that  that  guidance  can  no  longer  be
    maintained. As part of the skeleton arguments submitted  on  behalf  of
    the appellant reference is made to two orders in the  Court  of  Appeal
    wherein decisions refusing judicial review of Upper Tribunal  decisions
    were to be subject of review by the Court of Appeal on the grounds that
    it was arguable that the Upper Tribunal had failed to take into account
    the risk that an appellant would face on return to  Iran  as  a  failed
    asylum seeker. There does not appear to be any finding by the Court  of
    Appeal that an individual is at risk but merely that the grounds may be
    argued.

10. The appellant was also seeking to rely upon further case law. The  most
    relevant appears to be RC v Sweden  41827/07  [heard  by  the  European
    Court of Human Rights on 9 March 2010] and KK v France 18913/11  [heard
    the European Court of Human Rights on the 10 October 2013]. In  respect
    of the latter the judgement is in French that there is a summary in the
    appellant's bundle.

11. In RC the court noted that the applicant's account  was  credible.  The
    applicant's account had related to his participation in  demonstrations
    and his having been detained, arrested and tortured before being placed
    before an Iranian revolutionary court. He had  allegedly  escaped  from
    the court with the assistance  of  friends.  At  paragraph  55  of  the
    majority judgement it  was  found  that  the  applicant's  account  was
    credible as to his detention, interrogation, ill-treatment and  escape.
    Therefore the fact that the applicant thereafter  left  Iran  illegally
    coupled with the fact that he was already wanted by the government  was
    such that on  return  his  illegal  exit  would  result  in  his  being
    questioned at which point his past was likely to  be  revealed.  [  See
    paragraph 56]. By  reason  of  his  past  having  been  discovered  the
    appellant would be at risk on return.

12. With regard to KK v France there is only a summary translation from the
    European Database of  Asylum  Law.  However  I  would  quote  from  the
    summary:-

          The Court ruled the situation in Iran is insufficiently serious to
          prevent all returns.  However  the  Court  was  persuaded  by  the
          applicant detailed story and documentary evidence  of  his  stands
          against  the  IRS  and  there  persecution  of  him  due  to   his
          resignation. The Court found no reasoning in the decisions of  the
          French authorities to justify their doubts about  the  applicant's
          authenticity. The Court also noted the specific risk of  detention
          and  questioning  face  by  returning  Iranians,   including   the
          applicant, who previously left Iran unlawfully.

13. As is clear from the passages  cited  the  Court  were  satisfied  that
    persons would be detained and questioned on return, when an  individual
    is passed may be discovered. However the cited passages  do  not  bring
    into question the guidance given in the Country Guidance case law.  The
    indications being that where  there  are  other  factors  such  as  the
    authorities  being  aware  of   an   individual   being   involved   in
    demonstrations or a person having taken specific steps  to  oppose  the
    government which have come  to  the  attention  of  the  government  an
    individual  on  return  during  questioning  of  their  past  will   be
    discovered such that they would be at risk. That does not suggest  that
    merely by reason of return they would be at risk but rather where other
    factors exist such other factors will be discovered if they  have  left
    the legally. That seems to be  consistent  with  the  existing  Country
    Guidance case law.

14. In the circumstances the judge  was  entitled  to  follow  the  country
    guidance cases and was entitled to make the decision that she did.

15. There is a no material error of law in the determination.  I uphold the
    decision to dismiss these appeals on all grounds.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
