

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10557/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 24 June 2013                               |On 28 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                                Shou Hong Lin
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of China who was born on 7  August  1968.
       She appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State made  on
       7 November 2012 refusing  her  application  for  asylum  and  giving
       directions for her removal under paragraphs 8-10 of  schedule  2  to
       the Immigration Act 1971.


    2. The appellant claims to  have  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  15
       September 2012 but she avoided  immigration  controls.  She  claimed
       asylum on 9 October 2012. At the  hearing  before  the  judge  on  8
       February 2013, she had only been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  six
       months.

    3. The judge dismissed her appeal on asylum grounds, not  having  found
       the appellant credible on the central  elements  of  the  claim.  He
       concluded that he could not be satisfied, even to the lower standard
       of proof, that the Chinese authorities would perceive the  appellant
       to be either a Buddhist or a supporter of the Dalai Lama or to be at
       risk on account of her religious or political opinions  or,  indeed,
       by reason of the authorities' perception of them.

    4. The judge applied the reasoning in AX (family planning scheme) China
       CG [2012] UK UT00097 (IAC) in which it was found that,  in  general,
       for female returnees, there is no risk of forcible sterilisation  or
       forcible termination in China and that, as a result of the one child
       policy, the appellant would not face treatment on  return  to  China
       amounting to persecution.

    5. However, in dealing with the appellant's Article 8 claim which, as I
       have said, could only have  addressed  a  private  and  family  life
       developed over a period of six months in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
       judge adopted the reasoning of paragraphs 47 to 61  of  the  refusal
       letter.  In doing so, he adopted the approach of  the  Secretary  of
       State by applying Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  as  well  as
       Rule 276ADE (iii)  in  which  the  Secretary  of  State  asserted  a
       requirement that a successful Article 8 claim required the appellant
       to establish she had been 20 years resident in the United Kingdom.

    6. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge Frances,
       noting that the appellant had been  unrepresented,  referred  to  MF
       (Article 8-new rules) Nigeria [2012] UK UT393 (IAC) in  which  a  2-
       stage process was set out under which a judge was also  required  to
       consider the appellant's "pure" Article 8 claim as it  arises  under
       the Human Rights Act 1968 untrammelled, as  it  were,  by  what  the
       Secretary of State imposed in the Immigration Rules.

    7.  Whilst,  no  doubt,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  in  granting
       permission was correct to say that it was the duty of the  judge  to
       consider Article 8 in its broadest sense,  this  was  a  case  where
       there was very little additional material before  the  Secretary  of
       State or the judge which  might,  even  arguably,  require  separate
       consideration. The appellant had only been in  the  United  Kingdom,
       even on her own account, since 15 September 2012. At  the  time  the
       decision was made by the Secretary of State, she neither had a child
       or a partner here. However, the respondent  accepted  that  she  was
       pregnant and  that  her  baby  was  due  within  a  few  weeks.  Not
       unreasonably,  the  Secretary  of  State  took  the  view  that  the
       appellant could return with her newborn child and enjoy family  life
       in China without any interference capable of engaging Article 8.  If
       it did so, removal would be proportionate, given the  findings  that
       the appellant was not at  risk  of  persecution  by  reason  of  the
       policies conducted by the Chinese authorities to reduce population.

    8. The child had been born by the time her  appeal  was  heard  in  the
       First-tier Tribunal.  In his determination, the judge dealt with the
       appellant's claim that she would return to  China  as  an  unmarried
       mother in  paragraphs  175   to  190  and  reached  the  sustainable
       conclusion that  she  and  her  child  would  not  be  subjected  to
       persecution or serious harm by reason of having a child born in  the
       United Kingdom out of wedlock. There was simply  no  other  material
       before him capable of an arguable Article 8 claim.

    9. On the material before him, the  judge  was  bound  to  dismiss  the
       appellant's Article 8 claim whether or not it was argued  under  the
       Immigration Rules or by  way  of  the  "pure"  Article  8  claim  as
       identified in MF (Article  8-new  rules)  Nigeria  [2012]  UK  UT393
       (IAC).

   10. In the course of proceedings, the appellant through a friend, John K
       W Tse has made a series of applications for adjournments based  upon
       her medical condition. The first application was successful although
       the Tribunal was not persuaded on the basis of the information in  a
       hospital  letter  that  there  was  satisfactory  medical   evidence
       sufficient to merit a delay of three or  four  months.  Thus,  by  a
       decision made on 30 April 2013, the appeal  was  adjourned  but  re-
       listed for hearing on 24 June 2013.

   11. A further application was made for an adjournment by  Mr  Tse  which
       was received by the Tribunal on  20  May  2013.   This  was  refused
       because no medical evidence had been produced to indicate  that  the
       appellant was  unable  to  attend  the  hearing  on  24  June  2013,
       notwithstanding a hospital appointment on 3 July 2013.

   12. A further application was made to adjourn on 5 June 2013  seeking  a
       further two  months  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant's  medical
       condition rendered her unfit to attend the hearing on 24 June  2013.
       This was refused, one  again,  because  there  was  no  evidence  to
       indicate that the appellant was indeed unfit to attend  the  hearing
       on 24 June 2013.

   13. A further application for an adjournment was made to me on  21  June
       2013 on the basis that she was unable to find anybody to babysit for
       her on the hearing date and she was frail and unable  to  travel  to
       London. I refused that application because the appellant  had  known
       the hearing date since 16 May 2013 and was well aware of the need to
       have childcare arrangements  in  place.  I  considered  the  earlier
       unsuccessful attempts for an adjournment which were refused  on  the
       basis that there was no adequate supporting medical evidence.

   14. There is still none.

   15. At the hearing on 24 June 2013, the appellant did  not  attend,  nor
       did her friend Mr Tse. I resolved to proceed with the hearing of the
       appeal. My reason for doing so was largely related to the absence of
       any material to suggest that there was  a  viable  Article  8  claim
       which could only be based upon the private life that  the  appellant
       has developed in the United Kingdom since September 2012, no details
       of which have ever been provided. There is no viable Article 8 claim
       based upon a violation of appropriate respect for  her  family  life
       because she will be returned to China with her child.

   16. The Article 8 claim has always been hopeless given no  material  the
       appellant has been produced in support of it. As there is no  viable
       claim to be at risk of harm, the appellant's  removal  to  China  is
       both justified and inevitable.

DECISION

    The judge made no error on a point of law and the original
    determination of the appeal shall stand.







                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                26 June 2013





