
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10775/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 23 April 2014                              |on 25 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 KONG QING WU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Ms L Kerr, of Katani & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant is a citizen of  China,  born  on  26  February  1987.   He
   appeals  against  the  determination   by   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
   Hutchinson, promulgated on 23 January 2014, dismissing his appeal on  all
   available grounds.

2) The appellant's first ground of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  relates  to
   paragraph 44 of the determination, where the  judge  says  there  was  no
   adequate evidence to suggest that the appellant's wife  and  child  could
   not voluntarily return to China with him.  This is said to be  in  direct
   contradiction of the witness statement by the appellant's wife which  was
   before the judge, saying that she could not return to  China  because  of
   her own problems and fears in respect of which a hearing had  been  fixed
   for 3 days after the hearing in his case,  but  had  been  adjourned  for
   health reasons.

3) The second ground of appeal complains of  the  finding  at  paragraph  42
   that the child's best interests would be served  by  remaining  with  her
   mother and returning to China.  The ground say that the judge  failed  to
   consider the evidence that the child and mother had a separate case  from
   the appellant and that to return the appellant as a  father  without  the
   rest of the family unit would breach Article 8 of the ECHR.  While it was
   accepted that it was in the child's interests to remain with the  mother,
   there had been a failure to consider that they had  an  ongoing  separate
   appeal.

4)  On  12  February  2014  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  granted
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, on the view  that  the  judge
   had not sufficiently engaged with Article 8  of  the  ECHR,  outside  the
   Rules.

5) In a Rule 24 response dated 25 February 2014 the SSHD submits:

    ... the grounds do no more than to disagree with the  findings  of  the
    judge and do not disclose any errors ... the  judge  did  give  anxious
    scrutiny to the Article 8 evidence.  At  paragraph  40  notwithstanding
    the fact that family and private life was not substantively argued, the
    judge gave a detailed consideration including the miscarriage  suffered
    by the appellant's wife, her discharge  date  and  her  pending  appeal
    hearing.  After careful  consideration  ...  the  judge  arrived  at  a
    conclusion open to [her].


6) Ms Kerr said that an Article 8 case was put to the  First-tier  Tribunal,
   and that it was inadequately resolved at paragraphs  41  and  42  of  the
   determination.  The judge was wrong in saying that there was no  evidence
   why the appellant's wife might not return to China, because it was in her
   statement.  The judge had  erred  materially  in  failing  to  deal  with
   Article 8.  A further decision should be reached, based on  the  evidence
   before the First-tier  Tribunal,  or,  preferably,  the  case  should  be
   remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  fresh  hearing  before  another
   judge.  The appellant's wife has recovered, and could give evidence.

7) In response to my enquiries, Ms Kerr said that her firm also  represented
   the appellant's wife, and that her appeal was dismissed by the First-tier
   Tribunal.  The First-tier Tribunal refused her application for permission
   to appeal, but she has made a further application for permission  to  the
   Upper Tribunal, which is pending. No request had been made to the  First-
   tier Tribunal for the appeals of husband and wife to be  heard  together,
   because their asylum claims were based on different circumstances.

8) Mr Mullen said that the judge had considered  Article  8,  going  outside
   the Rules.  At paragraphs 41 - 43 she took account of  all  factors  made
   known to her, which was all she could  be  expected  to  do.   A  pending
   appeal by another family member was a fairly precarious basis on which to
   seek to remain under Article 8, and  the  situation  was  now  even  more
   precarious, her appeal having failed.  She  had  presumably  also  relied
   upon Article 8.   The  outcome  in  this  case  could  hardly  have  been
   otherwise, and if  the  matter  were  to  be  revisited  on  the  further
   circumstances now known, the case was significantly weaker, not stronger.

9) I reserved my determination.

10) If the appellant and his wife thought they had a  good  collective  case
   as a family,  they  should  have  sought  to  advance  it  together,  not
   separately.  What the judge said in this case  was  that  there  was  "no
   adequate evidence to suggest that the  entire  family  cannot  return  to
   China as a family unit".  The scanty evidence  in  the  appellant's  wife
   statement that she feared return could not properly  lead  to  any  other
   conclusion, and it is now confirmed by the outcome in her appeal.

11)  The  determination  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal,   dismissing   the
   appellant's appeal, shall stand.





                               [pic]
                                24 April 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
