

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10736/2012
                                                               AA/10740/2012
                                                               AA/10741/2012
                                                               AA/10742/2012
                                                               AA/10743/2012
                                                               AA/10744/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Date sent                    |
|On 8 August 2013                              |On 6 September 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                             MR JEET SINGH GOGAR
                               MRS MEENA KAUR
                              MISS PRIYA GOGAR
                          MASTER ANEESH SINGH GOGAR
                              MISS SANJAN GOGAR
                          MASTER SURAJ SINGH GOGAR
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Chelvan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) These are appeals with permission granted by the Upper  Tribunal  against
   the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Trotter  dismissing  the
   appeals on asylum and human rights grounds.
2) The appellants  are  a  family,  comprising  a  husband,  wife  and  four
   children, from Afghanistan.   Although  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   nationality was disputed, the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found that
   the family were from Afghanistan having regard to the acceptance  by  the
   Embassy of Afghanistan that the mother and father  are  Afghan  citizens.
   Before the First-tier Tribunal it was disputed that the  appellants  were
   of the Sikh religion but it was accepted by the Judge of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal that the father of the family is a Sikh, as  are  his  wife  and
   children.

3) The first appellant worked for a while in  Moscow.   Initially  he  lived
   there on his own.  He married the second appellant in  2000.   After  the
   marriage the second appellant remained in Afghanistan until the appellant
   decided to take his wife and children to Moscow because of the  worsening
   situation for Sikhs in Afghanistan.  The family returned  to  Afghanistan
   after the market in which the first appellant had  a  stall  was  closed.
   After the family returned to Afghanistan the first appellant  obtained  a
   job working with his cousin for a company transporting stock to Kabul and
   other cities in Afghanistan.  The company was called MDC and its business
   appears to have been mine clearance and medical assistance.  Although the
   appellant was self-employed as a driver  the  company,  although  not  an
   American company was associated with  the  Americans  by  reason  of  the
   proximity of its office in Mazar-e-Sharif to the American base.   In  the
   summer of 2011 the appellant's cousin disappeared on a journey to Mazar-e-
   Sharif.  About 10 days afterwards the appellant was threatened that if he
   continued to deliver to "the Americans" he would suffer  the  same  fate.
   Nothing happened to  the  appellant  until  he  was  attacked  in  Ghazni
   Province in October 2011 but  the  appellant  went  on  working  for  MDC
   because he needed work to feed  his  family.   The  appellant  was  again
   threatened by the Taliban and at that  point  the  first  appellant  felt
   obliged to leave his job.  He moved with his family  to  his  brother-in-
   law's house in February 2012 before fleeing Afghanistan in May 2012.

4) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had regard to the timescale  between
   the alleged disappearance of the appellant's cousin and  the  threats  to
   the first appellant.  The judge noted that the first appellant claimed to
   have received a number of threats, none of which were carried out  before
   he relocated with his wife and children to his brother-in-law's property,
   where he claimed to have received further threats.  The judge  considered
   that if the Taliban had any interest in the appellant and wished to carry
   out their threats they would have done so without giving notice of  their
   intentions.  The judge did  not  accept  that  the  first  appellant  was
   threatened as he alleged.  If the first appellant was in danger he  would
   not have waited to arrange a journey to the UK at considerable  cost  but
   would have fled to India, with which he had family connections.

5) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal heard argument  as  to  whether  the
   country guideline case of  SL  &  Others  (Returning  Sikhs  and  Hindis)
   Afghanistan CG [2005] UKIAT 00137 should still  be  followed  as  it  was
   argued the risk to Sikhs currently is considerably greater  than  it  was
   found to be in that case.  The judge took the view that he was  bound  to
   follow the country guideline case.   Although  he  was  referred  to  two
   expert reports which contained evidence contrary to the findings  in  the
   country guideline case, the judge put considerable  weight  on  the  fact
   that the appellant's brother-in-law was still living  in  Afghanistan  in
   "considerable prosperity and with easy  travel  between  Afghanistan  and
   India."  The judge accepted that children of either  the  Sikh  or  Hindu
   minorities were subject to bullying and discrimination but  the  evidence
   did not show that they were subject to persecutory maltreatment.

6) One of the grounds upon which permission to appeal  was  granted  by  the
   Upper Tribunal was that the judge made this finding about  Sikh  children
   in Afghanistan but did not proceed to consider the best interests of  the
   children in these appeals in the context of Article  8.   Permission  was
   granted also on the grounds that the judge did  not  make  a  finding  in
   respect of the evidence of the second appellant, the wife and  mother  of
   the family.  Her evidence was that after the family relocated  a  bearded
   man came to the house asking for her husband's whereabouts and warning of
   dire consequences if he helped foreigners.  Because of  this  the  family
   decided to flee  as  they  realised  the  Taliban  had  discovered  their
   whereabouts.  This evidence is directly material to the appeals  and  the
   judge arguably erred in not mentioning a finding in respect of it.

7) The other grounds of the application for permission to appeal  were  also
   considered arguable.  These were whether the judge was  right  to  follow
   the country guideline case of SL without analysing  the  evidence  before
   him in respect of the risk of persecution to Sikhs as a  group.   It  was
   the appellant's contention that the  case  of  SL  should  no  longer  be
   followed as the evidence suggested that all Sikhs and Hindus are at  risk
   of persecution in Afghanistan.

8) It was further contended that the adverse credibility  findings  made  by
   the judge were unsound.  The judge referred to none of the threats of the
   Taliban having been carried out but the evidence of the  first  appellant
   was that he was attacked in Ghazni in October 2011 and  beaten  so  badly
   that he was rendered unconscious and had to be taken  to  hospital.   The
   first appellant's account of the threats was found by an expert  witness,
   Dr Giustozzi, to be plausible with regard to the country background.   It
   was the practice of the Taliban to send their potential  victims  warning
   letters.  There was no evidence before the judge that the first appellant
   and his family would be given permission to live in India.  The treatment
   by the judge of  a  document  purporting  to  emanate  from  the  Taliban
   containing a threat to the appellant was also criticised.

9) At the hearing before me Mr Chelvan pointed out  that  a  case  had  been
   listed for hearing in September  which  was  intended  to  be  a  country
   guideline case.  He pointed out that  in  the  present  appeals  although
   permission to appeal had been granted there was no Rule  24  notice  from
   the respondent.  Mr Dewison responded  that  he  nevertheless  sought  to
   oppose the appellant's  submissions  and  would  not  be  expressing  any
   argument that would take the appellant's counsel by surprise.

10) Mr Chelvan argued that the appellants were  making  two  asylum  claims.
   The first was made on the basis of  HJ  (Iran)  on  the  basis  that  the
   appellants  are  Sikhs.   The  second  was  based  on   the   appellants'
   experiences in Afghanistan and on the evidence that  openly  Sikh  people
   were persecuted there.  There was a challenge  to  the  findings  in  the
   country guideline case  of  SL.   Reference  was  made  to  the  reported
   decisions in SI  (reported cases as evidence) Ethiopia [2007] UKAIT 00012
   and DSG & Others (Afghan Sikhs: departure  from  CG)  Afghanistan  [2013]
   UKUT 00148.  In DSG it was conceded by the Presenting Officer that SL was
   no  longer  good  authority.   In  SL  it  was  found  that  Sikhs  faced
   discrimination but not persecution.  The reports from Dr Ballard  and  Dr
   Giustozzi both post-dated SL - by 6 years in the case of Dr  Ballard  and
   by 8 years in the case of Dr Giustozzi.  Mr  Chelvan  drew  attention  to
   some of the issues arising from these reports.  He acknowledged that  the
   decision in DSG is not available at  the  time  of  the  hearing  of  the
   present appeals before the First-tier Tribunal but DSG showed  the  force
   in the challenge to the findings made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   A
   country guideline decision should not be seen as a "straitjacket" and the
   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had misdirected himself as to the law in
   this regard.

11) For the respondent, Mr Dewison relied on Practice Direction  12.4  which
   states the following:

    "Because of the principle that like cases should  be  treated  in  like
    manner, any failure to follow a clear,  apparently  applicable  country
    guidance case or to show why it does not apply to the case in  question
    is likely to be regarded as grounds for appeal on a point of law."

12) Mr Dewison submitted that the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
   under a duty to follow the country guideline case unless there was a good
   reason not to.  Mr Dewison referred to paragraph 45 of the determination,
   where the judge considered the submission that he should not  follow  the
   country guideline case.  The judge decided that he was  bound  to  follow
   the country guideline case and, anyway,  on  their  facts  these  appeals
   would not support the submissions based on the two expert reports to  the
   effect that Sikhs face persecution in Afghanistan.

13) I consider that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
   his approach to the country guideline case of SL.   First  he  considered
   himself bound to follow the  country  guideline  case  but  this  is  not
   strictly accurate  as  the  Practice  Direction  states  that  a  country
   guidance case must be  followed  only  if  it  is  clear  and  apparently
   applicable.  The submission made to the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
   was that the country guideline case of SL was out of date  and  therefore
   no longer applicable.  The judge did not adequately consider the  reasons
   arising from the expert reports why SL should no longer be  followed  but
   instead gave as his reason the finding that there was  one  Sikh,  namely
   the  first  appellant's  brother-in-law,  still   living   "a   life   of
   considerable prosperity" in Afghanistan with travel  between  Afghanistan
   and India.  It was wholly inadequate for  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal to reject the submissions and expert evidence  on  the  risk  to
   Sikhs in Afghanistan on the basis of the example of a single  individual.
   The situation of one individual from a community may be  wholly  atypical
   of the community as a whole and a finding that one individual is able  to
   survive and prosper in what is alleged to be  a  persecutory  environment
   does not imply that there is not a  real  risk  to  others  of  the  same
   religious or ethnic group.  The reasoning by the Judge of the  First-tier
   Tribunal in this regard is inadequate and amounts to an error of law.

14) Having set aside the decision on the basis of error of  law,  I  invited
   the parties to make submissions with a view to re-making the decision.

15) In his submission Mr Chelvan once more relied on HJ (Iran).  He  pointed
   out that according to the respondent's Operational Guidance Note in April
   2012 there were only 2,200 Sikhs left  in  Afghanistan,  not  the  20,000
   wrongly claimed to be there in SL.  There was no evidence offered by  the
   respondent to challenge  the  expert  reports  by  Dr  Giustozzi  and  Dr
   Ballard.  If there was a real risk for adult  Sikhs  in  Afghanistan  the
   risk for children was even greater.  Dr Giustozzi referred to the risk of
   Sikh girls be abducted.  Among the appellants in this family  there  were
   two girls.  In terms of HJ (Iran) it was necessary to  look  at  how  the
   family  would  conduct  themselves  on  return.   The  evidence  of   the
   appellant's wife was that when she went out she had to hide any  evidence
   that she was a Sikh and wore a Burka, pretending to  be  a  Muslim.   The
   appellants had to conceal their religion to avoid  persecution.   It  was
   pointed out that the first  appellant  had  been  clean  shaven  when  in
   Afghanistan in order to avoid known to be a  Sikh.   A  finding  to  this
   effect was made by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal at  paragraph  42
   of the determination.

16) For the respondent, Mr Dewison's position was that if  the  decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal was considered to be  unsafe  then  the  evidence
   should be reheard.  He sought to rely on the reasons for refusal  letter.
   Mr Chelvan pointed out in response that the reasons for refusal letter at
   paragraph 65 relied upon the decision in SL.  Mr Dewison then referred to
   criticisms made by the judge of the second appellant's evidence.

17) For my part I did not consider it was necessary for the evidence  to  be
   reheard in order for the decision to be re-made.  There were  two  highly
   significant findings by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  which  were
   unchallenged.  These were, first, that  the  appellants  are  Sikhs  and,
   secondly, that they are from Afghanistan.  The risk to the appellants  on
   return to Afghanistan must be assessed on this basis.  As already  noted,
   a further finding by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  was  that  the
   first appellant had gone clean shaven in Afghanistan in  order  to  avoid
   being identified as a Sikh.

18) In assessing risk on return the first issue I  should  consider  is  the
   weight to be given to the country guideline case of SL.  Although, as  Mr
   Chelvan submitted, a new country guideline case on Sikhs  in  Afghanistan
   is awaited, I was referred to the  decision  in  DSG.   This  found  that
   evidence before the judge in that appeal  justified  departure  from  the
   country guidance in SL.

19) In DSG the Tribunal had before  it  evidence  from  Dr  Ballard  and  Dr
   Giustozzi, as in the present appeals.  The report  by  Dr  Ballard  is  a
   generic report on the position  of  the  Hindu  and  Sikh  population  in
   Afghanistan.  The report before me by Dr Giustozzi is a  specific  report
   dated 29 December 2012 on the circumstances of the first appellant in the
   present appeals.

20) In both these appeals and in  DSG  the  Tribunal  was  referred  to  the
   decision of Collins J in Luthra [2011] EWHC 3629 (Admin).  In  that  case
   Collins J noted that there had been a drastic reduction in the number  of
   Sikhs in Afghanistan and this, coupled with discrimination  extending  to
   violence, meant that there was fresh  material  which  was  significantly
   different from the material in SL and consequently the claimant  in  that
   case had a realistic prospect of success.  According to a  report  by  Dr
   Giustozzi submitted in DSG, by 2001 the Sikh Community in Afghanistan had
   dwindled to somewhere as little as a few hundred and not more than a  few
   thousand.  In Kabul it was estimated that by the end of 2001  there  were
   only 50-100 families of the approximately 2000 who  had  lived  there  in
   1992.  Although reports of attacks  and  harassment  of  Sikhs  were  not
   great, this should be considered in terms of the size of the  population,
   which was now very small.  In DSG it was accepted that in SL the Tribunal
   had relied upon erroneous evidence as to the number of  Sikhs  living  in
   Afghanistan.  The same point was made by Mr Chelvan in his submission  to
   me.  The Tribunal in SL assumed there  was  a  Sikh/Hindu  population  in
   Afghanistan of 20,000 of which very few were at risk and they were simply
   victims of random and opportunistic attacks.  The figure of  20,000  came
   from UNHCR report  of  July  2003  which  referred  to  3,500  Sikh/Hindu
   families with an estimate that each family  would  comprise  5-6  people.
   Before the Tribunal in SL promulgated their decision in October 2005  the
   UNHCR position had changed.  As of June 2005 UNHCR estimated  that  there
   were 600 Sikh and Hindu families in Afghanistan amounting to about  3,700
   persons in total.  Mr Chelvan argued that  if  the  Tribunal  in  SL  had
   assessed the  adverse  incidents  in  Afghanistan  against  much  smaller
   numbers it would have reached the view that all Sikhs and Hindus were  at
   risk.  Even if this assertion was not correct, Mr  Chelvan continued, the
   current evidence was that the number of adverse incidents had grown since
   the case of SL,  including  attacks,  extortion,  discrimination,  forced
   conversions and confiscation of land, all without  legal  redress.   When
   the increase and nature of such incidents were compared with  the  number
   of Sikhs/Hindus now left in Afghanistan, estimated at between  1,500  and
   3,100, the opinion of Dr Giustozzi was justified that there was a serious
   threat to these communities.

21) The evidence before me  about  the  position  of  Sikhs  and  Hindus  in
   Afghanistan is very similar, and  in  some  respects  identical,  to  the
   evidence before the Tribunal in DSG.  On the basis of this  evidence  the
   Upper Tribunal accepted that the judge was entitled to  depart  from  the
   country guidance.  The Tribunal noted that according to the  respondent's
   Operational Guidance Note on Afghanistan of April 2012 there were only an
   estimated 2,200 Sikhs and Hindus remaining in Afghanistan.  The case  was
   said to have clear implications for other cases involving claimed risk on
   return to Afghanistan for Hindus or Sikhs until further country  guidance
   on the subject was issued.

22) I now turn to the report by Dr Giustozzi  in  the  present  appeal.   Dr
   Giustozzi reports that the  Taliban  threaten  government  officials  and
   anybody whom they consider to be collaborating with the enemy in order to
   force them to abandon  their  activities.   Contractors  like  the  first
   appellant's employer are likely to receive such threats.  If intimidation
   does  not  work  then  assassinations  are  common.   Those  regarded  as
   "collaborationists" are normally first warned to quit their job and/or to
   stop co-operating with the government and the foreigners.  These warnings
   may be face to face or in the form of "night letters", which  are  mostly
   handwritten  tracts  widely  distributed.   After  several  warnings,   a
   collaborationist will be beaten up or their property  damaged.   If  this
   tactic fails then the Taliban would proceed to "physically eliminate" the
   collaborationist.

23) I note that this account is consistent  with  threats  reported  by  the
   first appellant.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  consider
   it plausible that the first appellant would have  received  warnings,  or
   indeed successive warnings, from the Taliban without  any  threats  being
   carried out.  As has been pointed out in the application  for  permission
   to appeal, however, the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  neglected  to
   have regard to the occasion in October 2011 when the first appellant  was
   badly beaten.  The first appellant explained that he moved to  live  with
   his brother-in-law in order to avoid the  threats  and  left  Afghanistan
   once the threats were resumed at his brother-in-law's house.

24) Dr Giustozzi reports  that  attacks  on  and  harassment  of  Sikhs  are
   sometimes reported in the press but at the time of the case of SL in 2005
   the seriousness of the condition of  Sikhs  in  Afghanistan  was  greatly
   underestimated.  The known episodes of harassment and violence presumably
   represented only a proportion of the actual incidents and when these were
   compared to the size of the population it showed  rampant  hostility  and
   discrimination against Sikhs in Afghanistan.  The police  in  Afghanistan
   are known for  being  abusive  and  inefficient.   Police  corruption  is
   widespread.  In Kabul the quality of law enforcement is very low.

25) Dr Giustozzi refers to mistreatment of Sikhs  by  the  authorities.   He
   refers to a recent case in which a Sikh removed from the UK was  arrested
   on arrival in Kabul because he lacked  identification.   He  was  tricked
   into making a televised conversion to Islam.  There was a danger of Sikhs
   being  forced  to  convert.   There  were  continuing  attacks   on   and
   dispossession of Sikhs.  This was  partly  because  they  were  typically
   relatively wealthy.  They were put under pressure to sell their  property
   at prices unfavourable to them.  Sikh children were more vulnerable.   Dr
   Giustozzi refers to reports of Sikh girls going missing and  later  being
   found to have been forcefully converted to Islam and married to  a  local
   Muslim.  Young Hindus and Sikhs suffer harassment at  school.   Typically
   Sikhs and Hindus in Afghanistan  are  self-employed,  running  their  own
   family businesses.  A returning Sikh such as the  first  appellant  would
   have to seek employment from another Hindu or  Sikh  business  but  there
   were relatively few of these left and the owners would always  prioritise
   their own relatives.   Without  relatives  and  acquaintances  the  first
   appellant would struggle to find any kind of food  or  accommodation  and
   might have to rely on the charity of the  temple  for  accommodation  and
   food.

26) For the reasons I have  given,  I  do  not  consider  that  the  adverse
   finding by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in respect of the threats
   to the first appellant from the Taliban was  soundly  based.   The  judge
   failed to have regard to the expert's report in this regard, which showed
   that the manner in which the threats were delivered was  consistent  with
   the way in which the Taliban were known to operate.  The judge failed  to
   have regard to the assault on  the  appellant  in  October  2011.   I  am
   satisfied that the first appellant was the victim  of  threats  from  the
   Taliban because of his activities as a driver and that  at  the  time  he
   left Afghanistan he was at risk because of this.

27) In these appeals findings have been made that the appellants are a  Sikh
   family from Afghanistan.  As Mr Chelvan submitted, there is  no  contrary
   evidence to the evidence of Dr Giustozzi to the effect that a Sikh family
   such as the appellants returning to Afghanistan would face a real risk of
   persecution.  This persecution might  manifest  itself  in  the  form  of
   assault or even murder; it might amount to forced conversion or abduction
   of the girl members of the family; and it might include being denied  the
   ability to earn a living and the ability to practise  the  Sikh  religion
   openly.

28) The ability to practise religion openly brings in the  HJ  (Iran)  issue
   relied upon by Mr Chelvan.  It was accepted by the Judge  of  the  First-
   tier  Tribunal  that  the  first  appellant  had  been  clean  shaven  in
   Afghanistan, contrary to one of the precepts of his faith,  in  order  to
   avoid being identified as  a  Sikh.   The  second  appellant,  the  first
   appellant's wife, gave evidence that she wore a burka when she  went  out
   to avoid being identified  as  a  Sikh.   The  Judge  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal did not make a finding directly upon this. I see no  reason  not
   to accept the second appellant's evidence  on  this  issue  as  credible,
   particularly having regard to the background evidence.

29) I am satisfied that the only possibility for the appellants to  avoid  a
   real risk of persecution were they to return to Afghanistan would  be  to
   conceal completely any signs of their faith and to avoid  entirely  being
   identified by the authorities or the community as Sikhs.  Not only  do  I
   consider  that  this  course  of  action  would  not  be  a   sustainable
   possibility but to require this as the price of safety would be  contrary
   to the principle of HJ (Iran).

30) Having regard to the background evidence, including the expert  reports,
   and the appellant's circumstances, I am satisfied that they face  a  real
   risk of persecution on return to Afghanistan and accordingly the  appeals
   will succeed on asylum grounds.

Conclusions

31) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside the decision.

32) I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Anonymity

33) The First-tier Tribunal did make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
   the Asylum & Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.   I  lift  that
   order.

Fee Award   Note: This is not part of the determination.

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
