
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10661/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                   |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 March 2015                                 |On 5 May 2015              |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                          KUKI ZERIHUN GEBREMESKEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Dickson of Counsel instructed by Blavo & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. On 25th March 2014 Judge of the Upper Tribunal  Coker  gave  permission
    (on  a  renewed  application  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal)  to  the
    appellant to appeal against the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal M Davies in which he dismissed the appeal against the decision
    of the respondent to  refuse  asylum,  humanitarian  and  human  rights
    protection to the appellant who claims to be a citizen of Eritrea.

 2. The grounds of application contended that it was wrong for the judge to
    take issue with the appellant's apparent lack of  knowledge  about  the
    area in Eritrea from which she claimed to come. It was also argued that
    the judge was wrong to suggest that the appellant's seven  year  period
    of residence in  Greece  showed  that  she  did  not  have  a  fear  of
    persecution in Eritrea on account  of  her  faith.   The  grounds  also
    criticised the judge for relying upon the appellant's failure to  claim
    asylum in France as showing that she did not fear persecution.  Finally
    the grounds argued that, in concluding that the appellant  was  not  an
    Eritrean national, the judge had not dealt with the  appellant's  claim
    to have been deported from Ethiopia in line with objective evidence.

 3. When granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Coker thought  that  most
    of the grounds lacked merit.  However she considered it  arguable  that
    reliance by the judge on the appellant's lack of  knowledge  of  hotels
    and street names in Assab to show that the appellant was  not  Eritrean
    was unsustainable given the appellant's claim that she had  only  lived
    there for some two  to  three  years  following  her  deportation  from
    Ethiopia and when only aged 14 at the time of deportation.

Error on a Point of Law

 4. At the hearing Mr Dickson's  submissions  centred  upon  the  point  of
    arguable error identified by the Upper Tribunal.   He  emphasised  that
    the judge had not shown that she had considered that the appellant  was
    young at the time of her deportation and that she had indicated in  her
    witness statement that she  was  nervous  at  the  time  of  interview.
    Additionally, the judge  had  found  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  a
    Pentecostal Christian credible despite the  respondent's  rejection  of
    that part of her claims.  Thus, an important element of the appellant's
    claims had been accepted by the judge who therefore had to give  cogent
    reasons for rejecting  her  claim  to  be  Eritrean.   He  thought  the
    appellant's lengthy stay in Greece was not inconsistent with her  being
    a genuine refugee as she had only left that country when it became more
    unstable.  She had also been under the control of agents in her journey
    to the United Kingdom.  Mr Dickson  also  submitted  that  the  judge's
    failure to deal with the issue of the consistency  of  the  appellant's
    claim to be deported from Ethiopia to Eritrea was relevant.

 5. Mr Harris agreed that the  respondent  had  made  no  response  to  the
    grounds but argued that there was no material error  in  the  decision.
    He also pointed out that there had been no presenting  officer  at  the
    hearing who could  have  raised  some  of  the  more  detailed  issues.
    Nevertheless, Mr Harris agreed  that  it  might  be  possible  for  the
    appellant to have only a limited knowledge of Assab in view of her  age
    and the relatively short period of time she had lived  there  following
    deportation.  He also agreed that the judge  did  not  appear  to  have
    fully resolved the conflict of the appellant's assertion that  she  had
    claimed asylum in Greece (which the judge had found to be credible) but
    believed her time in Greece was an indication that  she  had  not  left
    Eritrea fearing persecution.

 6. After hearing the submissions I announced that I was satisfied that the
    decision showed errors on points of law such that it should be  re-made
    and now give my reasons for reaching that conclusion.

 7.  Although  the  determination   is   comprehensive,   two   significant
    credibility findings are reached which, I  conclude,  are  affected  by
    material errors.

 8. In paragraph 33 the judge accepts that the appellant had  attempted  to
    claim asylum in Greece but the authorities were reluctant to accept her
    claim.  It was also accepted that it would not have been  possible  for
    the appellant to claim international  protection  in  either  Sudan  or
    Turkey.  I therefore conclude that it was perverse, in the legal sense,
    for the judge to conclude that, as the appellant had spent seven years'
    working in Greece, it was a "clear indication" that she  had  not  left
    Eritrea fearing persecution or that she had a  genuine  fear  of  being
    persecuted if returned to Eritrea.  The decision does not show that the
    judge gave any or adequate reasons for  this  apparently  contradictory
    finding when it was accepted that the  appellant  had  tried  to  claim
    asylum in Greece.

 9. Paragraph 45 of the decision reveals that the  judge  appears  to  have
    conducted an investigation of his own into  features  of  the  city  of
    Assab by reference to the internet, albeit  with  the  consent  of  the
    appellant's representative.  The judge then reaches a  conclusion  that
    the appellant's lack of knowledge of specific locations in Assab  meant
    that she had never lived there.  However, the judge evidently fails  to
    take  into  consideration  the  material  point  in  relation  to   the
    appellant's lack of knowledge which had been set out in  her  evidence,
    namely, that she was only 14  years  of  age  when  she  reached  Assab
    following deportation and was only  there  for  between  two  or  three
    years.   The  judge  erred  in  failing  to  show  that  this  relevant
    information, which might have  affected  the  appellant's  geographical
    knowledge, had  been  taken  into  consideration  before  reaching  his
    negative credibility finding.

10. In view of the  material  errors  I  have  identified  in  the  judge's
    credibility findings means that the appeal should be  re-made.   Having
    regard to the provisions of paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements
    for the IAC dated 25 September 2012  and taking into consideration that
    the evidence will have to be heard again, I consider  that  the  matter
    should be heard afresh before the First-tier Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

 1. The appeal will be heard afresh by the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at
    Manchester on a date to be specified by the Resident Judge.

 2. The appeal should not be heard before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    M Davies.

 3. An Amharic interpreter will be required for the hearing.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

