
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10611/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 June 2016                     |On 1 August 2016                     |
|                                    |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is a national of Palestine. He applied  for  asylum  in  the  United
   Kingdom and that application was refused by the  Respondent  on  21  July
   2015. The Respondent gave consideration  to  whether  the  Appellant  was
   stateless and noted  that  he  had  made  no  valid  application  to  the
   Secretary of State for limited leave to  remain  as  a  stateless  person
   under paragraph 403 (a) of the Immigration  Rules.  The  Respondent  also
   concluded that the Appellant could return to Saudi Arabia  where  he  had
   previously lived and that there would be no breach of  his  rights  under
   the European Convention of Human Rights.


2. The Appellant appealed against this decision under section 82 (1) of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002  Act).  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Widdup dismissed his appeal under the  Refugee  Convention
   but allowed it on the grounds that the Respondent's decision in  relation
   to paragraph 402 of the Immigration Rules was not in accordance with  the
   law.

3.  The Respondent sought permission to appeal  against  that  decision  and
   permission was granted on 6 May 2016 by First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mark
   Davies on the grounds that it was arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal
   had exceeded its powers when remitting the decision to the Respondent  to
   make a fresh decision.

4. The Respondent argued in the grounds that the First-tier Tribunal had  no
   power to remit to the Respondent. If the First-tier  Tribunal  considered
   that the decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  because  the
   Respondent had incorrectly applied paragraph 403 of the Immigration Rules
   this was fundamentally flawed.  The Respondent had  considered  paragraph
   403 and refused the application  under  403  (a)  as  the  Appellant  was
   required by the Rules to submit  an  application  for  limited  leave  to
   remain as a stateless person, which the Respondent considered he had not.
   The Respondent submitted that if wrong about  that  then  the  Judge  was
   seized of the matter and should  have  determined  the  claim  under  the
   relevant paragraph.


   The Hearing


5. Ms Isherwood submitted that there was a material error of law. There  had
   been no challenge to the dismissed decision. The Judge sent it back under
   paragraph 403. The first point  was  that  the  Appellant  must  make  an
   application and as highlighted in the RFRL this was not done.  The  issue
   of statelessness was considered in the RFRL but what was  also  said  was
   that the Appellant had not made an application  as  a  stateless  person.
   Even if that was not accepted it was for the Judge to consider it and not
   to remit to the Secretary of State.  A valid application was stated to be
   required under the Rule. The Judge acknowledged this at paragraph 55.


6. I explained to  the  Appellant  in  clear  terms  what  the  Respondent's
   grounds were and why it was said that there was  an  error  of  law.  The
   Appellant said that he did not want to deal with the Home Office. He said
   that the Home Office had given him the hardest time. He had been here for
   19 years.  He said he had made an application as a stateless person under
   paragraph 403 of the Immigration Rules and he  produced  the  application
   made on 10 June 2016.

7. Ms Isherwood submitted that it  was  the  Appellant's  responsibility  to
   raise all points and the requirement regarding application had to be met.






   Discussion and Findings


8. The Appellant was in person before the First-tier Tribunal. There  is  no
   cross-appeal in relation  to  the  asylum  claim.  The  requirements  for
   limited leave to remain as a stateless person are set  out  at  paragraph
   403 of the Immigration Rules and include a requirement that the Appellant
   make a valid application to the Secretary of State. It is  common  ground
   that by the time the appeal was before the First-tier Tribunal  this  had
   not been done. The Respondent considered  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be
   stateless from paragraphs 44 to 57 of the reasons for refusal letter  and
   stated at paragraph 55 that no valid application had been made.  However,
   it is also stated that  it  was  not  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was
   stateless because he could return to Saudi Arabia where he had been  born
   and lived from 1973 to 1997.


9. The questions to be determined in this appeal  are  firstly  whether  the
   First-tier Tribunal exceeded its powers in finding that the decision  was
   not in accordance with  the  law  because  in  the  absence  of  a  valid
   application the Respondent was  not  required  to  consider  whether  the
   Appellant should be granted leave as a stateless person and secondly,  if
   a valid application was not necessary for the First-tier Tribunal to have
   jurisdiction, whether the First-tier Tribunal should have determined  the
   issue rather than finding that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  in
   accordance with the law.

10. I have not been directed to any authority on this issue. However, it  is
   clear, in my view that the clear wording of paragraph 403(a) cannot be by-
   passed. The Appellant had not made an application under paragraph 403 for
   limited  leave  to  remain.  The  Respondent  was  therefore  correct  to
   highlight in the refusal letter that no such application had  been  made.
   Technically therefore there was no  refusal  under  this  paragraph.  The
   First-tier Tribunal therefore erred in law in finding that  the  decision
   was not in accordance with the law and remained  outstanding  before  the
   Respondent as the Respondent could not make a  decision  under  paragraph
   403 in the absence of an application.

11. I am fortified in my conclusion by  the  decision  of  the  Presidential
   Panel in R (on the application of Semeda) v Secretary of  State  for  the
   Home Department (statelessness; Pham [2015] UKSC 19 applied)  IJR  [2015]
   UKUT 00658 (IAC) which confirms the proactive duty of  the  Secretary  of
   State in such cases :


      17. The decision making process in all statelessness cases is overlaid
          by the mantle of public law.  The principle  of  public  law  most
          obviously engaged is the requirement to  identify  and  then  take
          into account all relevant considerations. Linked to  this  is  the
          Tameside principle:


          "...It is for a court of law to  determine  whether  it  has  been
          established that in reaching his decision ...  [the  Secretary  of
          State] had directed himself properly in law and had in consequence
          taken  into  consideration  the  matters  which  upon   the   true
          construction of the Act he ought to have considered  and  excluded
          from his consideration matters that were irrelevant to what he had
          to consider ...


          Or, put more compendiously, the question for the court is did  the
          Secretary of  State  ask  himself  the  right  question  and  take
          reasonable steps to acquaint himself with the relevant information
          to enable him to answer it correctly?"
          (per Lord Diplock in Secretary of State for Education and  Science
          v Metropolitan Borough Council of  Tameside  [1977]  AC  1014,  at
          1065b).


          In  the  particular  context  of  statelessness   cases,   it   is
          appropriate to emphasise the latter part of Lord Diplock's seminal
          formulation: the decision maker  must  take  reasonable  steps  to
          acquaint himself with the relevant information.  In the  evolution
          of public  law  during  the  four  subsequent  decades,  this  has
          sometimes been coined  the  "duty  of  enquiry".   It  is  not  an
          absolute duty.  Rather, it imports the standard of reasonableness.
           In the present context, it coexists with, and gives emphasis  to,
          the obligations of enquiry specifically imposed  on  the  decision
          maker by the Secretary of State's policy guidance (supra).


12. There are clearly strong administrative reasons why  an  application  in
   this sort of case is required. I am further fortified in my conclusion by
   the decision of the Court of Appeal in R (on the application of Weiss)  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 803  in  which
   the Court held that in the absence of an application under paragraph 276B
   on the prescribed form the First-tier Tribunal could not make a  decision
   on that paragraph.


13.  In the circumstances, I find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
   allowing the appeal as not in accordance with  the  law  and  outstanding
   before the Respondent for a proper decision to be made. The Tribunal  had
   no jurisdiction to do so.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The Upper Tribunal has no jurisdiction in this matter.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Dated 26 July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
