
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10308/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 January 2016                   |On 5 February 2016                   |
|Prepared on 29 January 2016          |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. B.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Selway, Counsel instructed by Brar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, who entered the UK illegally
    with his wife and children. He was refused asylum, and a  decision  was
    made to remove him from the UK on 14 November 2014.

 2. The Appellant duly appealed against those immigration decisions and his
    appeal was heard by a Tribunal panel of Judges  Webb  and  Fisher,  and
    dismissed on all grounds in a decision promulgated on 9 June 2015.

 3. The Appellant's application to the First Tier Tribunal  for  permission
    to appeal was granted by First Tier Tribunal  Judge  Page  on  22  June
    2015.

 4. The Respondent filed no substantive Rule 24 response, because  she  had
    mislaid her file. Neither party applied to introduce further  evidence.
    Thus the matter comes before me.

The grounds of appeal

 5. The Appellant's grounds are drafted in intemperate language. Mr Selway,
    who was also their author, made no apology for  that,  although  it  is
    inappropriate, unnecessary, and to be deplored.

 6. Mr Selway began by arguing that the Tribunal had  failed  to  consider,
    and apply, the decision in DSG & Others (Afghan Sikhs;  departure  from
    CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 148, which sanctioned the departure by  the
    First Tier Tribunal from the guidance to be  found  in  SL  and  Others
    (Returning Sikhs and Hindus) Afghanistan CG [2005] UKAIT  137,  on  the
    basis of  the  changed  situation  in  Afghanistan  for  Sikhs  in  the
    intervening eight years. He then conceded however that the Tribunal had
    shown that the guidance DSG was in mind, because express reference  had
    been made to it in paragraphs 13-16 of the decision. There is simply no
    merit in the suggestion that the Tribunal ignored DSG.

 7. I turn then to the argument that the  Tribunal's  findings  of  primary
    fact should have led  them  to  the  conclusion  that  the  family  had
    experienced past persecution. As put, Mr Selway's argument was that the
    family had not simply experienced discrimination  and  harassment  from
    some members of the general population. That argument  was  however  no
    more than a disagreement with the Tribunal's conclusion, which had been
    drawn after a consideration of the guidance in both  DSG  and  SL,  and
    after consideration of the  evidence  that  not  all  of  the  family's
    neighbours were ill disposed towards them.

 8. Where Mr Selway was on stronger ground was in  his  argument  that  the
    behaviour of one particular family of neighbours, non state agents, had
    crossed the  line  of  mere  discrimination  and  harassment,  and  was
    properly to be viewed as past persecution motivated by their  knowledge
    of the religion of the Appellant's family. The active members  of  this
    family were a "Commander" and his  son  (What  he  was  said  to  be  a
    commander of was never identified in the evidence). It was not in issue
    before the Tribunal that the son had raped the  Appellant's  wife,  and
    when the decision is read as a whole it is  perfectly  clear  that  the
    Tribunal accepted the Respondent's  concession  in  this  respect.  The
    Tribunal considered however that this was an isolated criminal act,  no
    doubt given the evidence that there was no repetition of this conduct -
    which finding was certainly well open to them on the evidence, since no
    other incident of sexual violence against any member of the family  was
    asserted by  the  Appellant.  The  Tribunal  also  accepted  that  this
    incident was far more serious  that  any  of  the  other  incidents  of
    harassment that had been experienced. What was called for was therefore
    a consideration of whether this was simply  a  criminal  act  resulting
    simply from uncontrolled lust, or whether it was an act of persecution,
    resulting in part from the  knowledge  of  this  lady's  religion,  and
    either the belief that it was acceptable to behave in such a way  to  a
    Sikh woman, or in the belief that because the victim was a Sikh he  had
    no fear of retribution. That does not appear to have occurred,  and  to
    that extent  the  decision  does  disclose  an  error  of  law  in  the
    conclusion that there was no past persecution.

 9. The Tribunal did however approach their decision in the alternative  at
    paragraph 17. The assumption underlying paragraph 17 is that  the  acts
    of this one family of neighbours did amount  to  past  persecution,  so
    that a consideration was required of  the  ability  of  the  family  to
    relocate. The evidence showed only that that this  one  family  were  a
    group of non state agents, and it did not establish that they  had  any
    reach beyond Jalalabad itself, and this was  therefore  the  Tribunal's
    finding. Whilst Mr Selway did not accept that proposition, he  accepted
    that the evidence did not explain what the head of this family had been
    a commander of, and that the evidence did not show one way or the other
    what his reach was. I am satisfied that he was unable to  identify  any
    arguable error of law in the Tribunal's finding on this family's reach,
    and that it must stand.

10. The Tribunal therefore turned to the question of whether the  Appellant
    and  his  family  could  be  expected  to  relocate  upon   return   to
    Afghanistan, and correctly identified that only Kabul was argued by the
    Respondent to be a possible destination.

11. The evidence that had originally been placed before  the  Tribunal  was
    limited by Mr  Selway's  decision  (no  doubt  for  sound  professional
    reasons) not to rely upon, and  thus  to  place  no  weight  upon,  the
    content of a report from J Hassan Zadeh of 17 December 2014 [ApB  p13].
    Mr Zadeh had not attended the hearing. Both the Tribunal [18], and  the
    Respondent's presenting officer at the hearing, separately recorded  Mr
    Selway's decision in this respect, and I have no doubt that it was made
    and expressed to the Tribunal at the time. It is not  enough  to  argue
    now, as at one point before me  he  sought  to  do,  that  despite  his
    decision the Tribunal should have considered the content of that report
    for themselves.

12. Using the guidance to be found in both DSG and  SL  together  with  the
    quotations from the Country Information report upon Afghanistan  relied
    upon by the Respondent the Tribunal therefore considered  the  position
    of Sikh  families  in  Kabul.  They  noted  the  existence  of  a  Sikh
    community, a privately run Sikh school, and two active Gurdwaras.  They
    noted the ability of the Appellant and his family to travel  in  safety
    from Jalalabad to Kabul in 2012 where they had been able  to  celebrate
    their  religion  with  other  Sikh  families  at   festivals,   without
    interference. They considered  that  the  family  could  reasonably  be
    expected to relocate there, and that the Commandant and his  son  would
    have no further interest in them there.

13. Mr Selway's challenge to this approach was  wholehearted  -  it  defied
    practical common sense he argued. The  Sikh  community  was  dwindling,
    there were only about 300 Sikh and Hindu families  left  in  Kabul,  so
    that therefore only about 60-70 Sikh children left there, and there was
    now only one Gurdwara. If the family had been subjected  to  harassment
    and discrimination from the general population in Jalalabad on  account
    of their religion, then it should be  presumed  that  this  would  also
    occur in Kabul. The difficulty that this challenge faced  was  that  it
    was not based upon the evidence that was before the Tribunal,  or,  the
    guidance in DSG.

14. Instead Mr Selway prayed in aid the decision in TG and  others  (Afghan
    Sikhs persecuted)  Afghanistan  CG  [2015]  UKUT  595,  which  was  not
    promulgated until November 2015, and which  could  not  therefore  have
    assisted the Tribunal. The analysis of the evidence contained  therein,
    and the guidance offered, falls well short however of supporting either
    Mr Selway's proposition that no Sikh may safely return to  Afghanistan,
    or, that no Sikh can reasonably be expected to relocate to  Kabul  from
    Jalalabad. Some members of the  Afghan  community  continue  to  suffer
    harassment at the hands of muslim zealots, but not all, and the members
    of that community do  not  qualify  simply  on  the  grounds  of  their
    religion for international protection. The  cumulative  effect  of  the
    discrimination that community may suffer does not reach  the  threshold
    for persecution. That guidance is entirely consistent with the approach
    taken by the Tribunal in this appeal.

15. Having considered for myself the guidance to be found in  TG  upon  the
    risks faced by those who return, it is plain that many  of  the  issues
    raised for consideration upon the  evidence  as  part  of  the  overall
    assessment of whether relocation would be possible, were  simply  never
    addressed in the Appellant's evidence before the Tribunal, and/or  that
    the arguments now relied  upon  have  no  adequate  foundation  in  the
    evidence.

16. Thus the Appellant's wife would not  be  returning  as  a  sole  woman,
    without the protection of a male member of the family. She  would  have
    the protection of her husband, the Appellant.

17. Moreover the evidence did not establish  that  the  Appellant  and  his
    family were without means, and without the ability to gain support from
    either their own extended family, the Sikh community in the UK, or  the
    Sikh community in  Kabul.  This  was  an  issue  that  was  simply  not
    addressed in the witness statements. If they returned voluntarily  they
    would  have  the  ability  to  access  the  financial  support  package
    available to those who do, and they cannot be heard to  say  that  they
    would refuse to do so, and would therefore be  unable  to  access  such
    support. In this respect I must also apply the  guidance  in  AN  &  SS
    (Tamils - Colombo - risk) Sri Lanka CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00063  when  the
    Tribunal  concluded  it  was  appropriate  to  take  into  account  the
    availability  of  the  financial  support  then  provided  through  the
    Voluntary Returns Programme;

         "117.    Much has been made of the undue harshness  which  AN  will
                face as a single mother without accommodation or  employment
                and without friends or family to turn  to  in  Colombo,  but
                this  is  to  leave  out  of  account  what  even  Dr  Smith
                acknowledges to be the very generous support package offered
                by the IOM to voluntary returnees. After "smoothing the  re-
                entry process" the IOM provides "a comprehensive package  of
                support for five years after arrival", which includes  "five
                years shelter guaranteed." We do not think it is open to the
                appellant to say that, if she loses her appeal, she will not
                take advantage of this  package,  and  to  argue  from  that
                refusal that she will face  destitution  in  Colombo  which,
                accordingly, is not a place to which she can  reasonably  be
                expected to relocate."

18. The evidence also failed to establish that  there  was  no  functioning
    Gurdwara in Kabul where the family could worship in safety, and  obtain
    education for their children.

Conclusion

19. In the circumstances I am not satisfied that the challenges advanced in
    the grounds of appeal are  made  out.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant has established a material error of  law  in  the  Tribunal's
    decision that requires the decision to be set aside and remade.

DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 9
    June 2015 did not involve the making of an error of law in the decision
    to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision to be set  aside  and
    remade. The decision to dismiss the appeal is accordingly confirmed.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity. No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead
    to proceedings being brought for contempt of court.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 29 January 2016
