
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10012/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16th May 2016 / 1st September 2016      |On 06th October 2016             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                  Aklas [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith, instructed by Ison Harrison Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer (16/9)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Resumed Hearing

 1. This matter was transferred to me by  Order  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Connor on 5 August 2016 on the grounds that as it was not practicable
    for the original Tribunal to give its decision  without  undue  further
    delay. Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane had  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision giving his reasons as follows:

         "1.  The appellant, Aklas [S], was born on 1 February 1960 and is a
         female citizen  of  Iraq.   She  had  appealed  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (Judge Batiste) against the  decision  of  the  respondent
         dated 26 June 2015 who  refused  her  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom having rejected her asylum claim.  The First-tier  Tribunal
         (in a decision  promulgated  on  15  October  2015)  dismissed  the
         appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
         Tribunal.

         2.   The judge [32] accepted the account given by the appellant  as
         credible.  He accepted that she was party to  a  mixed  Sunni/Shi'a
         marriage and that she had been threatened  by  unknown  persons  on
         account of her marriage while she was living in  Iraq.   The  judge
         found that the appellant would return to Iraq with her husband.  He
         assessed her asylum claim on that basis [34].  The judge also found
         that the appellant's  nephew  had  been  killed  having  also  been
         threatened.  The "real issue in this case" as the judge  identified
         at [37] was that of internal relocation.

         3.   It was in respect of his assessment of  that  issue  that  the
         judge  fell  into  legal  error,  in  my  opinion.   The  appellant
         considered the question of risk on return and  internal  flight  on
         the basis of the country guidance provided by  AA  (Article  15(c))
         Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC).  At [27] the judge noted that  the
         representative for the appellant (Ms Smith  of  Counsel,  who  also
         appeared before  the  Upper  Tribunal)  argued  that  the  existing
         country guidance should be disapplied as  it  was  "out  of  date".
         Following the hearing but before the judge wrote his  decision,  AA
         had been promulgated (in fact, on the day following  the  hearing).
         The judge noted that he did not have submissions  about  this  case
         [AA] however "as it  had  not  been  promulgated  at  the  date  of
         hearing."  The first question is whether the judge  acted  properly
         by applying AA without offering the parties the opportunity to make
         submissions regarding its relevance in the appeal. Given  that  the
         country guidance was promulgated after the hearing but  before  the
         promulgation of the judge's decision and there was no clear  reason
         why a further hearing could not be arranged, I find that the  judge
         erred in law by failing to reconvene the hearing.   That  error  of
         law appears to be accepted by the respondent in the Rule  24  reply
         of 24 December 2015 [3].  However, the respondent  argues  that  it
         was  "far  from  clear  to  what  material  degree  [AA]  played  a
         significant part in his decision."  I  disagree.   It  is  apparent
         from the judge's decision that he has  applied  AA  throughout  his
         analysis.  In particular at [39] when  assessing  the  question  of
         internal flight, the judge wrote,

             "I accept that much of Baghdad is now  divided  between  Sunni
             and Shia areas.  The mixed marriage [of the appellant and  her
             husband] is likely to be a disadvantage  for  them.   However,
             nowhere in AA does it  suggest  that  the  people  from  mixed
             marriages such as the appellant would be at specific risk from
             this factor.

             The judge had before him an expert report filed on  behalf  of
             the appellant from Ms Laizer which the judge found  "extremely
             helpful."  However, the judge complained that the  report  had
             been written "prior to the new country guidance  authority  of
             AA."  Ms Laizer dealt in her report with the question  of  the
             mixed marriage. Had the  judge  reconvened  the  hearing,  the
             appellant's representative would have had the  opportunity  to
             make submissions on the expert evidence in the light of AA and
             in particular as regards any danger posed to the appellant  by
             her mixed marriage.  It is not, in my opinion, correct for the
             judge simply to conclude that the  mixed  marriage  would  not
             pose the appellant a real risk of harm simply because  parties
             to mixed marriages do not form a category  of  individuals  at
             risk as identified in AA; indeed, if  that  is  the  case,  it
             would have been more logical to have ignored AA  and  to  have
             determined the appeal  on  its  own  evidence,  including  the
             expert report.  Equally, it is not stated in AA  that  parties
             to mixed marriages are not at risk; the judge should have made
             his findings on the issue only having heard  submissions  from
             both parties in the light of the new country guidance."

         4.   This is a matter  which  may  be  disposed  of  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal given that there is no need to  revisit  the  findings  of
         fact made by the judge.  For the reasons I have given  I  have  set
         aside the judge's decision preserving his findings of  fact  and  I
         shall remake the decision following a resumed hearing in the  Upper
         Tribunal."

 2. The appellant adopted a further statement to stand as her  evidence-in-
    chief.  She was accepted as  having  given  credible  evidence  by  the
    original judge in relation to the events which led to her  flight  from
    Iraq. Her factual claim, having been established, means  that  she  and
    her husband would be at real risk if returned to Basra.

 3. The sole remaining issue therefore is  whether  there  is  an  internal
    relocation option available to the appellant and her family as a couple
    from a mixed marriage returning to Baghdad.

 4. The original judge noted that she has a brother in Baghdad who might be
    able to provide assistance.  The  witness  statement  deals  with  that
    issue.

 5. The appellant says that her brother is 68 or 69 years old and the  last
    time she had any contact with him was nearly 17 years ago. She has  not
    seen him since she was married, since he disapproved of her marrying  a
    man who was a Shia. Even before  they  were  married  she  had  limited
    contact with him because  he  was  many  years  older  than  her.   She
    understands that he has heart problems and  is  dependent  on  his  own
    children to care for him.  In answer to questions from  the  Presenting
    Officer she said that she knew that he  was  still  living  in  Baghdad
    city, because her other brother in Basra had told her so,  and  he  did
    have family of his own including adult children.

Submissions

 6. Mr McVeety  submitted  that  the  family  could  reasonably  return  to
    Baghdad. He referred to the evidence in EA (Sunni/Shia mixed marriages)
    Iraq CG [2011] UKUT 00342, not for the  proposition  that  the  country
    guidance was still relevant some five  years  later,  but  because  the
    Tribunal recorded that of the 6,000,000 marriages  registered  in  Iraq
    one-third, namely 2,000,000 were mixed Shia/Sunni.  This was  therefore
    not an unusual problem.

 7. He referred me to the Home Office Country Information and  Guidance  on
    Iraq for Sunni Arab Muslims dated August 2016 which records that whilst
    Sunnis are marginalised by the Shia majority in Baghdad they are  still
    represented in society and government.  Whilst there are  reports  that
    government forces have abused Sunnis, mainly in the areas of current or
    recent Daesh control, in general a Sunni will not be at  real  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm from the State.   On  the  other  hand,  he
    accepted that various non-state actors,  primarily  the  powerful  Shia
    militia who number in the tens of thousands, have  violated  the  human
    rights of Sunnis in Baghdad and the contested governorates.

 8. At paragraph 2.4.2 of the report, it states that there are still  Sunni
    dominated districts  in  Baghdad  city  although  it  has  become  more
    segregated between Sunni and Shia.  Baghdad hosts over half  a  million
    IDPs which  have  been  displaced  from  Sunni  majority  governorates.
    Whilst Sunnis are the minority in a city of over 7,000,000  people,  it
    is reasonable to judge that Sunnis number at least in the  hundreds  of
    thousands.

 9. The report states that freedom of movement  may  be  limited  in  areas
    under the control of government forces and/or Shia militia and a  Sunni
    may be required to find a sponsor  to  enter  the  city  although  this
    requirement  is  subject  to  change,  due  to  the  changing  security
    situation.

10. He relied on the report's conclusion, that a Sunni will in  general  be
    able to relocate to Baghdad as long as it is not unreasonable, based on
    their specific circumstances. In his submission,  the  appellants  were
    properly documented and could return and access  employment.  Both  she
    and her husband were educated people.  They could obtain food  supplies
    etc. there.

11. Mr McVeety also addressed the expert report produced  by  Sheri  Laizer
    dated 29th June 2016.  Sheri Laizer states that the mixed sect quarters
    of Baghdad have not only shrunken but are being further  splintered  by
    on-going fighting between militia groups. Mr McVeety observed that Miss
    Laizer did not disclose the basis for her assertion and submitted  that
    there was no objective evidence to confirm that the  mixed  areas  were
    shrinking.

12. Finally, it was reasonable to assume that the appellant's brother might
    give her some assistance since the  evidence  was  not  that  they  had
    quarrelled. Whilst there would  undoubtedly  be  difficulties,  in  his
    submission, it would not be  unduly  harsh  for  them  to  relocate  to
    Baghdad.

13. Miss Smith argued the opposite.

14. Like Mr McVeety, she referred me to the CIG Report of August 2016 which
    states, at 2.2.6

         "Sunni internally displaced  persons  who  generally  lack  support
         networks and economic means are more vulnerable  to  suspicion  and
         abuse.  Decision makers need to consider each case on its merits."

15. The CIG was dealing with the position of  Sunnis  in  Baghdad  and  not
    Sunni/Shia families, and the focus of  the  report  was  on  individual
    Sunnis who could reasonably live  in  pockets  of  Baghdad.   For  this
    family to live safely, each of them would have to be tolerated  by  the
    other community. In order to be relatively safe, the appellant and  her
    husband would have to live separately in  their  own  sectarian  areas,
    which would be unduly harsh and not in their children's best interests.



16. She referred to Sheri Laizer's report which states that as a Sunni, the
    appellant could not relocate to a Shia area of Baghdad. Her clear  view
    was that mixed marriages are  not  tolerated  by  extremist  groups  on
    either side of the sectarian divide.

17. There was a distinction to be made  between  mixed  areas  where  Sunni
    families lived in proximity with  Shia  families  and  mixed  marriages
    between Sunni and Shia, and the clear evidence from the expert was that
    in any event, mixed areas had been reduced.

18. In her initial report, prepared for the first hearing, Sheri Laizer was
    asked to comment on whether it would be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
    appellant to relocate.  She wrote:

         "8(v) In practical terms when moving around Iraq and in and out  of
             Shia or Sunni areas respectively, it must be  emphasised  that
             check points and  road  blocks  exist  throughout  Iraq  where
             people's details are checked before they are  able  to  travel
             onwards.  Mrs [S] will be swiftly identifiable throughout Iraq
             as a Sunni Arab registered  in  Basra,  a  mainly  Shia  area.
             When checking the registered it will be seen she has married a
             Shia.  Once, this was tolerated.   Currently  mixed  marriages
             are  opposed.  Moreover,  people  outside  their   traditional
             sectarian areas are viewed with suspicion, even hostility.

         (vi)     Those unfamiliar with the sectarian  divide  and  shifting
             areas of control, face high generalised risks.  As a woman she
             cannot go safely anywhere alone under the new rules of  Sharia
             Law.  She would be  expected  to  be  accompanied  by  a  male
             relative.  Because the couple are a mixed Sunni Shia couple it
             makes it very difficult for them under the changed climate  to
             travel and stay together without either one being targeted  or
             both  because  it  is  a  mixed  marriage.  Such  has   become
             increasingly difficult over the past two years."

19. Miss Smith pointed out that the family had  been  out  of  Iraq  for  a
    lengthy period of time and would find it more difficult to move  around
    confidently.

20. She submitted that the UNHCR Report on the Availability of an  Internal
    Flight Alternative in Baghdad for Sunni Arabs dated  31  May  2016  was
    consistent with the evidence from Sheri Laizer when she  described  the
    difficulties for the family in moving around  through  the  checkpoints
    within the city.  The report records incidents of IDPs being stopped at
    checkpoints and interrogated by the ISF. As a result  some  IDPs  limit
    their movements to their initial sponsor's area of residence  and  tend
    to remain within those areas. This was consistent with  Sheri  Laizer's
    report, when she said that  IDs  must  be  shown  at  any  official  or
    unofficial checkpoint and from the ID a person's sect is evident  based
    the different names used by Sunnis and Shias.  The appellant's  origins
    would be shown on her ID card and her surname is her family name  which
    would potentially identify her as a Sunni.

21. Finally, Miss Smith submitted  that  the  appellant  could  not  access
    meaningful support from her  brother,  who  had  disapproved  of  their
    marriage.  The fact that they had not been  in  contact  for  seventeen
    years was a strong indication of his feelings.

Findings and Conclusions

22. I have no hesitation in finding that it would be unduly harsh  for  the
    appellant and her family to be expected to relocate to Baghdad.

23. Her credibility is not at issue.  She has been found to be  a  truthful
    witness.  There is therefore no basis for impugning her  evidence  that
    she could not access meaningful or indeed any support from her  elderly
    brother whom she has not seen for seventeen years and  who  disapproved
    of her marriage.

24. I have the benefit of two reports from Sheri Laizer. The original judge
    said that he found her first report to be  extremely  helpful  and  her
    views were supported by references and methodology. Mr McVeety was  not
    able to make any meaningful criticism otherwise than to  say  that  the
    comment about shrinking mixed areas was unsourced. It is  correct  that
    no specific reference has been given in the report to the shrinking  of
    mixed sect quarters but,  in  the  context  of  the  present  surge  in
    sectarian violence it is very likely that this should be the case.   In
    itself it is not a  basis  for  rejecting  her  conclusions.  They  are
    corroborated, so far as the checkpoints are concerned at least, by  the
    UNHCR.  The report is not inconsistent with the Home Office's  own  CIG
    which of course does not deal with mixed Sunni/Shia families  but  only
    to the risk to Sunnis.  The CIG states that Sunni  IDPs  who  generally
    lack support  networks  and  economic  means  are  more  vulnerable  to
    suspicion and abuse. This is the case here.

25. There is no support network for the  family  in  Baghdad.   Whilst  the
    couple are well educated, there is no prospect of immediate employment.
     The fact that the marriage is mixed is of  itself  bound  to  increase
    adverse attention.

26. Mr McVeety's strongest point was that there are many mixed marriages in
    Iraq.  He may well be right, and not all  of  them  will  be  at  risk.
    However, this appellant is in a more  difficult  situation,  since  she
    will not be returning to her home area where she is known and where she
    could access support from her family.

27. In AA the Tribunal set  out  the  factors  likely  to  be  relevant  in
    assessing whether it  would  be  unreasonable/unduly  harsh  for  P  to
    relocate to Baghdad. They are as follows:

      a) Whether OP has a CSID or will be able to obtain one;

      b) Whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot  are  less  likely  to
         find employment);

      c) Whether P  has  family  members  or  friends  in  Baghdad  able  to
         accommodate him;

      d) Whether P is a lone female (women face  greater  difficulties  than
         men in finding employment);

      e) Whether P can find a  sponsor  to  access  a  hotel  room  or  rent
         accommodation;

      f) Whether P is from a minority community;

      g) Whether there is support available for P bearing in mind  there  is
         some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are provided with
         the support generally given to IDPs."

28. The appellant has the proper documentation and can speak Arabic.  Those
    are factors in favour of her  being  able  to  reasonably  relocate  in
    Baghdad.  However she has no family members  or  friends,  she  has  no
    sponsor, she is from a minority community and there is no  evidence  of
    support available for her.  Whilst  she  is  not  a  lone  female,  her
    husband is from the  other  side  of  the  sectarian  divide,  and  the
    evidence from the expert suggests that  that  in  itself  enhances  her
    risk. If returned to Baghdad there is the clear risk  that  the  family
    could not all live together, clearly against the best interests of  the
    children.

Decision

29. The original judge erred in law.  His decision has been set aside.   It
    is remade as follows.  The appellants appeals are allowed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed[pic]                             Date 8 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

