
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10349/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 30 May 2017                        |On 5 June 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                Leon De Lucas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Cole, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is my decision following the resumed hearing at Bradford on 30 May
    2017.  In a decision promulgated on 19 October 2016, I found  that  the
    previous Tribunal had erred in law.  My decision was as follows:

         1.   The appellant, Leon De Lucas, was born on 25 July 1974 and was
         found by the First-tier Tribunal to be a citizen  of  South  Sudan.
         He appealed against the decision of the respondent who  refused  to
         grant him asylum and humanitarian protection dated  10  July  2015.
         The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Turlock) in a  decision  promulgated
         on 20 June 2016, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,
         with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   Judge Turlock found that the appellant was a citizen of  South
         Sudan [41].  Thereafter,  he  correctly  observed  [42]  that  "the
         question... is whether the appellant would be at risk  if  he  were
         returned to South Sudan."   He  recorded  [45]  that,  during  "the
         appellant's period of residency in the United Kingdom it  has  been
         recognised that the country of Sudan has formally  split  into  two
         independently recognised sovereign states, Sudan and South  Sudan."
         The judge went on to record  that  the  appellant  had  produced  a
         bundle  of  evidence  and  sought  to  argue  that  the  level   of
         indiscriminate violence in South Sudan was such  that  he  required
         humanitarian protection  within  the  United  Kingdom.   The  judge
         quotes at length [46-48] two extracts from material produced by the
         appellant in particular from the UNHCR and Voice of  America  News.
         Without any further comment, he stated at [49]:

         The  respondent  acknowledged  that  South   Sudan   is   currently
         experiencing a deterioration in the security situation.   Reference
         is made to a report from Amnesty International  dated  8  May  2014
         which corroborated an escalation in  fighting  across  South  Sudan
         with increasing reports of violence in the states of Jongeli, Unity
         and Upper Nile (see paragraph 13 of the letter of refusal).

         There is no evidence to show that there are factors  particular  to
         the personal circumstances of the appellant which  puts  him  at  a
         greater  risk  than  other  civilians  in  South   Sudan.    Having
         considered the evidence produced regarding the current situation in
         South Sudan I do not find that it is such that the appellant  would
         be at risk solely on  account  of  his  presence  in  the  country.
         Whilst there is ongoing fighting in South Sudan there is not such a
         breakdown of law and order so as to create the level of risk  which
         is required for a claim to succeed on the basis of Article 15(c).

         Although the appellant has been in the UK for a number of years  it
         was not contended that the return of the appellant to  South  Sudan
         would be a breach of his right to respect for his private or family
         life.

         3.   It is not  clear  from  the  quotations  from  the  background
         material  at  [47-48]  whether  the  judge  considered  that  these
         materials assisted the appellant or otherwise. The judge's  comment
         [50] appears to indicate little more than that the appellant is  at
         no greater risk than anyone else in South  Sudan.   Moreover,  when
         assessing the risk to the appellant under Article 15(c),  it  would
         have been helpful if the judge had said exactly why  he  considered
         that there was "not such a breakdown of law  and  order  so  as  to
         create a level of risk which is required  for...   Article  15(c)".
         Likewise,  the  judge  should  have  indicated  exactly   what   he
         considered to be  "the  evidence  produced  regarding  the  current
         situation in South Sudan" that  had  led  him  to  find  that  this
         particular appellant is not in need of humanitarian protection.

         4.   I make the observations in the paragraphs  above  fully  aware
         that a First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  an  almost  impossible  task
         when, faced with a heavy list of asylum  and  other  cases,  he  is
         called upon to carry out a detailed assessment of the  risk  to  an
         appellant in a country such as South Sudan for which (as Designated
         Judge Woodcraft observed when granting permission) there exists  no
         current country guidance at all.  Given the pressures on the First-
         tier Tribunal, it is perhaps the case that an issue  such  as  that
         before  Judge  Turlock  in  this  appeal  may  only  be  adequately
         considered in the Upper Tribunal.

         5.   With those observations in mind, I set  aside  the  First-tier
         Tribunal's decision.  The Upper Tribunal shall re-make the decision
         following a resumed hearing.  Both representatives agreed that this
         may be a case where formal country guidance will need to  be  given
         by the Upper Tribunal.  I therefore make the following directions.

         DIRECTIONS

         (i)  Having set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         promulgated on 20 June 2016, this appeal should  be  listed  before
         Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane at Bradford FOR MENTION ONLY  (time
         estimate: 20 minutes) on the first available date after 1  November
         2016.

         Notice of Decision




         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 20 June 2016
         is set  aside.   The  Tribunal's  finding  as  to  the  appellant's
         nationality (South Sudanese) shall stand.  Otherwise, the  findings
         of the First-tier Tribunal shall not stand.  The decision  will  be
         re-made in the Upper Tribunal  following  a  resumed  hearing  (see
         directions above).




         No anonymity direction is made.




 2. On 31 January 2017, I gave directions for the hearing to take place  at
    Bradford and for the parties to  file  and  serve  expert  evidence  in
    relation to country conditions in South Sudan.  In  readiness  for  the
    resumed hearing,  the  appellant's  solicitors  have  produced  a  very
    helpful bundle containing the expert report upon which they  rely.   At
    the  resumed  hearing,  the  Tribunal  was  greatly  assisted  by   the
    submissions made by Mrs Pettersen, for the  Secretary  of  State.   She
    highlighted a number of passages from the expert  report  which,  inter
    alia, indicate that the appellant cannot return to  his  home  area  of
    South Sudan which is in an  area  of  the  country  where  violence  is
    verging upon an ethnic and civil  conflict.   The  expert  report  also
    confirms (62-65) that the United Nations has advised  that  all  forced
    returns to South Sudan should be suspended on account of the extent and
    intensity of the conflict in the  country  and  also  the  humanitarian
    situation currently  prevailing.   Mrs  Pettersen  submitted  that  the
    report painted a "particularly bad picture" of the  country  conditions
    and she told me that,  notwithstanding  the  appellant's  inability  to
    return to his home area, there was no part of South Sudan to which  the
    appellant could reasonably be expected to return at the  present  time.
    This appellant has no family members who might assist  him.  It  should
    also be remembered that he has been living in the United Kingdom  since
    before the creation of the state  of  South  Sudan;  he  has,  somewhat
    bizarrely, never lived in South Sudan, which is now the country of  his
    nationality.

 3. In the early stages of the case management of  this  appeal,  both  the
    parties and I considered that the appellant's case may be  suitable  to
    become a country guidance case for South Sudan as regards  which  there
    is at present no guidance from the Upper Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of
    State ultimately took the view that there were too few  asylum  seekers
    from South Sudan living in the United Kingdom to make such an  exercise
    worthwhile.  In the circumstances, it does not seem to be a proper  use
    of the Upper Tribunal's resources to embark upon a lengthy and detailed
    examination of the country material and the expert report especially in
    light of the fact that Mrs Pettersen has made clear that the  Secretary
    of State considers that it is not possible for this appellant to return
    to South Sudan at the present time  on  account  of  the  conflict  and
    desperate humanitarian condition prevailing there.  I would stress that
    anyone reading this decision should not necessarily draw the conclusion
    that any citizen of South Sudan may not  be  returned  at  the  present
    time; obviously, every  appeal  needs  to  be  determined  on  its  own
    particular facts.  However, in the light of the evidence which  I  have
    before me and in the light of the helpful submissions made to me by Mrs
    Pettersen, I remake the decision allowing the  appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection/Article 3 ECHR grounds.

Notice of Decision

 4. This appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3 ECHR).

 5. The appellant is entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 1 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
