
[pic]
IAC-fh-nl-v1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/10071/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 February 2016                           |On 13 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                    m v v
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Head, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appeal of Master M V V, a minor, born in  Vietnam  on  [  ]
    1999.  He arrived in the United Kingdom unlawfully, on a lorry,  on  27
    October 2014.  He thereafter claimed  asylum,  on  the  basis  that  in
    November 2013 he was living with his father in Hanoi when  a  group  of
    five men came to the house and threatened his father saying  that  they
    would kill his family if he betrayed them.  Two weeks  later  the  same
    five men also visited the house.  They did not see him and he saw  them
    leaving the house as he returned home.  The Appellant  and  his  father
    then moved to Hanoi where they stayed for  two  months  before  leaving
    Vietnam together and then stayed for another two months in  an  unknown
    country before entering the  UK  on  a  lorry  during  which  time  the
    Appellant and his father were separated.

 2. The Appellant's asylum application was refused by  the  Respondent  and
    reasons given in a letter dated 22 June 2015.  The  Appellant  appealed
    against this decision and his appeal came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M A Khan  on  13  November  2015.   In  a  Decision  and  Reasons
    promulgated on 8 December 2015 the judge dismissed the  appeal  on  the
    basis that he did not accept the credibility of the  Appellant's  case,
    holding at 42:

         "I find that the Appellant  had  made  up  the  whole  evidence  in
         support of his asylum case".  The Appellant's oral evidence  before
         me was wholly vague and evasive.  I find  that  the  Appellant  has
         totally made up the whole of his asylum claim and he  has  invented
         various versions which are inconsistent with his claim."

    He further found at [45] that the  Appellant's  asylum  claim  did  not
    engage the Refugee Convention and at [48] there was no real  risk  that
    he would suffer a breach of his rights contrary to Articles 2 and 3  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was  made  on  the  Appellant's
    behalf and detailed grounds were submitted on 23  December  2015.   The
    grounds of appeal essentially asserted that the  judge  had  failed  to
    competently consider the evidence before  the  court  and  specifically
    concessions  made  by  the  Respondent   when   refusing   his   asylum
    application; that the judge had failed to give  cogent  or  sustainable
    reasons for finding that the Appellant would not be at risk  on  return
    to Vietnam  as  a  minor  and  had  failed  entirely  to  consider  the
    compelling background material before the court as to the treatment  of
    minors and in particular unaccompanied minors in Vietnam.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on 18 January 2016  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Landes on the basis that it was arguable  that  the
    judge erred materially in law.  He did not engage at all with the  risk
    to the Appellant returning as a minor, he did not appear  to  recognise
    that the Appellant's claim as a minor engaged the  Convention  and  did
    not adequately consider Section 55.  In addition  it  is  arguable  the
    judge should not have departed from the Respondent's acceptance of  the
    facts underlying part  of  the  Appellant's  claim,  without  at  least
    indicating at the hearing he might do so.

 5. At the hearing before me the Appellant was represented by Ms R Head and
    the Respondent by Mr T Wilding.  The Appellant attended along with  his
    foster father and another child being fostered within that family unit.



 6. I heard submissions from Ms Head and Mr Wilding  and  I  found  at  the
    hearing that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred materially in law,  in
    particular  in  the  manner  in  which  he  addressed  the  Appellant's
    credibility and in relation to Section 55. I now give detailed  reasons
    for why I reach that conclusion.

 7. It is the case that in the refusal letter the Respondent accepted  some
    aspects of the Appellant's  appeal  not  only  at  [14]-[17]  that  the
    Appellant is Vietnamese but at [39]  and  [41]  that  a  group  of  men
    visited his home in November 2013, threatened his father and  that  the
    same group of men visited his  home  two  weeks  later.   That  is  not
    reflected in the decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan who at [43]
    said:

         "I find that the Appellant has made up his whole evidence about his
         father being threatened and the evidence with regards to his claim.
          This is contrary to  the  acceptance  by  the  Respondent  in  the
         refusal letter that this part of the Appellant's claim was true."

    In addition, at [40] of his decision the judge rejected the  submission
    that the Respondent had failed to consider Section 55 of the 2009  Act,
    on the basis that the Appellant had been granted discretionary leave to
    remain as a result of the Respondent's  consideration  of  the  child's
    best interests.   The judge further found at [40] that whilst he had to
    consider the  circumstances  at  the  date  of  the  hearing,  for  all
    practical purposes the Appellant would not be removed from  the  United
    Kingdom until he is an adult.

 8. It was submitted to me and I find that the judge  erred  materially  in
    law in that it was incumbent upon him  to  consider  the  risk  to  the
    Appellant on return to Vietnam as a minor.  Part of that  consideration
    was the fact he was being returned as  a  minor  child  and  the  judge
    simply does not consider that aspect of the case through the  prism  of
    Section 55 as he is required to do.

 9. In light of  my  finding  that  the  judge  erred  in  respect  of  his
    assessment of the Appellant's credibility and in his assessment of  the
    application of Section 55 of the Borders, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2009, I find the judge further erred in  failing  to  engage  with  the
    Convention reason put forward on the Appellant's behalf i.e.  the  risk
    on return as a minor or an unaccompanied minor  to  Vietnam.   This  of
    course ties in with the Section 55 ground of appeal.

10. For these reasons I find that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Khan cannot stand and I allow the appeal  to  the  extent  that  it  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  by  a  different
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted back  to  the  First
tier Tribunal for a re-hearing de novo.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                              Date 12 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


