
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/10270/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2 August 2016                           |On 8 August 2016               |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                    H B O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Cooray, JCWI
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fenoughty ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 30 March 2016,  in
    which the FTTJ dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.


 2. An anonymity direction was not made in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but,
    given that the appellant will be removed to Iraq  as  a  failed  asylum
    seeker, I make such a direction now.



Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq.  The respondent refused his  asylum
    claim on 3 July 2015. He appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  but  his
    appeal was dismissed.  The appellant claimed his  father  was  a  high-
    ranking member of the Ba'ath party, that threats had been made and that
    he and his family were at risk. The FTTJ found the Tribunal "could  not
    place significant weight on his evidence" [67].   The  FTTJ  found  the
    appellant was not at risk on return, taking the guidance in AA (Article
    15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544  (IAC)  into  account.   The  FTTJ  also
    dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds (Articles 3 and 8).

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal and this was granted  in  the
    following terms:

           "..


           2. The grounds seeking  permission  claim  that  the  judge  had
           failed to consider and apply properly to the appellant's case AA
           (Article 15(c) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC)  as  the  appellant
           had no CSID and thus it would not be possible for him to  reside
           in Baghdad, obtain a CSID or travel to the IKR either by land at
           all, or absent a CSID, by air.


           3. Notwithstanding the comprehensive decision by  the  judge,  I
           find that the grounds disclose that decision appears not  to  be
           consistent with the approach in AA on such matters and thus  may
           be vitiated by a material arguable error of law."


 5. Hence the matter comes before me.


Submissions

 6. Mr Cooray, for the appellant, relied on the reasons for appeal to  this
    tribunal which I summarise as follows:


        a. The FTTJ had accepted the appellant did not have a CSID; AA [11]
           indicated that there was a risk of destitution, amounting  to  a
           breach of Article 3, without a CSID.
        b. There was no evidence the appellant would be able to provide the
           required information to obtain a CSID from the authorities;  nor
           was there evidence that records were maintained for persons from
           Kirkuk (the appellant's home area);
        c. The evidence  did  not  demonstrate  there  was  any  office  in
           Baghdad, or any safe part of Iraq, to which he could apply for a
           CSID.
        d. The appellant could not be expected to reside in Baghdad without
           a CSID.
        e. The FTTJ had assumed the appellant could travel from Baghdad  to
           the IKR; yet land travel was not possible according to AA:  this
           would entail crossing contested areas.
        f. Whilst it was accepted there were flights from Baghdad to Erbil,
           the appellant had no documentation to enable him to board such a
           flight.

 7. Mr Kotas, for the Secretary of State, noted there was no  dispute  that
    the appellant's return was feasible.  The appellant had overstated  the
    importance of having a CSID when family support was available  (as  the
    FTTJ had found).  The lack of a CSID was not "the be all and end  all".
    He referred to paragraph 71 to the effect that there  was  no  evidence
    before the FTTJ as to whether the appellant could remember  the  volume
    and page number of the relevant book for establishing his identity. The
    appellant's grounds of appeal to this tribunal  overlooked  the  FTTJ's
    findings on credibility which were relevant to an  assessment  pursuant
    to Article 15(c). The FTTJ described the appellant's evidence that  his
    mother and uncle had remained in the most dangerous areas  of  Iraq  as
    "inconsistent"; the tribunal "did not accept his assertions that either
    they or he would be put at risk if he made contact with them,  or  that
    they would be unwilling to assist him because of  risk  to  themselves"
    [74].  Mr Kotas relied on paragraph 12 of the  AA  headnote.  He  noted
    that internal relocation was addressed by the FTTJ in the  alternative:
    if it were not safe  in  Baghdad,  he  could  travel  to  the  IKR;  no
    particular documents were required for that. He was a Kurd and would be
    issued a visit visa which was renewable.


 8. In reply, Mr Cooray accepted that AA contemplated both the availability
    of a CSID and the existence of family support. His  primary  submission
    was that the  appellant,  being  from  Kirkuk,  would  have  particular
    difficulties getting a CSID even if he had knowledge of  the  reference
    books and even if he had family support.  That said, he accepted  there
    had been no evidence before the FTTJ on this issue.  Whilst  there  was
    no challenge to the findings of fact on that score Mr Cooray  submitted
    the FTTJ had failed to address fully  whether  that  support  could  be
    accessed by the appellant. The evidence was that the family had been in
    Kirkuk and had moved to Mosul; the appellant's account was  disbelieved
    but the FTTJ had made no specific finding as to  the  location  of  the
    family now; the  possibility  of  support  from  the  family  was  only
    realistic if the family was not in the  Kurdish  region.   He  accepted
    that if the appellant were removed to Baghdad and his  family  were  in
    the Baghdad administered areas, that would be  the  end  of  the  case.
    However, if the family was in the Kurdish  region,  there  should  have
    been consideration of whether it was  feasible  for  the  appellant  to
    travel there.  It was accepted it was difficult for  the  appellant  to
    counter the submission of the respondent on the issue of air travel  to
    the IKR because there had been no evidence before the FTTJ  to  suggest
    an ID document was required for the flight. He also accepted there  was
    no reference in AA to such a document being needed for  travel  to  the
    IKR and that no such evidence had been provided to the FTTJ.


Discussion

 9. The appellant does not challenge the  feasibility  of  the  appellant's
    return or that he would be returned to  Baghdad.  The  headnote  to  AA
    summarises: "The Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P)  in
    the United Kingdom to enter Iraq only  if  P  is  in  possession  of  a
    current or expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a laissez  passer".
    It is stated at paragraph 6 of the headnote  that  "no  Iraqi  national
    will be returnable to Baghdad if not in  possession  of  one  of  these
    documents". The appellant does not have an expired passport.  He  would
    therefore be returned on an emergency travel document.

10. Paragraph 11 of the headnote to AA states:

            "11. Where P's return to Iraq is found by  the  Tribunal  to  be
         feasible, it will generally be necessary to decide whether P has  a
         CSID, or will be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after  arrival
         in Iraq. A CSID is generally required in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to
         access  financial  assistance  from  the  authorities;  employment;
         education; housing; and medical treatment.  If P shows there are no
         family or other members likely to  be  able  to  provide  means  of
         support, P is in general likely to face a real risk of destitution,
         amounting to serious harm, if, by the time any funds provided to  P
         by the Secretary of State or her agents to assist P's  return  have
         been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still  have  no
         CSID."

11. Irrespective of the FTTJ's finding with regard to the  availability  of
    family support, the lack of a CSID in the short term after his  arrival
    would not lead to serious harm because the appellant would  have  funds
    made available by the respondent or her agents in that period. This  is
    irrespective of the appellant's ability to obtain one  and  to  "access
    the full range of state support, and it  accepted  that  there  may  be
    difficulties  in  obtaining  identity  documentation  because  of   the
    violence in his home area, and the uncertainty surrounding the procures
    for establishing his identity, although there were a number  of  routes
    available, without personally returning to the area." [75].   The  FTTJ
    finds at paragraph 74 that the appellant would be returned  to  Baghdad
    but, as a Kurd, could  gain  temporary  admission,  without  needing  a
    sponsor, to the IKR.  This aspect of the decision is not challenged. It
    is also accepted by  the  appellant,  before  me,  that  there  was  no
    evidence or background material before the FTTJ  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant's lack of a CSID would prevent him from taking a flight  from
    Baghdad to Erbil.

12. Thus, even in the absence of a specific finding as to the  location  of
    the appellant's family and  their  practical  ability  to  support  the
    appellant, there can be no material  error  of  law  because  FTTJ  had
    found, following the guidance in AA, the appellant did not need  either
    a CSID or family support in the short term. Both Mr Cooray and Mr Kotas
    agreed that AA does not rule out travel to the IKR from Baghdad by  air
    on an emergency travel document. Both were also  in  agreement  that  a
    visit visa could be obtained without difficulty and that stay could  be
    extended if the applicant obtained employment. The FTTJ made a  finding
    that the appellant would be able to work there  [74].   The  FTTJ  also
    found the appellant would have the benefit of family support if he were
    in the IKR [74].  Mr Cooray accepted there was no evidence  before  the
    FTTJ to suggest that the lack of a CSID would  hamper  the  appellant's
    ability to take a flight from Baghdad to Erbil.  For these  reasons,  I
    am  satisfied  the  FTTJ  made  a  fact-sensitive  assessment  of   the
    reasonableness of relocation to the IKR as required by paragraph 171 of
    AA.


13. For these  reasons,  the  FTTJ  took  into  account  appropriately  the
    guidance in AA and made findings which are sustainable on the  evidence
    available at the date of hearing. There is no material error of law  in
    the FTTJ's findings.


Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve a
    material error of law.


15. The decision of the FTTJ is upheld.


Signed           A M Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black                                   Date
    8 August 2016









Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Fee Award

The decision of the FTTJ not to make a fee award is also upheld.


Signed           A M Black

Deputy       Upper       Tribunal       Judge        A        M        Black
    Date 8 August 2016
