
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/10252/2012
                                                               AA/10253/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 8th January 2014                             |On 17th January 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 ASIYA SAFI
                                 MARYAM SAFI
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Wilding, Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. There is a history to this appeal.   The  Appellants  are  sisters  and
    citizens of Afghanistan. They applied for asylum on  1st  October  2012
    and 14th September 2012 respectively.

 2. Their claim is that they were brought up in Pakistan where their father
    ran an NGO working on development.  They  returned  to  Afghanistan  in
    2010 and their father was abducted.  They attended a family wedding  in
    2011 in Afghanistan at which there was an accidental shooting incident.
    The bridegroom was killed and their uncle was accused of murder because
    of a land dispute.  A local jirga settled the matter  by  offering  the
    Appellants in marriage to the bridegroom's  brothers.   The  Appellants
    did not want to marry them and they returned  to  Pakistan  where  they
    lived with their mother and in hiding until an agent  arranged  student
    visas to enable them to come to the UK.

 3. The Secretary of State did not accept that the Appellants had told  the
    truth about the events which  led  to  their  coming  to  the  UK.  The
    Appellants appealed to a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, D  J  Baker.
    On 13th December 2012 Judge Baker heard evidence  from  the  Appellants
    and agreed with the Secretary of State that they lacked credibility and
    on 20th December 2012 dismissed the appeal.

 4. On 5th January 2013, the Appellants  appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against Judge Baker's decision.  Permission to  appeal  was  originally
    refused  by  Designated  Judge  Garratt  on  21st  January   2013   but
    subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy on 13th  February
    2013.

 5. The matter then came before Deputy Judge of the Upper  Tribunal  Parkes
    on 18th March 2013 and he found no error of law in the decision.

 6. The Appellants appealed to the Court of Appeal and  on  16th  May  2013
    Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  granted  permission  finding  two  arguable
    errors in the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge's determination.

 7. On 22nd October 2013 the Court  of  Appeal,  by  consent,  allowed  the
    appeal to the extent  of  remitting  it  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  (the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber) for reconsideration.

 8. At the commencement of the hearing there was some discussion with  both
    representatives as to the nature of  the  hearing  today.   It  was  Ms
    Isherwood's contention that the terms of the Court of Appeal order were
    that the decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes'  determination
    should no longer stand and the issue today  was  whether  the  original
    judge, Judge Baker, had erred in law.  Ms Wilding had prepared the case
    on the basis that there would  be  a  full  rehearing  of  the  appeal.
    However, after consideration, she was content to agree that only  if an
    error of law was established would the decision need to be remade.



Submissions

 9. Ms Wilding relied on her original grounds and submitted that the  judge
    had erred in  her  consideration  of  the  stamps  in  the  Appellants'
    passport.  It is the Appellants' case  that  there  were  a  number  of
    stamps in the Appellants' passports which had been put there  in  order
    to fabricate an immigration history, to enable them  to  obtain  visas.
    The judge said that it was not clear why there would need to be several
    false stamps and that it was not impossible for a person  to  make  the
    journeys recorded on the passport.  It was difficult  to  see  why  the
    agent would have obtained passports for them in their  true  identities
    and then falsified stamps.  In particular, the entry to Pakistan  dated
    28th September 2011 was inconsistent  with  their  account  of  leaving
    Afghanistan after the wedding incident in June.

10. It is the Appellant's case  that  the  stamps  are  demonstrably  false
    because on the basis of the passport stamps both Appellants would  have
    been in Pakistan on 18th January 2012, whereas on that date  they  were
    in fact being fingerprinted in  the  British  Consulate  in  Islamabad,
    Pakistan.  The passport stamps could not possibly represent an accurate
    record of their movements.  Their explanation for the  stamps  is  that
    the visit visas in the passport stipulate a maximum stay of  one  month
    on any one visit to Pakistan and the agent obtained them to ensure that
    their presence there remained lawful.

11. Ms Wilding submitted that the false stamps  supported  the  Appellants'
    case that they were under the control of an agent who had been employed
    to facilitate their entry to the  UK  because  they  were  in  need  of
    international protection.

12. She also submitted that the judge had acted irrationally  in  rejecting
    the Appellants' claim that their paternal grandfather had insisted that
    the sister's return to Kabul because the girls were living  with  their
    mother and without a male head of household, since it was unlikely that
    their grandfather would expect them to move to Afghanistan where  their
    father had been kidnapped. Ms Wilding argued  that,  since  the  kidnap
    took place some 300 miles away from Kabul, it was not at all incredible
    that the grandfather would require the family to  come  and  live  with
    him.  The basis of the concept of internal relocation was that even  if
    one area of the country was unsafe, another area is  not  automatically
    so.  The  judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant's   grandfather   must
    necessarily have made a decision that  the  whole  of  Afghanistan  was
    unsafe for them was perverse.

13. She accepted that, although it had  originally  been  argued  that  the
    judge had not applied the correct standard  of  proof,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge McGeachy, in granting permission, had said that this  ground  was
    not made out.  However, she sought to rely on  two  remaining  grounds,
    namely that the judge  had  improperly  relied  on  assumptions  as  to
    plausibility and  had  made  a  material  error  with  respect  to  the
    challenge to the interpreters at the asylum interview.

14. Ms Wilding  submitted  that  the  judge  had  accepted  that  women  in
    Afghanistan were subject to certain cultural constraints but had  erred
    in finding the Appellants' evidence not credible in relation  to  their
    lack of knowledge of their father's disappearance.  The judge had  said
    that it was reasonable to expect  that  they  would  have  asked  their
    mother who would have in turn asked a male relative to take  some  kind
    of action, whilst failing to acknowledge that their mother  would  have
    been subject to the same cultural constraints.

15. Finally, the judge rejected the Appellants' account of difficulties  at
    the interview to explain various inconsistencies in the evidence.   The
    judge said that it was unlikely that  there  would  have  been  serious
    problems with two different interpreters.  Ms Wilding submitted that in
    Maryam's interview the interpreter had left without giving  any  reason
    which  supported  her  case  that  she   had   had   to   correct   his
    interpretation. A complaint  had  been  made  about  Asiya's  interview
    promptly after it  had  taken  place.   The  general  proposition  that
    interpretation  problems  would  be  unusual  was  not  borne  out   in
    particular by a research paper by Bogner et  al  showing  that  a  high
    percentage  of  asylum  seekers  anonymously  questioned  about   their
    interviews had experienced problems from a broad number of countries.

16. The errors individually and  cumulatively  rendered  the  determination
    unsafe.

17. Ms  Isherwood  submitted  that  there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the
    determination which contained a proper analysis of all of the  relevant
    evidence. The judge was entitled to  find  the  Appellants  not  to  be
    credible and to dismiss the appeal.

Findings and Conclusions

18. I agree that the judge may have erred in her comment on the  stamps  in
    the passport since at least one  of  those  stamps  is  demonstratively
    false, it being accepted by the Respondent that the Appellants were  in
    Pakistan on at least one occasion when according to the stamps  in  the
    passport they were in Afghanistan.  However, the fact  that  the  judge
    may have been mistaken in respect of her broad conclusion (that it  had
    not been shown that  the  stamps  were  false),  does  not  render  the
    determination unsafe. The judge did not dismiss the appeal on the basis
    that the entry to the Pakistan in September 2011 was inconsistent  with
    their account of having left Afghanistan in June but gave a  number  of
    other wholly sustainable  reasons  for  her  conclusions.   Indeed,  Ms
    Wilding accepted that the fact that the Appellants had false stamps  in
    their passport was a neutral factor rather than one  which  established
    the truth of their claim.

19. Neither do I accept that it was irrational for the judge to reject  the
    evidence that the grandfather required the girls to move to Afghanistan
    where there father had  been  kidnapped.   It  seems  that  there  were
    maternal male relatives in Pakistan -  there is reference to a maternal
    grandfather being in Peshawar.  It was not irrational for the judge  to
    state,  in  the  circumstances,  that  the  claim  that  the   paternal
    grandfather expected them to move  to  Afghanistan  was  not  credible,
    particularly since she was not shown any objective evidence to  support
    the claim that they would be expected to go to paternal male  relatives
    rather  than  maternal  male  relatives.  This  is  not  a  finding  in
    contradiction to the general principles of refugee law, but  simply  an
    assessment by the judge of the individual facts of the case.

20. Neither has it been established that the  judge's  adverse  credibility
    findings are simply assumptions as to plausibility.   The  judge  noted
    that the Appellants were both well educated, presented  as  very  self-
    assured and indeed Maryam claimed to have done some work with  an  NGO.
    Although the judge acknowledged  the  consistency  of  the  Appellants'
    evidence, both internally and with the objective evidence, it was  open
    to her to hold it against them that their lack  of  detailed  knowledge
    was  indicative  of  a  lack  of  truthfulness  in  the  account.   She
    acknowledged the cultural restrictions for females, which she  properly
    took into account in weighing up the evidence, but  was  entitled,  for
    these particular educated and articulate women, to find that their lack
    of knowledge was a convenient excuse in a false asylum claim.

21. Finally, with respect to the interpreters, again the judge was entitled
    to conclude that the alleged problems were a means  of  explaining  the
    inconsistencies in the evidence of the two  sisters.   Both  Appellants
    signed the interview record and stated that they were content with  it.
    Neither raised an interpreter problem at the time.  The fact  that  the
    interpreter left during Maryam's interview is likely to be a reflection
    of her proficiency in English rather than for any  other  reason.   The
    judge did not assume that interpreter problems did not  occur  but  the
    conclusion that it was unlikely that there were serious  problems  with
    two different interpreters, in the context of her findings as a  whole,
    is unassailable.

22. Overall, this is a very thoughtful and  well-considered  determination.
    Neither the grounds nor the submissions establish any legal error.

Decision

23. The original decision stands.  The Appellants' appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

