
IAC-AH-CO-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10821/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 February 2015                            |On 20 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                 Bq (tURKEY)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against a decision by the Secretary
    of State to refuse to recognise her  as  a  refugee,  or  as  otherwise
    requiring international or human  rights  protection.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal made an anonymity direction, and I consider it is  appropriate
    the appellant is accorded anonymity for these proceedings in the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national  of  Turkey,  whose  date  of  birth  is  8
    November 1986.  She applied for a type C family multivisit visa  on  20
    September 2012 which was granted until 5 April 2013.  She then  applied
    for another visa of the same type on 12 April 2013, which  was  granted
    until 22 October 2013.  She last arrived in the United Kingdom on 2 May
    2013.  She is recorded as having claimed asylum on 3 October 2013.  She
    was given a screening interview on that day, and a  substantive  asylum
    interview on 1 November 2013.

 3. As summarised in the subsequent refusal decision, the case was that she
    had studied at university in Turkey for three years, before gaining her
    diploma in 2009.  In order to improve her career prospects she  decided
    to apply for a student visa in order to learn English in the  UK.   Her
    father agreed to  this  plan,  and  provided  her  with  the  necessary
    financial support.  She arrived in the UK on a student visa in May 2010
    and studied for six months.  She met  her  future  husband,  Jonny,  in
    August  2010  in  a  night  club  and  quickly  became  involved  in  a
    relationship with him.  She fell pregnant by him, but decided to have a
    termination in July 2011 because she felt she was unable to  return  to
    Turkey as a pregnant unmarried woman.  At this stage, she told  no  one
    about her relationship other than her  sister.   Jonny  struggled  with
    drug addiction and was violent towards her throughout the  duration  of
    their relationship.  She reported Jonny to the police in  the  UK,  but
    did not pursue the proceedings because she loved him and did  not  want
    to give up on  the  relationship.   Eventually  her  family  in  Turkey
    discovered their engagement through Facebook.  They did not approve  of
    her relationship to Jonny due to the way he treated her and also due to
    the fact that he was not Turkish or Muslim.

 4. In January 2012 the appellant told her father  that  if  he  would  not
    allow her to marry Jonny, she would  kill  herself.   Her  father  then
    threatened that he would kill her first, and chased her  with  an  axe.
    Following this incident she fled to her aunt's home  nearby.   She  did
    not report her father to the Turkish police because she did not want to
    aggravate him any further.  She had married Jonny in  Turkey  in  March
    2012, and they had lived together in  Turkey  as  man  and  wife  until
    Christmas 2012.

 5. While the appellant was in the UK with entry clearance  as  a  visitor,
    her husband had ended their relationship.  This was in June  2013  when
    he admitted he had been having an affair.  She thought this might be  a
    passing phase due to his drug addiction, but he threw her  out  of  the
    home that they were sharing  together.   On  16  August  2013  he  then
    contacted members of his family on Facebook and accused her  of  having
    sexual  relationships  with  other  men  during  the  course  of  their
    relationship.  He also stated that she was living with a different  man
    out of wedlock; that she had had an abortion; and that she used ecstasy
    and cocaine.

 6. In Turkish culture it was not right to live with a man under  the  same
    roof and her father considered that his honour had been damaged by  her
    actions.  She feared returning to Turkey because she  was  afraid  that
    her father would kill her.

 7. On 22 November 2013  the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her  reasons  for
    refusing to recognise the appellant as a refugee.  In  support  of  her
    asylum claim she had submitted screen shots  of  Facebook  messages  in
    Turkish with translations.  The Secretary of State went on to  identify
    a number of alleged inconsistencies and discrepancies in  her  evidence
    which she said undermined the credibility of her core claim: it was not
    accepted she had received threats from her  family  in  the  manner  in
    which she claimed.

 8. On the issue of risk on return, it was noted that by her own  admission
    both she and her sister had been able to stay away from home alone  for
    prolonged periods of time (whilst at university and studying in the UK)
    which suggested that her  family  did  not  monitor  and  restrict  her
    movements in the manner and to the degree in which she claimed.  So her
    account  was  inconsistent  with  background  information  as  it   was
    considered she had  failed  to  demonstrate  that  her  family  were  a
    conservative family.  It was also noted that Bursa (her home area)  was
    located  in  northwest  Turkey,  whereas  the  background   information
    indicated that those most likely to be at risk of honour  killing  were
    from families in the southeast of the country.   She  had  related  her
    claimed fear specifically to her father and  therefore  to  a  confined
    area of Turkey.  It was considered that  a  sufficiency  of  protection
    would be available to her upon return to Turkey from  her  father,  who
    was a non-state actor.  As a female in Turkey there were  a  number  of
    avenues available to  her,  provided  by  both  governmental  and  non-
    governmental organisations.  It was noted she claimed  her  father  had
    connections in the police force, and  therefore  he  could  locate  her
    anywhere in Turkey.  But she had failed to provide evidence in  support
    of this element of the claim.  She was an educated young woman who  had
    attended  university  in  Turkey.   Whist  studying   she   stayed   in
    accommodation provided by the university,  and  she  supported  herself
    financially by taking up part-time jobs.  After leaving university  she
    worked for one year as a car designer.  It was also noted she had  been
    supported by her uncle's son's wife in obtaining  documentary  evidence
    in support of her asylum claim.  It was therefore  considered  she  had
    support of some of her family, and that her family as a whole  was  not
    against her.  It was also noted that her younger sister was studying at
    university and living away from her parents  in  a  student  hostel  in
    Denizili city which further demonstrated it was possible  for  educated
    young women to support themselves and live alone away from their family
    in Turkey.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Ghaffar sitting in the  First-
    tier Tribunal in Birmingham on 20 March 2014.  Miss Norman  of  Counsel
    appeared on behalf  of  the  appellant,  and  Miss  Owen,  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, appeared on behalf of the  respondent.   The  judge
    received oral evidence from the appellant, which the judge  extensively
    rehearsed in his subsequent decision.

10. In her closing submissions on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  Miss  Owen
    relied on the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  and  submitted  that  the
    appellant's father and wider family had accepted the marriage and  were
    present at the  wedding.   The  first  e-mail  at  H1  and  H2  of  the
    respondent's bundle had not been seen by the father, and as a result no
    weight should be given to it as it had not been seen and had not caused
    any problems.  The second email was sent in August 2013.   Even  if  it
    was accepted that it was sent, there was  nothing  untoward  about  it.
    The appellant could return  to  Turkey.   There  was  nothing  to  take
    revenge for.  The father was supportive in that he funded  her  studies
    in Turkey in the UK.  He agreed to the marriage that he  was  not  keen
    on.  He wanted his daughter to be safe.  As far as the  injunction  was
    concerned, it related to the mother.  In any event the court action  by
    the mother showed that there were avenues in Turkey that  could  assist
    the appellant.  The father had breached the injunction obtained by  the
    mother, but no complaint had been made.  The appellant would be able to
    relocate, as the father worked in a private local bus company.

11. In reply, Miss Norman submitted that the father was a violent man.  She
    accepted that the father had not got to hear the very explicit messages
    that had been sent to  all  the  other  family  members.   But  he  had
    received the message in August 2013  stating  that  the  appellant  was
    living in a house where there was  a  40  year  old  man.   The  expert
    evidence clearly showed that women can be tracked down in Turkey.

12. The judge's findings are set out at paragraphs 22  onwards.   He  found
    that the appellant was not credible in relation to the reaction of  her
    family, which was the core of her  account.   He  noted  that  she  was
    allowed by father to travel to the UK to study.  She was able  to  have
    the freedom to go to night clubs and meet boys and there was no control
    of her behaviour whatsoever.   Throughout,  her  father  supported  her
    financially.  The family might not have been keen about  the  appellant
    marrying someone who was not a Muslim.  However the marriage took place
    with their blessing.

13. He did not accept her evidence that her family disowned her because she
    returned to the UK with her husband.  There was supporting evidence  of
    the appellant being a victim of domestic violence in  her  marriage  to
    Jonny, and he found that he assaulted her and abused her and  that  she
    remained loyal to him because she continued to love  him  despite  this
    mistreatment.   Her  family  may  well  have  been  worried  about  the
    appellant leaving Turkey with her husband who  they  knew  was  violent
    towards her.  This was out of concern for her safety,  and  accordingly
    he did not accept that they made a threat to kill her if  she  returned
    to Turkey.  The judge continued in paragraph 24:

         I  find  the  appellant's  account  of  her  family  to  be  wholly
         inconsistent.  On the one hand they attended  the  wedding  on  the
         other they did not approve of it; on the one hand they were worried
         for her safety, and on the other they threatened to  kill  her;  on
         the one hand they were extremely  strict  and  would  not  let  her
         anywhere near [Jonny] prior to marriage and on the other  they  let
         her travel within him to  the  UK  for  Valentine's  Day.   I  find
         therefore that the appellant was never threatened by her family who
         had looked out for her but attended her wedding and let her marry a
         man of her choice who was outside their culture and religion.

14. At paragraph 25 he did not  accept  that  the  appellant's  father  had
    chased her with an axe.  He found that if  her  father  was  intent  on
    harming her, he would have done so.  At paragraph 26 he found that  the
    appellant's family remained concerned about her and would be willing to
    offer any assistance.  He found that the appellant  had  been  able  to
    organise "a gambit of letters" from Turkey from  various  relatives  to
    support her claim to remain in the UK.  But  it  was  not  because  the
    appellant faced harm upon return.

15. At paragraph 29 the judge said the appellant presented as  being  about
    five to six months' pregnant.  There was no evidence before him  as  to
    the identity of the father of her unborn child, and he was not going to
    speculate on this matter.  The appellant's family were supportive,  and
    that they would support her if she was returned to  Turkey.   He  found
    that she had neither a well-founded nor a genuine fear  of  persecution
    on return to Turkey.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

16.  Miss  Norman  of  Counsel  settled  the  appellant's  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   She  submitted  that  the
    judge's decision was confused, did not clearly reflect  the  course  of
    the proceedings, and came to conclusions which were  not  supported  by
    the evidence and which were based on speculation.

Initial Refusal of Permission

17. On 1 May 2014 Judge Page refused permission to appeal for the following
    reasons:

         It is always possible to re-argue the factual conclusions to  argue
         that different conclusions on the fact should have been reached  by
         the judge.  No error of law is identified in these various examples
         where different conclusions could have been reached by  the  judge.
         I have read the determination and it was not apparent anywhere that
         the conclusions reached by the  judge  are  not  supported  by  the
         evidence and [are] based on speculation.   The  judge  has  clearly
         recorded all of the pertinent evidence going to the central  issues
         in the appeal and made clear findings at paragraphs 22 - 30 of  the
         determination.  Both in parts and in whole the conclusions  reached
         were open to the judge on the evidence before the Tribunal.   There
         was no error of law in the determination.

The Eventual Grant of Permission to Appeal

18. On a  renewed  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Allen granted permission to appeal on 16
    July 2014 for the following reasons:

         It is arguable that the matters raised in  the  grounds  go  beyond
         disagreement and identify material flaws in the  judge's  reasoning
         and, as a consequence, his conclusions.

The Rule 24 Response

19. On 6 August 2014 John Parkinson of Specialist Appeals Team settled  the
    Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.  In summary,  the  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal had directed himself appropriately.  The judge  did
    not accept core elements of the appellant's claim and gave good reasons
    for doing so.  It was not for the judge to speculate as to what  emails
    the appellant's father might or might not be able to discover.  It  was
    open to the judge to conclude that  the  appellant's  father  had  been
    prepared to fund his daughter to attend college in the  UK,  a  country
    materially different from Turkey, where she would  be  able  to  access
    night clubs and the like at will.  These were  not  the  actions  of  a
    father who would have sought to kill his daughter on  return.   In  the
    alternative there was no adequate evidence that the appellant could not
    return to Turkey and live elsewhere without informing her family.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

20. Shortly before  the  scheduled  hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the
    appellant's solicitors informed the Tribunal in writing that they  were
    without instructions and so would not be  attending  the  hearing.   Mr
    Avery submitted that the appeal should be  dismissed  for  the  reasons
    given in the Rule 24 response.

Discussion

21. As stated in the Rule 24 response, there was an inherent  contradiction
    in the appellant's case. It was clearly open to the judge to disbelieve
    the appellant's claim that  her  father  was  the  type  of  person  to
    threaten or carry out an honour killing, when on the  undisputed  facts
    he had enabled her to enjoy complete freedom of action in the  UK;  and
    he had also allowed her to marry the man of her choice, albeit that  he
    disapproved of her choice.

22. The first criticism is that the determination  is  confused.   But  the
    judge's line of reasoning is clear and coherent.  The second  criticism
    is that the determination does not clearly reflect the  course  of  the
    proceedings.  It is not clear what Miss Norman is driving  at  by  this
    criticism.  The judge set out in considerable  detail  the  appellant's
    evidence, and the closing submissions made by both parties.

23. The third criticism is that the judge comes to  conclusions  which  are
    not supported by the evidence and are based on speculation.  I consider
    this is merely an elaborate way of saying that the appellant  disagrees
    with the judge's findings of fact.  The judge's findings  of  fact  are
    not based on speculation, but upon a combination of  those  aspects  of
    the appellant's evidence which he accepted and  those  aspects  of  the
    evidence which he rejected.  Thus, for  example,  it  was  an  entirely
    legitimate inference for the judge to draw that any concerns  expressed
    by the family about the appellant's  maintenance  of  her  relationship
    with Jonny was out of concern for her  welfare,  and  not  because  her
    association with Johnny dishonoured the family.

24. A further criticism in the grounds of appeal is that the  judge  failed
    to engage with the appellant's account that her parents were opposed to
    the wedding, but eventually agreed to attend the  wedding  because  she
    threatened to commit suicide if they did not.  The judge was not  bound
    to address every single facet of  the  evidence,  and  this  particular
    piece of evidence did not change the landscape.  Even if it  was  true,
    the fact remained that her father  had  eventually  given  way  to  the
    appellant's feelings and wishes, despite his better judgment.  This  is
    wholly inconsistent with her portrayal of her father as  a  controlling
    person who expected and commanded complete  obedience  from  his  adult
    daughter.

25. Finally, at  paragraph  9  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  the  judge  is
    criticised for not making a finding  on  the  issue  of  the  appellant
    returning as a single woman to Turkey with a child in utero.   This  is
    an entirely misconceived criticism, as  the  judge  squarely  addresses
    this question.  The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  would  not  be
    returning to Turkey as a lone woman, but would be able  to  access  the
    support of her family there.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 20 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
