
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10128/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 July 2016                              |On 7 December 2016            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between
                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     F A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Bundock, of counsel, instructed by Wilsons
Solicitors LLP



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/269) we make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
      or any form of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
      identify the original Appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
      others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction  could
      give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  We  make  the  anonymity
      order to prevent serious harm  arising  from  the  substance  of  the
      protection and Article 8 ECHR appeal.

   2. For the purposes of this decision we refer to FA as the appellant and
      to the  Secretary  of  State  as  the  respondent,  reflecting  their
      positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

   3. This is a re-making  of  FA's  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights
      grounds. In our decision promulgated on 2 September 2016 we found  an
      error of law in both of those aspects of the decision of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal and set it aside. The error of law decision is attached
      as an appendix. In addition to setting out the reasons for finding an
      error of law, it directed the parties to provide any further  written
      submissions they wished to rely on in the re-making  of  the  appeal.
      The appellant provided written submissions dated 30  September  2016.
      The respondent did not provide anything further.

   4. The central facts of this case are not in dispute. The  appellant  is
      from India and from a Muslim family. She is lesbian. After coming  to
      the UK in 2011 to study she met PT, a national of Singapore and  they
      began  a  relationship.  They  married  on  5  November  2014.   Both
      experienced significant hostility  from  their  families  because  of
      their sexuality and their relationship. FA's family made threats  and
      registered a police report against  her.  This  led  to  FA  claiming
      asylum because of a fear of significant mistreatment  by  her  family
      and the societal hostility she feared if she returned  to  India.  PT
      was  her  dependent  in  that  claim.  Neither  India  nor  Singapore
      recognises same-sex marriage or civil  partnership.  Neither  country
      provides for a same-sex partner to join a partner or  spouse  on  the
      basis of the relationship, either temporarily or permanently.

   Asylum and Internal Relocation

   5. The First-tier  Tribunal  decision  that  the  appellant  would  face
      persecution because of  her  sexuality  in  her  home  area  was  not
      challenged by the respondent. In our error of law decision,  however,
      we accepted that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in the internal
      relocation assessment. We must therefore re-make  the  assessment  of
      whether it would be unduly harsh for FA to relocate to  another  part
      of India in order to avoid persecution.

      The Law

   6. When making our assessment on internal relocation, we  bore  in  mind
      that the test of undue hardship is  a  demanding  one,  going  beyond
      "difficult". The House of Lords in Januzi v SSHD  [2006]  UKHL  5  at
      [67] stated that "It is necessary to stress the  rigorous  nature  of
      the test for unreasonableness or undue harshness". That threshold was
      approved at [41] of SSHD v AH (Sudan)  and  others  [2007]  UKHL  49,
      elaborated on at [42], thus:

           "... the Refugee Convention, as I have  sought  to  explain,  is
           really intended only to protect those threatened  with  specific
           forms of persecution. It is not a general humanitarian  measure.
           For these respondents, persecution is no longer  a  risk.  Given
           that they can now safely be returned home, only proof that their
           lives on return would be quite simply intolerable compared  even
           to the problems and deprivations of  so  many  of  their  fellow
           countrymen would entitle  them  to  refugee  status.  Compassion
           alone cannot justify the grant of asylum."

   7. As we indicated in  our  error  of  law  decision,  in  the  internal
      relocation assessment, the  standard  of  comparison  when  assessing
      whether internal relocation is available is not with  the  life  that
      the claimant is living here. As was held in Januzi v SSHD [2006] UKHL
      5 at paragraph 46:

           "... At this stage, if the possibility of internal relocation is
           raised, the relevant comparisons are between those in the  place
           of relocation and those that prevail elsewhere in the country of
           his nationality. As the Court of Appeal said in E and another v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] QB 531,  para
           67, the comparison between the asylum-seeker's situation in this
           country and what it will be in the place of  relocation  is  not
           relevant for this purpose, though it may be very  relevant  when
           considering the impact  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
           Rights or the requirements of humanity."

   8. That approach was maintained in the case of SSHD  v  AH  (Sudan)  and
      others [2007] UKHL 49 at paragraph 27 which states that "We know that
      the standard of comparison is  not  the  lives  which  the  returning
      claimants are living here: that is what Januzi was all about."

   9. We also referred to the country  guidance  cases  which  specifically
      address the situation for  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual  and  transgender
      (LGBT) individuals in India. The head note of  the  country  guidance
      case of AR and NH (lesbians) India CG [2016] UKUT  00066  (IAC)  ('AR
      and NH') sets out as follows:


         "(1)     The guidance in MD  (same-sex  oriented  males)  India  CG
             [2014] UKUT 65 (IAC) stands.  The guidance at (a) - (f) in  MD
             (India) applies equally to lesbians. A risk of persecution  or
             serious harm for a lesbian woman in India,  where  it  exists,
             arises from her family members, and the extent of  such  risk,
             and whether it extends beyond the home area, is a question  of
             fact in each case.


          3) The  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  is  higher  for
             uneducated lower class  lesbian  women  in  rural  areas,  who
             remain under the control of their family members and  may  not
             be permitted to leave  the  home  to  continue  meeting  their
             lesbian partners.


          4)  Where  family  members  are  hostile  to  a  lesbian  woman's
             sexuality,  they  may  reject  her  completely  and  sometimes
             formally renounce her as a member of that family.  In  such  a
             case, whether relocation to a city is unduly harsh will  be  a
             question of fact, depending on the ability of such  a  lesbian
             woman to survive economically away from her family and  social
             networks.


          5) If a lesbian woman's family wishes to pursue and harm  her  in
             the place of internal relocation, their ability to do so  will
             depend on the reach of the family network, how persistent they
             are, and how influential.  The evidence indicates  that  there
             is  normally  sufficient  state  protection  for  women  whose
             families  seek  to  harm  them  in  their  place  of  internal
             relocation.


         (6)  In general, where there is a risk of  persecution  or  serious
             harm in  a  lesbian  woman's  home  area,  for  educated,  and
             therefore 'middle class' women, an internal relocation  option
             is available.  They are likely to be able to relocate  to  one
             of the major cities in India and are likely to be able to find
             employment and support themselves, albeit with difficulty, and
             to live together openly, should they  choose  to  do  so.   In
             general, such relocation will not be unduly harsh.

  10. The head note of the country guidance case of MD  (same-sex  oriented
      males; risk) India CG [2014] UKUT 65 (IAC), confirmed in AR  and  NH,
      states:


         "a.            Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code 1860
             criminalises same-sex sexual activity. On 2 July 2009 the
             Delhi High Court declared section 377 IPC to be in violation
             of the Indian Constitution insofar as it criminalises
             consensual sexual acts between adults in private. However, in
             a judgment of 11 December 2013, the Supreme Court held that
             section 377 IPC does not suffer from the vice of
             unconstitutionality and found the declaration of the Delhi
             High Court to be legally unsustainable.

         b.             Prosecutions for consensual sexual acts between
             males under section 377 IPC are, and have always been,
             extremely rare.

         c.             Some persons who are, or are perceived to be, same-
             sex oriented males suffer ill treatment, extortion, harassment
             and discrimination from the police and the general populace;
             however, the prevalence of such incidents is not such, even
             when taken cumulatively, that there can be said in general to
             be a real risk of an openly same-sex oriented male suffering
             treatment which is persecutory or which would otherwise reach
             the threshold required for protection under the Refugee
             Convention, Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive, or
             Article 3 ECHR.

         d.       Same-sex orientation is seen socially, and within the
             close familial context, as being unacceptable in India.
             Circumstances for same-sex oriented males are improving, but
             progress is slow.

         e.             It would not, in general, be unreasonable or unduly
             harsh for an open same-sex oriented male (or a person who is
             perceived to be such), who is able to demonstrate a real risk
             in his home area because of his particular circumstances, to
             relocate internally to a major city within India.

         f.              India has a large, robust and accessible LGBTI
             activist and support network, mainly to be found in the large
             cities. "

      Discussion and Findings


  11. The respondent's case is that because the appellant is from a middle-
      class family and is well educated, having obtained a Masters'  degree
      in the UK, she comes within [6] of AR and NH and is likely to be able
      to relocate to a major city, find employment and support herself.  If
      she relocated to a major city she would also be able to  access  some
      support from  the  "robust  and  accessible"  LGBTI  networks  there,
      identified at head note f. of MD.

  12. The appellant argues that particular aspects of her profile mean that
      she does not come with the general category set out  at  [6]  of  the
      head note of AR and NH and that it would be unduly harsh for  her  to
      be expected to relocate to another part of  India.  The  factors  put
      forward for the appellant are:

              - General levels of discrimination against  and  mistreatment
                of lesbians in India even though this  did  not  reach  the
                level of persecution

              - The appellant's past experience of threats  and  oppressive
                treatment from her family and her subjective fear of having
                to return to India arising from  that,  distinguishing  her
                from the appellants in AR and NH

              - The  psychological  and  emotional  consequences  of  being
                separated from PT

              - The appellant living alone on return, without practical and
                emotional support  from  any  family  member,  the  country
                evidence showing additional discrimination  towards  single
                women, distinguishing her from AR and NH who were returning
                together

  13. We did not accept  that  the  general  level  of  discrimination  and
      mistreatment of  lesbians  in  India  was  such  that  that  internal
      relocation would be unduly harsh for FA.  Such  a  finding  would  go
      against the country guidance set out above, there being no country or
      expert  evidence  before   us   capable   of   distinguishing   those
      conclusions. The provision criminalising same-sex  activity  has  not
      led to any prosecutions of lesbians and is not perceived as  applying
      to lesbians; see [64] and [76] of AR and NH. The principle  risk  was
      identified to  be  from  family  members  which  can  be  avoided  by
      relocation, particularly to a major city; see [69],  [71],  [72]  and
      [76] of AR and NH. The conclusion in that case and  MD  was  that  it
      would not, absent other factors, be unduly harsh for an openly gay or
      lesbian individual to relocate, applies here.

  14.  We accept that the appellant has the subjective fear of  return  she
      describes because of the past hostility  from  her  family.  She  has
      understandable concerns about how others will behave towards  her  on
      her  return  to  India  because  of  her  sexuality.  The   kind   of
      discrimination she will face was made very real  by  the  description
      given by FA and PT of their experiences at the Indian High Commission
      in London who were obstructive and, at  times,  hostile  towards  the
      couple.

  15. We do not question the inevitable distress of separation from PT  and
      having to live life as a  single  person  after  being  in  a  loving
      partnership for some years and the additional impact this  will  have
      on FA's ability to manage the difficulties of establishing herself in
      a new and discriminatory environment in India. The lack of  provision
      for PT to join the applicant as her spouse or  partner  under  Indian
      law, however, compares her circumstances in India to those in the UK,
      however, so falls outside the internal relocation assessment.

  16. We also gave careful consideration to the question of  the  appellant
      returning  to  India  alone  which  does  distinguish  her  from  the
      appellants in AR and NH who were returning as a couple and where  the
      respondent's County Information Guidance at 1.3.16 indicates that:

             "Relocation may be more difficult for a single  woman  who  no
             longer has the support of her family,  but  less  so  for  two
             women moving together."

  17. We do not wish to downplay the hardship the appellant will have in re-
      establishing herself as a single woman  even  in  one  of  the  major
      cities in India where life is relatively less difficult. We  did  not
      find, however, that even taken cumulatively and at their highest  the
      factors relied upon showed that her circumstances  met  the  test  of
      undue hardship. As above, the threshold to be met for such a  finding
      is a demanding one. She will have the benefit of the positive factors
      identified in the country guidance cases as  of  significance,  being
      from a middle-class family and having  a  high  level  of  education,
      capable, in our judgement, of counterbalancing the  negative  factors
      already identified.

  18. For these reasons we concluded that it would not be unduly harsh  for
      this appellant to relocate in order to avoid  persecution  on  return
      and  that  as  a  result   she   does   not   qualify   for   asylum.









Article 8


  19. The case law on the assessment  of  an  Article  8  claim  since  the
      introduction of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
      Rules is extensive. Rather than  rehearsing  the  developments  since
      those changes were introduced in July 2012, with substantial  changes
      following in 2014, we set out  here  the  basic  principles  we  have
      applied in our assessment.

  20. We were assisted in doing so by the parties focussing their arguments
      on the proportionality assessment, the genuine and strong  nature  of
      FA and PT's family life not being in issue, and distinct private life
      arguments not being pursued.

  21. It was not disputed that the appellant did not meet  Appendix  FM  of
      the Immigration Rules.  The  appellant's  spouse  does  not  have  an
      immigration status that meets the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and
      they do not appear to be able to meet the  maintenance  requirements,
      neither working and  having  lost  the  financial  support  of  their
      families.

  22. In the second stage Article 8 assessment, following SS (Congo) v SSHD
      [2015] EWCA Civ 387, the  settled  approach  to  the  proportionality
      exercise  is  that  the  inability  of  the  appellant  to  meet  the
      Immigration Rules is the starting point and something which  attracts
      significant weight, the assessment to be conducted through the  prism
      of the Immigration Rules. In order to outweigh the importance of  the
      public interest, the appellant must show compelling circumstances. We
      must also apply the provisions  of  section  117A  and  117B  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

  23. We must clarify one other legal matter of  particular  importance  in
      this case.  In the written submissions dated 30 September  2016,  the
      appellant maintains at paragraphs 24-26 that:

             "24. The act of the Appellant's removal, on the part of the
             United Kingdom, would interrupt and end the relationship. The
             Article 8 claim does not rest solely on consequences suffered
             once in the country of return; the interference with the
             Article 8 rights of the Appellant and her wife would not only
             take place in India.


             25. For that reason this is a 'mixed', not 'foreign' case;
             contrasted with EM (Lebanon) where the mother and child would
             be removed together, the claim relying on what was likely to
             happen at an unspecified point in the future in Lebanon,
             should the father seek custody, given Lebanon's discriminatory
             legal system.


             26. Therefore the 'exacting' burden described in EM (Lebanon),
             of establishing a 'flagrant' breach or denial of Article 8
             rights, does not apply."

  24. We did not find we could agree with that  argument.  At  [15]  of  EM
      (Lebanon), the House of Lords said this:

             "15. The guidance that is  to  be  found  in  these  decisions
             indicates that the Strasbourg court would be  likely  to  hold
             that, except in wholly exceptional circumstances,  aliens  who
             are subject to expulsion cannot claim an entitlement to remain
             in the territory of a Contracting State in  order  to  benefit
             from the equality of treatment as to respect for their  family
             life that they would receive there which would  be  denied  to
             them in the receiving state. The return of a woman who arrives
             here with her child simply to escape from the system of family
             law of her own country, however objectionable that system  may
             seem in comparison with our own, will not  violate  article  8
             read with article 14. Domestic violence and  family  breakdown
             occur in Muslim countries just as they do  elsewhere.  So  the
             inevitable result under Shari'a law that the separated  mother
             will lose custody of her child when  he  reaches  the  age  of
             custodial transfer ought, in itself, to make no difference. On
             a purely pragmatic basis  the  Contracting  States  cannot  be
             expected to return aliens only to a country whose  family  law
             is compatible with the principle of non-discrimination assumed
             by the Convention."

  25. At [17], their Lordships confirmed that the test to be applied  in  a
      "foreign" Article 8 case is that  of  a  "flagrant"  level  and  that
      "cases where  that  assessment  shows  that  the  violation  will  be
      flagrant will be very exceptional."

  26. In our judgement, the appellant's submissions at  [24]-[26]  misstate
      the cause of the breach to the family life of FA and PT  that  arises
      here. They are  not  prevented  from  exercising  their  family  life
      together because of the respondent removing FA to India  but  because
      Indian immigration law does not permit PT to join FA as her spouse or
      same-sex partner.

  27. This  is  therefore  a  foreign  case  concerning  the  "equality  of
      treatment" in India and, within the legal matrix set out  above  that
      we must follow, we are also required to identify a "flagrant"  breach
      of the right to a family life if the claim is to succeed.

  28. When analysed against that high threshold, we did not find  that  the
      evidence indicated that  the  respondent's  decision  amounted  to  a
      disproportionate interference with the  family  life  of  FA  and  PT
      notwithstanding the undoubted seriousness of their  relationship  and
      difficulties that the couple will have to face.

  29. There is no dispute that under Indian law, PT is not able to join  FA
      as her spouse or same-sex partner.  It  does  not  preclude  PT  from
      joining FA in India at all, however,  such  that  their  relationship
      would be ended as suggested  at  paragraph  28b  of  the  appellant's
      written submissions.

  30. The report of Ms Puri, an Indian immigration lawyer, relied  upon  by
      the appellant, states that PT could potentially apply for a  tourist,
      employment, student, business or research visa although none of  them
      would lead to settlement.

  31. We accept that in practice there may well be  practical  difficulties
      as  PT  may  not  have  the  required  educational  or   professional
      qualifications to enter in the latter categories. It remains our view
      that she could expect to enter  on  a  tourist  visa.  We  took  into
      account the indication from Ms Puri on page 8 of her report  that  PT
      will be entitled only to three six month visit visas but  also  noted
      that as a Singaporean national she is additionally  eligible  for  30
      day visas on arrival with there being no indication that  the  number
      of visits of that kind are restricted. Nothing  before  us  indicated
      that PT would be refused a visit visa because she was also married to
      PT,  something  we  accept  she  could  be  expected  to  declare  on
      application and entry.

  32. Although there was no expert or objective evidence to the same effect
      concerning Singapore, we are content to accept  the  evidence  of  PT
      that there is no option for FA to join her there as a spouse or same-
      sex partner,  permanently  or  temporarily.  It  was  not  suggested,
      however, that FA could not also obtain visit visas for  Singapore  or
      that  the  couple  could  not  meet  in  a  third  country.   In  our
      assessment, albeit their family life would be much reduced  by  being
      exercised in this way, their  circumstances  would  be  qualitatively
      different from the mother and child  in  EM  (Lebanon)  who,  it  was
      found, would be precluded from any contact at all on  return,  direct
      or indirect, that case turning in great  part  on  the  effect  on  a
      child, not an adult partner; see [47].

  33. We accept that to conduct  their  married  life  through  visits  and
      indirect contact will present as a stark and exceedingly unattractive
      prospect for this young couple. It remains our view  that,  accepting
      that they will have a much diminished  family  life,  these  options,
      they have options that will allow it to continue to some degree  with
      the possibility for studies or employment in  each  others  countries
      remaining possibilities for the longer term.  Where that is so we did
      not find that we could conclude that return to India amounted  to  "a
      breach . . . which is so fundamental as to amount to a nullification,
      or destruction of the very essence, of  the  right  guaranteed";  see
      [45] of EM (Lebanon).

  34. It was not suggested by either party that  much  turns  here  on  the
      provisions of s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
      2002. We have indicated above that as the Immigration Rules cannot be
      met the public interest  in  effecting  immigration  control  by  the
      removal of  the  appellant  attracts  significant  weight.  That  the
      appellant speaks very good English is a neutral  factor.  The  couple
      have in the main been supported by their families since coming to the
      UK and, as we understood the evidence, were living off  savings  from
      that period. This does not amount to financial independence  for  the
      purposes of s.117B(3); Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  803  at  [63]
      and [64] applied. The family life of the couple can attract weight as
      it  was  formed  whilst  they  were  here  lawfully.  As  above,  the
      appellant's private life was not a  factor  of  substantial  argument
      here. We did not find that any  of  these  factors  made  a  material
      difference to the outcome of this appeal.

  35. We did not find it easy to reach the conclusion  that  the  appellant
      can be expected to return to India and continue her marriage with  PT
      in the circumstances we have set out above. The  appellants  appeared
      to  us  to  be  admirable  young  women  who  have  dealt  with   the
      difficulties  they  have  faced  because  of  their  sexuality   with
      integrity and fortitude. We must apply the law as we understand it to
      the established facts, however, and find for the reasons given  above
      that the respondent's decision does not breach Article 8 ECHR.

Decision

  33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
      material error of law and is set aside.

  34. We re-make the appeal as refused on asylum and human rights  grounds.





Signed  [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt                        Date:  2 December 2016








