

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10353/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Manchester                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 1 April 2016                             |On : 12 April 2016           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    [m l]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R O'Ryan instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Albania considered by the respondent to  have
been born on 13 November 1994  but  whose  claimed  date  of  birth  was  13
November 1996. He arrived in the UK on 13 January 2014  and  claimed  asylum
the following day. His claim was refused on 13 November 2014 and a  decision
was made to remove him from the UK.

The appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  his  appeal  was  heard
before the First-tier Tribunal on 20 May 2015 and dismissed.  Permission  to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 25 June 2015.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant claims to be at risk on return to Albania as  a  result  of  a
blood feud involving his family and the [G] family, both of  whom  lived  in
the same village in Shkoder. He fears that the [G] family would kill him  if
he returned to Albania. He claims that in June  2008  his  father's  cousin,
[NL], was stabbed and killed by [PG], as  a  result  of  which  his  father,
[ZL], issued a blood feud against the [G] family. [PG]  was  jailed  for  15
years. The [G] family  went  into  self-confinement  and  so  there  was  no
opportunity to take  revenge.  They  attempted  reconciliation  but  it  was
refused. On 23 August 2012 the brother of [NL], [LL] took revenge  and  shot
two brothers, [GG]  and  [XG].  [GG]  died  whilst  [XG]  was  wounded.  The
appellant's cousin [LL] was arrested, convicted and sent to prison. The  [G]
family issued a blood feud and the appellant's family were  forced  to  stay
at home. Attempts at reconciliation  were  rejected.  On  10  January  2014,
after all hopes of reconciliation were lost, the appellant  was  transported
in the boot of his cousin's car to Kosovo. He then left Kosovo by lorry  and
came to the UK, arriving on 13 January 2014.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, did not  accept  that  he
was the age claimed and  noted  the  results  of  a  Merton  age  assessment
carried out by social workers  on  behalf  of  Hackney  Children's  Services
which concluded that he was aged 19. The birth certificate he  had  produced
was rejected. The respondent rejected the appellant's account of  the  blood
feud as internally inconsistent and implausible. His account of his  journey
from Albania was considered to be inconsistent. Even if his account  of  the
blood feud was true it was noted that the [G] family had taken no action  to
harm him or his family since the  murder  in  August  2012.  The  respondent
therefore considered that  the  appellant  was  at  no  risk  on  return  to
Albania. It was considered  that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of  protection
available to the appellant and, given that the blood feud  was  local,  that
he could relocate to another part of Albania such as Tirana.

The appellant appealed that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  his
appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Morris  on  20  May  2015.
Judge Morris accepted the age assessment  conducted  by  Hackney  Children's
Services. She did  not  find  the  birth  certificate  relied  upon  by  the
appellant to be authentic and was not satisfied that the  appellant  was  in
fact  [ML].  She  considered  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  produce
satisfactory evidence of the existence of an active blood feud  and,  having
had regard to the guidance in EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012]  UKUT  348,
she was not satisfied that he was a potential victim of a  blood  feud.  She
had regard to a news  report  submitted  for  the  appeal  which  named  the
parties in the claimed family conflict, but noted  that  such  reports  were
often invented by the press. She found  that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
protection available to the appellant and that he would be able to  relocate
to another part of the country. She dismissed the appeal on all grounds.


Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant on  the  grounds  that  the
judge had given inadequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's account  of
his identity; that she had failed to make findings on  the  existence  of  a
conflict as described in  the  news  report;  that  she  had  erred  in  her
findings about the appellant's cousin; and that she  had  erred  by  relying
upon an FCO letter dated 12 June 2014 which had not in any  event  been  put
before the Tribunal.

Permission to appeal was granted  on  25  June  2015,  specifically  on  the
ground that the judge had  arguably  proceeded  unfairly  by  relying  on  a
document without notice to the parties, although  not  rejecting  the  other
grounds.

Hearing and submissions

With respect to the basis upon which permission had been granted, I drew  to
Mr O'Ryan's attention to the fact that my copy of the FCO letter of 12  June
2014 had been marked at the top as having been handed in on 24  March  2015.
I advised Mr O'Ryan that the Tribunal's records showed that the parties  had
attended a hearing on 24 March 2015, when the appeal was adjourned to  await
a psychiatric report for the appellant (which was  later  obtained  but  not
relied upon). Mr O'Ryan proceeded on the other grounds.

He submitted that the judge's finding, that the appellant was  not  whom  he
claimed to be, was not properly reasoned and had not previously been  raised
by the respondent. The judge had failed  to  reach  any  conclusion  on  the
reliability of the news report at page 27 of the appeal  bundle.  There  was
therefore a fundamental gap in the judge's findings.  The  judge's  reliance
on there being other male  family  members  remaining  in  Albania  with  no
problems, with particular reference to the cousin who had helped  him  leave
the country, [LI], was misconceived, as [LI] was a maternal cousin  and  was
therefore not part of the blood feud. Mr O'Ryan  submitted  that  the  judge
had erred by placing significant weight upon the FCO letter of 12 June  2014
in relation to the question  of  sufficiency  of  protection,  when  it  was
inconsistent with the country guidance in EH and was not impartial.


Mr McVeety submitted that the judge was entitled to place weight on the  FCO
letter which was written by someone based  in  Tirana,  as  opposed  to  the
expert report which had been written by someone who had not been  in  Tirana
since 2011. The FCO letter reached the same conclusions as in  EH  and  just
brought EH up to date. It was open to the judge to find that the  appellant,
who had lied about his age, had also lied about his identity.  It  was  open
to her to find that he had adapted his identity to  fit  in  with  the  news
report. It was also open to the judge to place little  weight  on  the  news
report.


Mr O'Ryan, in response, reiterated the points made previously.

Consideration and findings.

As stated, permission to appeal had primarily been  granted  on  the  ground
that the judge had relied upon a document, the FCO letter of 12  June  2014,
which had not been before the parties at the Tribunal, but that  ground  was
misconceived since the letter clearly had been before  the  parties,  having
been produced at an earlier hearing on 24 March  2015.  Mr  O'Ryan  properly
did not seek to pursue that particular ground.

Whilst the grant  of  permission  did  not  exclude  the  appellant's  other
grounds, it made clear that they were less persuasive.  I  agree  with  that
comment. I find no merit in the other grounds.


I find no reason why the judge was not entitled to  place  the  weight  that
she did upon the FCO letter. I do not agree that it is  partial  but  concur
with Mr McVeety's submission that, contrary to the  assertion  made  in  the
grounds, the section entitled "actions to mitigate false blood feud  claims"
does not demonstrate  a  motivation  to  reduce  genuine  asylum  claims  by
Albanian nationals but rather is intended only to reduce false  claims.  The
judge relied upon the FCO letter in concluding that there was a  sufficiency
of protection available to the appellant in Albania. I do not agree with  Mr
O'Ryan that that was inconsistent with the country guidance in EH which,  at
headnote 3, refers to problems remaining in areas such as  northern  Albania
where Kanun law predominates. I find merit in Mr McVeety's  submission  that
the FCO letter supplements the decision in EH but  consider  also  that  the
judge, at [34], plainly had in mind the various  reports  referring  to  the
steps taken by the Albanian authorities to address  the  question  of  blood
feuds. It is also clear from her findings at [45] that  she  had  regard  to
the appellant's own particular circumstances in considering the question  of
sufficiency of protection, in  particular  the  fact  that  the  police  had
already intervened in the matter and applied the law to arrest  and  convict
the perpetrators in both families.

In any event, the judge did not find that there was a genuine blood feud  or
that the appellant was  a  potential  victim  of  a  blood  feud.  She  gave
detailed reasons  for  finding  that  the  appellant's  account  was  not  a
credible one, identifying  at  [24]  to  [31]  various  inconsistencies  and
discrepancies in his evidence, including  those  relating  to  his  age  and
identity. Contrary to Mr O'Ryan's submission it seems  to  me  that  it  was
open to the judge to find that  the  appellant  had  not  given  a  credible
account of his identity. The appellant relied upon a  birth  certificate  as
evidence of his age and the judge gave  cogent  reasons  at  [24]  to  [29],
based upon the age assessment report and the  background  information  about
the availability  of  forged  official  documents  in  Albania,  and  taking
account of the expert evidence, for concluding that that document was not  a
reliable one. Since the  document  was  also  evidence  of  the  appellant's
identity, the judge was therefore entitled to conclude  that  the  appellant
had also been untruthful in that regard.


The judge noted also that the appellant had given  an  inconsistent  account
about his journey from Albania to the UK and that  his  evidence  about  the
identity of the cousin who had assisted him in leaving was far  from  clear.
From [35] the judge went on to give  further  reasons  for  concluding  that
there was no genuine blood feud and noted that there was  no  evidence  that
other male members of his family had left the country. Mr  O'Ryan  submitted
that the judge had erred in her reliance on the fact  that  the  appellant's
cousin [LI] remained in Albania, since he was from the maternal side of  the
family and thus not part of the blood feud.  However  it  is  clear  in  any
event from the judge's findings at [35(iv)] that he was not  the  only  male
family member to which she was referring. Furthermore, whilst the judge  did
not make a specific finding at [37] that the new report at page  27  of  the
appeal bundle was unreliable, she  gave  clear  reasons  why  it  should  be
accorded little weight.

Having undertaken a careful  and  thorough  assessment  of  the  appellant's
evidence, the judge then considered his circumstances in the context of  the
principles and guidance in EH, addressing the various  factors  set  out  at
paragraph 6 of the headnote to that  case  and  giving  cogent  reasons  for
concluding that the appellant's account of events did not meet the  relevant
criteria for establishing that an active blood feud  existed.  At  [43]  she
concluded that the appellant  had  failed  to  demonstrate  that  he  was  a
potential victim of a blood feud  and  it  seems  to  me  that  that  was  a
conclusion that was entirely open to her on the evidence before her.


Accordingly I find no  merit  in  the  grounds.  The  judge  gave  full  and
detailed reasons for making the adverse findings that she did  and  she  was
entitled to reach the conclusions that she did. I do not find that she  made
any errors of law in her decision. I uphold her decision.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law requiring the decision to be set  aside.  I  do  not
set aside the decision. The decision to dismiss the appeal stands.






                               Signed


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
