
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa 10844 2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 15 July 2013                               |On 16 July 2013              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                              p-b--- N--- s---
 It is directed that the appellant is identified only by the above initials
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Finch, Counsel, instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone.  She was born in 1987.   She
    appeals the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  her  appeal
    against a decision of the respondent  to  remove  her  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  It is her case that she is a refugee or otherwise entitled  to
    international protection.  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal.
     The First-tier Tribunal Judge disbelieved the appellant and  concluded,
    consistent with that belief, that she had not established her case.

 2. The appeal before me challenges the First-tier  Tribunal's  approach  to
    the assessment of credibility.  The substantive criticism  is  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred by failing to set the credibility findings  in
    the context of scientific  evidence  background  material  that  is  not
    dependent on the appellant.

 3. There was certainly very clear medical evidence from two general medical
    practitioners and a  registered  nurse  that  there  are  marks  on  the
    appellant's body suggesting very strongly that she has been  the  victim
    of non-accidental injury.  The reports do not purport to go further than
    that.  They are not the reports, for example, of  a  consultant  surgeon
    but they are entitled to considerable respect.

 4. Additionally there is background material relating to custom  in  Sierra
    Leone of taking women to secret  places  to  carry  out  the  thoroughly
    unpleasant and nasty process that we delicately describe as FGM.

 5. Neither of these strands of evidence were investigated or considered  at
    all  adequately  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's   determination.    The
    background material identified in the skeleton  argument  has  not  been
    considered at all and the consideration of the medical evidence is  very
    skimpy.

 6. Mr Avery says that it is plain from paragraph 74  of  the  Determination
    that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  have  regard  to  the  medical
    evidence but assumed that the injuries  that  the  appellant  suffer  at
    least could have been caused at the time  when  the  appellant  was  the
    victim of rebel  attacks  in  1999.   With  respect  to  Mr  Avery  this
    submission is supported solely by conjecture.  It is not clear that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge made any such finding. It might have been what
    was in his mind but it is not what he said.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has given  reasons  for  disbelieving  the
    appellant.   He  has  seized  on   inconsistencies   in   the   account,
    particularly in the chronology and the claim by the appellant  that  she
    did not know she could claim asylum on arrival in  the  United  Kingdom,
    which claim he found to be wholly unbelievable.

 8. I have reminded myself that my task is not to say if this is how I would
    have determined the appeal but to  decide  if  it  has  been  determined
    adequately.  I also remind myself that, unlike the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, I have had  the  benefit  of  assistance  from  very  experienced
    Counsel who expects very high standards.  Nevertheless I have still come
    to the conclusion that this determination is  inadequate  in  law.    It
    gives no proper explanation for the cause of uncontroversial injuries or
    how those injuries impact on the appellant's credibility.

 9. It is similarly wrong  in  law  not  to  have  shown  proper  regard  to
    background material about cultural practices when  they  can  illuminate
    the core of the case.

10. These things do not mean that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has  reached
    the wrong conclusion but they do satisfy me that it has been reached for
    reasons that are wrong in law and  for  that  reason  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

11. I must now decide how to advance the matter further.  I appreciate  that
    when the case came before the First-tier Tribunal legal aid had not been
    granted and the appellant's solicitors may have done the best that could
    be done with the resources open to them but there are  many  strands  of
    enquiry that could be made to good effect  and  the  present  solicitors
    appear to be funded and willing to do them. They should be given time to
    do that.

12. I have asked myself if this is a case that  comes  within  the  Practice
    Direction that permits some cases to be heard again  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal rather than re-determined in the Upper Tribunal.  I think  this
    is on the borderline but I am persuaded that the  proper  course  is  to
    send this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined again  when
    all the relevant points can be taken and used to  determine  the  appeal
    properly.

13. I therefore allow the appeal and set aside the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and direct that the appeal  be  determined  again  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 15 July 2013                   |


