
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10756/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 27 March 2014                              |On 6 May 2014                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                     N M
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Sills, Counsel, instructed by JD Spicer Zeb,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant  was  born  on  1  January  1994  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Afghanistan.  He appeals with permission against the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge S Taylor  promulgated  on  20  January  2014,
    dismissing his appeal against the decision made by the respondent on 25
    November 2013 to refuse to grant him further leave  to  remain  and  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom by way of directions  under  Section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in August 2008 and  claimed
    asylum.  The respondent did not accept his claimed date  of  birth  and
    refused his claim on 23 July 2010.  An appeal against that decision was
    successful although to a  limited  extent.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cockrill found that  the  appellant  was  the  age  claimed;  that  the
    decision was therefore unlawful;  and,  directed  that  the  respondent
    should reconsider the matter.  The decision to  refuse  the  claim  for
    asylum was maintained but the appellant was granted discretionary leave
    to remain until 1 June 2011 in the light of the finding on his age.  On
    26 May 2011 he applied for  further  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  No decision was reached on that case until 25  November  2013
    and it is against that decision  that  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal lay.

 3. The appellant's case is, in summary, that his father had  worked  as  a
    civil servant in the local district office but had been killed in  2005
    by the Taliban.   His  older  brother  had  disappeared  about  a  year
    earlier.  Later, the Taliban came looking to recruit him but he was not
    at home when they called.  It was for that reason that his family  took
    steps to have him taken out of Afghanistan and to  the  United  Kingdom
    where he claimed asylum.

 4. The respondent did not accept the appellant's account of events but did
    accept his date of birth.  Although accepting that in 2008, the time he
    had left Afghanistan, he had been of an age where forced recruitment to
    the Taliban was likely, she did not accept that that had occurred.  The
    respondent also considered, given that the appellant was over 18,  that
    although she had not carried  out  family  tracing,  he  would  not  be
    disadvantaged by that. She concluded also that the appellant had failed
    to establish a private  or  family  life  within  the  meaning  of  the
    Immigration Rules and that there was no reason on which he could not be
    removed from the United Kingdom.

 5. On appeal, Judge S Taylor accepted the appellants account of the events
    which took place in Afghanistan leading to his departure, in particular
    that his brother had disappeared; that his father had  been  killed  by
    2005 [18]; and, that the Taliban had come to look for  him  to  recruit
    him in 2008.  He then went on to dismiss the appeal, finding that:

      i) the situation in Afghanistan had moved on since the appellant  left
         and that there was no evidence of continued interest in him by  the
         Taliban [18];

     ii) following Country Guidance, the appellant would not be at  risk  on
         return to Kabul Airport or Kabul [19]; that  there  was  no  longer
         such a high level of indiscriminate violence  in  Afghanistan  such
         that  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  and  thus  entitled   to
         humanitarian protection [19]; and, that the appellant was not in an
         enhanced risk category by reason of his age [20],  there  being  no
         evidence that he would be seen as a child due to lack of  education
         and maturity;

    iii) the appellant had failed to remain in contact with a tracing agency
         and that in any event he had not been disadvantaged by the lack  of
         tracing as he is now an adult and his account of the  events  which
         had occurred in Afghanistan had been accepted [20];

     iv) there had not been  an  unreasonable  delay  in  dealing  with  the
         appellant's application or that he had been  disadvantaged  by  any
         delay; that he was not at risk due to his enhanced risk due to  his
         personal history [20]; that there was no evidence of a link between
         the death of the appellant's  father  and  the  Taliban's  wish  to
         recruit him three years later [20] or  that  he  was  targeted  for
         recruitment on account of his father's occupation; that  there  was
         no evidence that the attempted recruitment  of  the  appellant  was
         anything other than a general recruitment of youth in the area  and
         no evidence of continued interest by the Taliban and the appellant,
         it being accepted that there was no evidence that the appellant was
         on a Taliban wanted list [20]; that no evidence had been  submitted
         to ongoing risk in his home area after five and a  half  years  and
         thus it would not  be  necessary  for  the  appellant  to  consider
         internal relocation but were he to do so that he could relocate  to
         Kabul [20];

      v) the appellant had not established  a  family  life  in  the  United
         Kingdom although he  did  have  a  girlfriend  [24]  and  that  any
         interference with his right to respect for his private  life  would
         not be of sufficient gravity to engage Article 8 [24] in  light  of
         MG (Serbia and Montenegro) [2005] UKAIT 113 given that  he  is  not
         working or studying in the UK, there was  no  work  record  and  no
         history of  progression  of  his  studies,  evidence  of  community
         involvement and his private life had been established whilst he had
         only limited leave and that it would be proportionate to the  needs
         of immigration control for him to be removed [24];

     vi)  the  respondent  had  fully  considered  paragraph  353B  of   the
         Immigration  Rules  and  that  there  were  no  additional  factors
         connecting the appellant to the United Kingdom or other exceptional
         factors under paragraph 353B [25].

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

      i) given that past persecution had been accepted  [6]  the  judge  had
         erred in concluding that the appellant was no longer at risk by not
         taking into account of Article 4.4 of the Qualification  Directive,
         that is, that prior persecution is a serious indication of a  well-
         founded fear of persecution in the future  unless  there  are  good
         grounds to consider that it would  not  be  repeated,  the  judge's
         reasoning on the latter issue not being sufficient;

     ii) the judge had failed to consider objective  evidence  submitted  to
         the effect that the appellant  would  be  at  an  ongoing  risk  of
         persecution, by  failing  to  make  reference  to  the  UNHCR  2013
         eligibility guidelines [9] which was "evidence" that the  appellant
         would still be targeted by the Taliban because  of  his  past,  his
         father's association with the Afghan  government  and  in  his  own
         right, [10], it being incorrect to state that there was no evidence
         and that accordingly the finding that the appellant was not  in  an
         enhanced risk category or at risk in his home area were flawed [11]
         and that further, the judge's conclusions with respect to  internal
         relocation were unsatisfactory and unsafe [12] given the failure to
         consider the UNHCR eligibility guidelines;

    iii) the judge erred in concluding that the appellant had  not  met  the
         thresholds for Article 8 to be engaged [13] given that he had lived
         here now for five and a half years [14]; that his residence had not
         been precarious from the outset [15] and that had  the  appellant's
         case been properly considered on the basis of  the  findings  made,
         the appellant would have been granted refugee status had  his  case
         been considered whilst he was a minor [16];

     iv) the judge had failed  to  consider  the  impact  of  delay  in  the
         appellant's case, it being incorrect to say that he  had  not  been
         disadvantaged [20] given that on the findings made  by  the  judge,
         the appellant, his case would have  succeeded  had  these  findings
         been made whilst he was a minor [20], the delay also being relevant
         on asylum grounds on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  would  have
         benefitted from them from the Rashid/S principle in addition due to
         the failure to apply the tracing obligation;  that  the  judge  had
         also erred in his consideration of paragraph  353B  in  failing  to
         take into account the length of the time spent by the appellant  in
         the United Kingdom and without having had regard to chapter  53  of
         the enforcement instructions and guidance.

 7. On 13 February 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade granted permission
    on all grounds.

 8. On 4 March 2014 the respondent replied pursuant to Rule 24  in  stating
    that Judge S Taylor had directed himself  appropriately;  had  properly
    considered the issue of risk on return and had  dealt  adequately  with
    the issue of Article 8 as well as the issue of delay.

Submissions

 9. Mr Sills submitted that the judge had failed to take into  account  the
    UNHCR guidance although he accepted that there was no further  evidence
    specific to the appellant since he had left Afghanistan.  He  submitted
    that  the  UNHCR  guidance  shows  that  the  appellant's  home   area,
    Nangarhar, had  a  high  level  of  security  incidents  and  that  the
    appellant was at risk because his father had been employed as  a  civil
    servant  (the  risk  category  part  3).   He  submitted  that  in  the
    alternative the judge  had  erred  in  failing  to  take  into  account
    relevant evidence regarding Kabul and had dealt solely with the  issues
    of general risk, the judge having been invited to  consider  the  UNHCR
    guidance that the Taliban can operate throughout the  country,  seeking
    to rely also on AA (Afghanistan), the appellant in that case being from
    a family associated with the government and it would not  be  easy  for
    him to go away from Pashtun areas, principles which would apply equally
    in this case.

10. Mr Sills submitted that the judge had applied too high a  threshold  in
    considering  Article  8  and  had  erred  to  say  that  any  risk  was
    disproportionate, given that  he  had  directed  himself  to  case  law
    relevant to those situations where people had not had leave to  remain.



11. In respect of  delay  Mr  Sills  submitted  that  there  had  been  two
    substantial periods of two years' delay which were relevant  and  ought
    to have been taken into account.  He submitted that  as  a  result  the
    respondent had acted unlawfully with respect to the asylum claim and on
    that basis following KA (Afghanistan) at paragraph [25] he was entitled
    to leave to remain either on Rashid principles or as a  result  of  the
    failure to trace.  He submitted further that the substantial delay here
    took the facts of this case outside Gulshan  and  that  the  judge  had
    erred in his approach to paragraph 353B.

12. Ms Holmes relied on EU (Afghanistan) [2013]  EWCA  Civ  32,  submitting
    that the judge had had regard  to  the  evidence  and  had  given  good
    reasons for concluding that past persecution would not give rise  to  a
    well-founded fear on return [20].  She submitted further that the UNHCR
    guidelines did not  constitute  substantive  evidence  relating  to  an
    ongoing risk in the home area and that, as the judge had been  entitled
    to find the appellant was not at risk in his  home  area,  any  finding
    with regard to risk in Kabul was  unnecessary  and  in  any  event  the
    decision in AA (Afghanistan) was not relevant.

13. Ms Holmes submitted also that the appellant had not been  disadvantaged
    by a failure to trace or by the delay in  consideration  of  his  case.
    She submitted that this case was not at all like  that  in  Rashid  and
    that the judge had made findings with respect to Article 8  which  were
    open to him.

14. In reply, Mr  Sills  submitted  that  the  appellant's  case  could  be
    distinguished factually from EU, the key  issue  being  the  unfairness
    arising from the delay of the failure  to  trace.   In  all  the  cases
    before the Court of Appeal in EU the appellants had been found  not  to
    be credible; that was not the case here.

Discussion

15. Judge S Taylor concluded that the appellant had been  subjected  to  an
    attempted forced recruitment in the past. There is no challenge to that
    finding, but equally he found [20]  that  there  was  no  evidence  the
    appellant was specifically targeted for recruitment on account  of  his
    father's occupation and that there was no evidence that  the  attempted
    recruitment of the  appellant  was  anything  other  than  the  general
    recruitment of youth in the area [20].  He also found that there was no
    evidence of continued interest in the appellant  on  the  part  of  the
    Taliban, interest last shown in him some five and a half years earlier.
    These were conclusions open to him, and  for  which  he  gave  adequate
    reasons. There is no effective challenge to these findings.

16. Mr Sills was  unable  to  point  me  to  evidence  relating     to  the
    particular circumstances of the appellant or relating to the  situation
    on the ground in the appellant's home area.  Whilst he  did  direct  me
    towards the UNHCR guidelines which are quoted in considerable detail in
    the grounds of appeal [9] none of this is specific to the appellant  or
    to his area and Mr Sills was unable to point me to any  other  evidence
    on these issues which was before Judge S Taylor.

17. It is evident from the determination at [19] and [20]  that  the  judge
    had considered the relevant country guidance material and risk factors,
    taking these into account when concluding that the appellant would  not
    face the same  problems  on  return,  as  must  his  finding  that  the
    appellant, who is now no longer a minor, had been sought as part  of  a
    general recruitment of youth.  Mr Sills was unable to point me  to  any
    evidence which is supportive of the contrary proposition over and above
    the UNHCR's guidelines which are by definition  not  specific  to  this
    appellant.

18. The judge was thus entitled to conclude that there had  been  a  change
    over time - the appellant's age and reaching maturity -  such  that  he
    would no longer be at risk of persecution or serious harm  and  in  the
    circumstances, sufficient reasons were given for  concluding  that  the
    persecution in the past would not be repeated. The judge gave  adequate
    reasons, for his conclusion that the appellant would not be at risk  on
    return. Whilst taken in isolation the  observation  that  "things  have
    moved on" is somewhat succinct, it is clear that  this  conclusion  was
    reached after a careful consideration of the relevant country  guidance
    material [19] and other risk factors [20].

19. The judge found that the appellant had not established a family life in
    the United  Kingdom.   That  was  a  conclusion  open  to  him  and  is
    unchallenged.  It was also open to him to conclude that the appellant's
    life had been established here when he was in  a  precarious  situation
    and it was open to him to conclude [24] that there was  little  content
    to the appellant's private life.

20. It is accepted that there was no tracing undertaken but equally, on the
    facts of this case, as the appellant was only on appeal believed in the
    substance of his claim, it is not properly arguable that  he  has  been
    disadvantaged by this.  Whilst I accept  that,  the  appellants  in  EU
    (Afghanistan) were not believed, this case can be distinguished on  its
    facts from KA and Rashid as here, the Secretary of state had  concluded
    that the appellant had not told the truth. It is not properly  arguable
    that tracing would have resulted in a different outcome.  This  is  not
    analogous to the situation in Rashid where the Secretary of  State  had
    failed to apply properly a policy whereby, on  the  facts  accepted  by
    her, the applicant should have been granted status.   It was only as  a
    result of further, fresh fact-finding exercise carried out by  Judge  S
    Taylor that the appellant was in a position whereby he would  have  won
    an appeal.

21. Although there has been delay in this case, that is  not  in  itself  a
    basis on which the appellant was entitled to leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, given the very limited and restricted  content  of  his
    private life as found by the judge, findings which were open to him. In
    reality, this is a challenge to weight  which  was  a  matter  for  the
    judge, and for which he gave sustainable reasons.

22. The arguments with regard to the delay and paragraph 353B are not well-
    founded.  The judge explained adequately why he did not  consider  that
    the delay on the facts of this case was of particular  significance,  a
    conclusion open to him, and accordingly the submissions with regard  to
    his findings are nothing more than  disagreements  with  weight  to  be
    attached to that factor.

23. Accordingly, for these reasons, I consider that  the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error  of  law
    and I uphold it.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS


   1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error of law and I uphold it.


   2. I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal



Signed                                  Date:  25 April 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


