
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10790/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 March 2016                               |On 6 April 2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                   MR V P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Yong, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant appeals with leave against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Widdup dismissing his appeal against the decision of the
    respondent dated 20 November 2014 to refuse him leave to remain in  the
    UK on asylum grounds.

2.   There is a history to this appeal.  The appellant first claimed  asylum
    in 1999 in the UK which was refused on 14 September 2004.   His  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed by IJ Lawrence in March  2004.   On
    25 March 2007 the appellant was returned to Sri Lanka.

3.   The appellant returned to the UK on 10 July 2013 and in September  2013
    lodged a further claim for asylum.  He was interviewed on 10 June 2014.
     His claim was refused on 20 November 2014 and further submissions were
    refused on 25 November 2014.

4.   The appellant's  appeal  against  this  refusal  was  allowed  by  FTTJ
    Bartlett on 16 March 2015.  On 18 June 2015 DUTJ Davey set  aside  FTTJ
    Bartlett's decision on the basis that it contained a material error  of
    law for lack of adequate reasons explaining why he found the  appellant
    to be credible in respect of his current account of events arising from
    2007 and onwards and found that it gave rise to a real risk of  return.



5.   The appeal  came  before  Judge  Widdup  on  30  October  2015.   Judge
    Widdup's findings of fact and conclusions are set out at paragraphs  57
    to 94.  The judge assessed the medical reports from  Dr  Josse  and  Dr
    Omara and the credibility of the appellant's account in relation to the
    medical  reports.   The  judge  found  that  the  appellant's   account
    contained inconsistencies which damaged his credibility  to  a  serious
    extent.   He  found  further  inconsistencies  in   relation   to   the
    appellant's evidence of payment of money  to  an  official  at  Colombo
    Airport to avoid interrogation.

6.   The judge then went on to say as follows:

         "88. The appellant's second witness statement was signed by him  in
             February 2015.  However at the hearing  before  me  two  minor
             matters were rectified by the appellant.  The need  for  those
             corrections caused me no concern  whatsoever.   However,  when
             asked by Ms Walker to explain  why  he  had  not  noticed  the
             errors before he said that the witness statement had not  been
             read to him line by  line  but  paragraph  by  paragraph.   He
             nevertheless said that the contents of the  witness  statement
             were true.  It is unclear to me whether the appellant's use of
             English is good enough to give him a sufficient  understanding
             of what was being said in his witness statement.  In  addition
             it would appear that the appellant was given an explanation of
             the contents of the witness statement rather than  being  read
             it line by line.  There would appear therefore to be  a  clear
             danger that the appellant's witness statement  has  only  been
             incompletely understood by him.


         89.  I will consider in the course of this  decision  whether  that
             irregularity  is  of  significance  and  when  assessing   the
             credibility parts of the appellant's evidence and its weight.


         90.  With those findings in mind  I  will  now  deal  with  the  GJ
             guidance and whether and to what extent it is relevant to  the
             appellant".


7.   Permission was granted by UTJ King who said that  the  grounds  merited
    further consideration, particularly ground 5 and the potential  missing
    material between paragraphs 89 and 90.  He  added  that  the  notes  of
    hearing should be copied and sent to the judge for him to comment  upon
    ground 5 and to indicate whether and what material was omitted from the
    determination.  It appears that this was never done.

8.   I find that there is a clear disjoint between paragraphs 89 and  90  of
    the determination, which raises serious concerns about whether  all  of
    the  judge's  reasoning  and  findings   are   contained   within   the
    determination and whether the determination has been written  with  the
    requisite anxious scrutiny.

9.   Accordingly, I find that the judge's decision cannot stand.  It is  set
    aside in order to be re-made.

10.  This case is remitted to Hatton Cross for rehearing by  a  judge  other
    than FTTJ Widdup.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

