
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10625/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 October 2015                   |On 13 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     DM
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Morgan, Counsel instructed by Pembridge
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E. Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Drabu who refused the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision to refuse to grant asylum.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the judge had applied irrelevant considerations  when  considering  the
    core of the Appellant's claim.  It was also arguable that the judge had
    inaccurately summarised the law when he said "If his sexuality were  as
    he claims the jurisprudence clearly states that as long as  he  remains
    discrete in his activities, he  would  not  be  at  any  real  risk  of
    persecution".  Additionally the judge made no  reference  to  delay  or
    Article 8, and both issues were raised in the grounds  of  appeal.   It
    was arguable that the failure to address those issues in  the  decision
    constituted a material error of law.

 3. In the Rule 24 response the Respondent  stated  that  she  opposed  the
    appeal.  The judge had directed himself appropriately.  In relation  to
    Article 8, it was clear  that  the  Appellant  would  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of the immigration rules, and in any  further  assessment,
    the Tribunal would have been required to attach little  weight  to  the
    Appellant's  private  life,  lack  of  financial  independence  etc  in
    addition to the  Appellant's  adverse  immigration  history.   To  that
    extent the judge did not materially err in law.

 4. At the hearing Mr. Morgan applied to add a further  ground  of  appeal.
    In his skeleton argument he submitted that the judge had made an  error
    of law "when he failed to consider, properly or at all, A's documentary
    evidence regarding his  Zimbabwean  nationality".   He  submitted  that
    evidence to prove  the  Appellant's  Zimbabwean  nationality  had  been
    provided to the Respondent in 2010.  Additionally  the  Respondent  had
    been in possession of the Appellant's driving licence since 2005.  This
    issue was not discussed at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    reasons for refusal letter was based on removal to Malawi  and  removal
    decision was to Malawi.  He submitted  that  without  establishing  his
    nationality, it was difficult to establish that he would  be  at  risk.
    The judge had not made a  finding  on  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's
    nationality.

 5. I considered that the Respondent knew of the Appellant's  claim  to  be
    Zimbabwean, and it was not an issue  of  which  she  was  unaware.   In
    paragraph [17] of the reasons for refusal letter there is  a  reference
    to "original birth certificates".  I gave leave to amend the grounds to
    include the additional ground regarding the failure  to  establish  the
    Appellant's nationality.

 6. On the grounds  on  which  permission  had  been  granted,  Mr.  Morgan
    submitted that in paragraph [14] of the decision it was clear that  the
    Appellant's lack of credibility, inferred from the  fact  that  he  had
    previously claimed to have been Malawian, had spread  to  consideration
    of the Appellant's sexuality.  It was not clear whether  the  reference
    to the leading gay activist was to Peter Tatchell.  There was  a  clear
    error of law in the failure to take into account the case of HJ  (Iran)
    and HT (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC 31.  This error alone enough to  set  the
    decision aside.  Regarding delay and Article 8,  the  Appellant  had  a
    partner to whom he had referred.

 7. Ms Savage relied on the Rule 24 response dated 10 September 2015.   The
    judge  had  given  cogent  reasons  for   rejecting   the   Appellant's
    credibility in paragraphs [12] and [13].  These reasons  were  adequate
    in the light of the history of the  case.   That  "Peter  Tosh"  was  a
    leading gay rights activist was unsupported by evidence.  Any error  of
    law in paragraph [14] was not material given the  judge's  reasons  for
    rejecting the Appellant's credibility.  Although the last  sentence  of
    this paragraph did not reflect HJ (Iran), this was immaterial given the
    adverse credibility findings.  The Appellant would  not  have  to  live
    discretely for any reason.

 8. There was no error in failing to deal with Article 8 and delay.   There
    was no evidence that Article 8 had been pursued at  the  hearing.   The
    skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal dealt only with asylum
    and risk on return.  I was referred to the case of Sarkar  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 195.  In that case Article 8 had been  raised  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, but there was no evidence provided at the hearing, and  Article
    8 was not pursued.

 9. In relation to the additional ground, Ms Savage accepted that there was
    no clear finding as to the Appellant's nationality.  The Appellant  had
    previously provided evidence that he was Malawian.  In 2010 a claim had
    been made that he was of Zimbabwean nationality.  There had been little
    evidence before the Tribunal.  In  summary,  the  credibility  findings
    were open to the judge and there was no material error of law.

10. In response Mr. Morgan submitted that the Appellant  needed  to  answer
    the issue of why he entered the UK on a Malawian passport.  Even if  he
    were found not to be credible in 2005, this did not contaminate all  of
    the evidence related to Zimbabwe.

11. I announced at the hearing that I found that the decision involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law as  inadequate  reasons  had  been
    given in relation to the adverse credibility finding.  I indicated that
    my full reasons would follow, and I set them out below.

Error of law decision

12. Paragraph [14] of the decision states:

         "On the claim of his sexuality I have no other evidence except  his
         own and given his very poor credibility, I cannot and do not accept
         that he is a homosexual.  He could not even get the name of the gay
         rights leading activist in the UK right.  If his sexuality were  as
         he claims the jurisprudence clearly  states  that  as  long  as  he
         remains discrete in his activities, he would not  be  at  any  real
         risk of persecution".

13. This is the totality of  the  judge's  reasoning  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's claim to be gay.  He dismisses his claim to be  gay  "given
    his very poor credibility".  He further adds that he was  not  able  to
    name the leading activist, but the judge does not name the  gay  rights
    leading activist either, so it is not clear from the  decision  who  is
    being referred to as the "gay rights leading activist".   In  paragraph
    [4] he states that the Appellant had said that he had met "Peter Tosh",
    but it is only a guess that the judge may have considered this to be an
    attempt to refer to Peter Tatchell.  Given the judge's failure to  name
    any gay rights activist so as to make clear  the  Appellant's  lack  of
    knowledge, I find that this is not a reason to find that the  Appellant
    lacks credibility, and to reject his claim to be gay.

14. Further, the judge does not refer in paragraph [14] to any of the other
    evidence provided by the Appellant  in  support  of  his  claim  to  be
    homosexual,  but  dismisses  it  all  based  on   his   previous   poor
    credibility.  I find that, given the Appellant's  evidence,  inadequate
    reasons are given for rejecting the Appellant's claim to be gay.  It is
    not enough, given the evidence provided, to  rely  on  the  Appellant's
    previous poor credibility to find that he is not gay.

15. Ms Savage accepted  that  the  statement  in  paragraph  [14]  did  not
    accurately reflect the law given the case of HJ (Iran), but argued that
    this was immaterial given the adverse credibility finding.  However,  I
    have found that the judge has failed to give adequate reasons  for  the
    adverse credibility finding, and therefore has failed to give  adequate
    reasons for finding that the Appellant is not gay.   I  therefore  find
    that to suggest he can live discretely, given the case of HJ (Iran), is
    a material error of law.

16. In relation to Article 8, this was raised in the grounds of appeal.  It
    was submitted by Ms Savage that it was not addressed  at  the  hearing.
    However in paragraph [1] the judge refers to  the  Appellant  appealing
    against the decision refusing to grant him asylum and "leave to  remain
    in the UK on any other basis", which indicates that the judge was aware
    that the Appellant was appealing  against  the  decision  not  only  on
    asylum grounds.  The Appellant also gave evidence of  his  partner  [7]
    and [9], and there is reference to  his  partner  in  the  findings  in
    paragraph  [13].   The  Respondent's  representative  made  submissions
    regarding  the  Appellant's  partner  and  asked  that  the  appeal  be
    dismissed "on all grounds" [10].  It appears from the decision that the
    judge was aware that the appeal was not only in respect of  asylum  but
    he only made findings as to the decision to refuse asylum.  I find  his
    failure to address this issue is a material error of law.

17. Regarding the additional ground of appeal, the Appellant's  nationality
    is clearly an issue which needed to be resolved.  However, although the
    judge refers to the fact that the Respondent does not accept  that  the
    Appellant comes from Zimbabwe [5], there are no findings in relation to
    the Appellant's claim that he is from Zimbabwe.  He refers to the  fact
    that the Appellant claimed to be a national of Zimbabwe in 2010, having
    originally claimed asylum on the basis that he was  from  Malawi  [12].
    However he does not resolve the issue.  I  find  that  the  Appellant's
    disputed nationality is a central issue which needed to  be  addressed,
    and the fact that the judge has failed to do this constitutes an  error
    of law in failing to resolve a conflict on a material matter.

Notice of Decision

The decision involved the making of an error on a point of law  and  is  set
aside.  No findings are preserved.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Date 12 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
