
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10556/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 June 2017                               |On 22 June 2017               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel, instructed by Genga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Parkes ("the judge"), promulgated on 1  March  2017,  in
    which  he  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  all  grounds.   The
    Appellant, a national of Sri Lanka, had come to the United  Kingdom  in
    2013.  Her claim was based upon her familial connections to the LTTE as
    well as  specific  problems  encountered  by  her  in  the  past.   The
    Respondent rejected her protection claim on 13 July 2015.

 2. The Appellant's initial appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was dismissed
    by  a  decision  promulgated  on  4  May  2016.   This   decision   was
    successfully challenged  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision was set aside on 16 August 2016.   The  matter  was
    remitted for a complete rehearing before another judge.




The judge's decision

 3. In a relatively brief decision the judge considers a number of items of
    documentary evidence provided by the Appellant in support of her  case.
    He sets out a number of criticisms of this evidence and also notes  the
    absence of other evidence which might potentially have been provided by
    the Appellant.  The judge concludes that the country guidance  decision
    in GJ (post-civil war: returnees: risk) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319
    (IAC) remained binding upon him.  At paragraph 30 he concludes that the
    Appellant had not shown that she had been detained in Sri Lanka or that
    her family had  ever  been  of  adverse  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.   He  finds  that  the  Appellant's  mental   health   had
    significantly improved over the course of time.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. There are seven grounds of appeal relating to  the  Appellant's  mental
    health, the documentary evidence that was submitted,  the  issue  of  a
    lack of certain evidence, and  a  failure  by  the  judge  to  consider
    country information which post-dated the decision in GJ.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy on 20
    April 2017.




The hearing before me

 6. At the outset of the hearing I asked both representatives whether  they
    had with them  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  Dr  Okhari,  a  Consultant
    Psychiatrist, who had been involved in the Appellant's  care  over  the
    course of time.  Although this letter is included in the index  to  the
    Appellant's initial appeal bundle, it does not in  fact  appear  within
    that bundle and I could not find it on my file.  In the event,  neither
    representative could locate the letter.   Mr  Paramjorthy  acknowledged
    that the absence of this letter undermined his ability to rely  on  the
    first ground of appeal. However, he submitted that there was enough  in
    the remaining challenges for material errors of law to be found.

 7. Mr  Paramjorthy  relied  in  particular  on  what  the  judge  said  in
    paragraphs 18 to 20 and 28 of  the  decision.   He  submitted  that  in
    certain respects the judge had required corroborative evidence and  had
    failed to make clear findings  on  other  members  of  the  Appellant's
    family.  In respect of paragraph 28 the judge had failed  to  have  any
    regard to the country information  set  out  in  the  Respondent's  own
    Country Information Guidance on Tamil Separatism.

 8. Mr Whitwell relied on the Rule 24 response.  He acknowledged that there
    was some force in the Appellant's challenge to  the  judge's  decision,
    but he was not conceding the appeal.  In respect of the MP's letter the
    judge was entitled to say what he did in paragraphs 21 and  22  of  the
    decision.

 9. In response Mr Paramjorthy confirmed that he was unable  to  locate  Dr
    Okhari's letter but emphasised that the other grounds  were  sufficient
    for me to set aside the judge's decision.




Decision on error of law

10. As I announced to the parties at the hearing, I conclude that there are
    material errors of law in the judge's decision.  My  reasons  for  this
    conclusion are as follows.

11. First, there is a general sense of  unease  arising  from  the  judge's
    findings  that  in  certain   respects   corroborative   evidence   was
    effectively  being  expected  or  required.   An  example  of  this  is
    contained within paragraph 19, wherein the judge holds the  absence  of
    photographs showing her on active  LTTE  service  counted  against  her
    claim.  I have concerns as to whether any such photographs  would  ever
    exist, but in any event, an absence  of  photographs  in  this  context
    could not in  my  view  be  an  adequate  reason  for  undermining  the
    credibility of a claim.  In respect of paragraph 20 the judge has  held
    the absence of what he describes as "supporting evidence"  relating  to
    the  curtailed  nature  of  her  claimed  LTTE  training  against   the
    Appellant's credibility.  It is not clear what is meant by  "supporting
    evidence", but although an absence of, for example, country information
    on a particular point may be relevant, it does not necessarily mean, of
    course, that a person's own evidence is worthy of little or no  weight.
    In my view the judge has either required corroborative  evidence  when,
    as a matter of law, this would be an erroneous approach, or has  failed
    to make a finding on the Appellant's own evidence in  relation  to  her
    claimed  training,  notwithstanding  the   absence   of   corroborative
    evidence.

12. Second, in  my  view  the  judge's  approach  to  the  MP's  letter  is
    materially flawed in two respects.   First,  while  it  appears  to  be
    correct that the contents of the MP's letter are based  upon  what  was
    told to him by other people and was not from his own direct  knowledge,
    this does not in and of itself render the  evidence  to  be  untrue  or
    otherwise unreliable.  It is an item of evidence to  be  considered  in
    the round and caution must be applied when rejecting evidence simply on
    the basis that the source of the evidence emanates from  persons  known
    to the Appellant. I cannot see any reasoning as to why the contents are
    unreliable, save for the mere  fact  that  the  information  came  from
    family members. The second error in approach relates to what is said in
    paragraph 22.  The judge is critical of the MP's letter because it  was
    over a year old and had not been updated.  What is said in  the  letter
    appears to be connected by the judge to  other  untranslated  items  of
    evidence to which he was not prepared to attach  any  weight.   He  was
    entitled to disregard untranslated evidence, of course, but the  import
    of the MP's letter was that it went (at least on its face  and  in  the
    context of the Appellant's case as a  whole)  to  corroborate  material
    past events which went to  the  core  of  her  claim.  This  was  quite
    separate from the untranslated documents. The fact that the letter  was
    over a year old at the time of the hearing before the judge seems to me
    to be rather beside the point.   It  does  not  represent  an  adequate
    reason for placing little or no weight upon this item of evidence.   In
    this regard I agree with what is said in ground 3  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

13. Third, there is an error of approach  in  paragraph  28.   Within  this
    paragraph the judge states:

         "The country guidance of GJ remains binding  and  can  be  departed
         from if there is evidence to justify doing so but there is  nothing
         in the applicable case law that would show  that  the  celebrations
         that the Appellant spoke of would be a source of danger."

    The difficulty here is that this element of the  Appellant's  case  was
    based upon country information post-dating GJ.  It had  nothing  to  do
    with other case law.

14. Having regard to the Record of Proceedings and the grounds of appeal  I
    am satisfied that the relevant country information (which was  included
    in the Respondent's Country  Information  Guidance  document  on  Tamil
    Separatism) was before the judge, and that particular  paragraphs  were
    cited to her in submissions.  However, the judge has failed  to  engage
    with  this  country  information.   The  country  information  went  to
    material issues in the Appellant's  case,  including  involvement  with
    celebrations of heroes and/or martyrs.  It might  be  that  the  judge,
    having assessed all of the relevant current country information,  would
    have deemed it insufficient to depart from the guidance in GJ or,  that
    in any event, it simply did not give rise  to  any  potential  risk  on
    return.  The error lies in failing to engage with this evidence in  the
    first place and failing to reach any findings thereon.

15. In respect of the Appellant's mental health, as mentioned previously, I
    do not have Dr Okhari's letter before me.  Having read the  psychiatric
    report from Dr Persaud, it is clear that he was aware  of  Dr  Okhari's
    letter and indeed I see mention of it in the Record of Proceedings.  It
    is a pity that I have not had sight of this item  of  evidence  and  it
    makes it difficult to  reach  a  firm  conclusion  in  respect  of  the
    challenge made against the judge's approach to the  Appellant's  health
    in general.  I must say that I have some  concerns  about  the  judge's
    conclusion that  the  Appellant  had  of  her  own  volition,  declined
    relevant treatment (see paragraph 30).  It was the clear opinion of  Dr
    Persaud that the Appellant remained significantly unwell.  However,  my
    decision on error of law is not based upon the mental health issue.   I
    also have concerns about the apparent failure  of  the  judge  to  make
    clear findings on  the  Appellant's  family  members.   Nowhere  is  it
    clearly set out as to what their role may have been in relation to  the
    LTTE.  All there is, is a conclusion stated in paragraph 30 that it  is
    not accepted that her family members had ever been of interest  to  the
    security forces in Sri Lanka.  I do not base my decision  on  error  of
    law on this point either as it was not expressly raised in the  grounds
    of appeal.

16. In light of the above I set aside the judge's decision.



Disposal

17. Both representatives were agreed that this matter should be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Having regard to  the  core  issues  in  this
    case, namely that of credibility and profile on return,  and  paragraph
    7.2 of the Practice Statement, I have concluded that  remittal  is  the
    appropriate course of action.  I bear  in  mind  of  course  that  this
    appeal has already been remitted once, and so I  take  this  step  with
    some hesitation.  However, credibility is very much a  live  issue  and
    there needs to be a complete rehearing of  the  case  with  appropriate
    findings  of  fact  before  any  proper  assessment  of  risk  can   be
    undertaken.  I would add an observation.

18. It might be thought that upon remittal the appeal could be heard  by  a
    panel of the First-tier Tribunal, given the history of this case.  That
    would be a matter for the First-tier Tribunal to decide for itself.




Notice of Decision

I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  does  contain  material
errors of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed                                  Date: 22 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor







Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

 1. This appeal is remitted for a complete rehearing with  no  findings  of
    fact preserved.


Directions to the Parties

 1. The Appellant shall produce  a  consolidated  bundle  of  all  relevant
    evidence relied upon;

 2. The Appellant shall also provide a skeleton argument  setting  out  the
    nature of her case and with references to  evidence  contained  in  the
    consolidated bundle;

 3. The bundle and skeleton argument shall be served on the Respondent  and
    filed with the First-tier Tribunal no later than  21  days  before  the
    next hearing.

 4. Both parties shall comply with any further  directions  issued  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.
