
[pic]

In the Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  AA/10783/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 22nd July 2013                               |On 7th August 2013         |
|Prepared 23rd July 2013                         |                           |


                                   Before

       VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL MISS E ARFON-JONES DL AND
                     DEPUTY UPPER tribunal JUDGE DEARDEN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            MS SOHNA SONKO SANNEH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz
For the Respondent:    Miss Patel

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. In this appeal the Appellant is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and the Respondent is Ms Sohna Sonko Sanneh.

 2. This is the review of  an  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision made on 21st October 2012 to refuse Ms  Sohna  Sonko  Sanneh's
    application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom under the  Asylum
    and Human Rights Conventions  and  under  the  Humanitarian  Protection
    Provisions.  This has been dealt with as an order  granting  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal under the provisions contained  in  the
    Transfer of Functions of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  Order
    2010.

The History of the Matter

 3. Ms Sohna Sonko Sanneh is a national of Gambia born on 25th  June  1983.
    She entered the United Kingdom on 26th September  2012  using  her  own
    passport and a valid visit visa.  The Appellant, who was accompanied by
    her daughter, claimed asylum at port.

 4. Subsequently on 21st  October  2012  the  Secretary  of  State  made  a
    decision to refuse to grant asylum to Ms  Sanneh,  but  did  grant  her
    discretionary leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 5. Ms Sanneh appealed the decision of the Secretary of  State  seeking  an
    upgrade in her  status  and  subsequently  appeared  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cox sitting in Bradford  on  4th  January  2013.   In  a
    determination subsequently promulgated on 18th January 2013 the  appeal
    of Ms Sanneh was allowed.  Grounds seeking leave to appeal  were  filed
    by the Secretary of State and after  initial  refusal  the  matter  was
    referred to Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy who in a determination  dated
    3rd January 2013 held:

         "1.  This section 83 appeal of Ms Sohna Sonka Sanneh was allowed on
             the basis that she was the mother of a young daughter who  had
             been  recognised  as  a  refugee  because   she   might   face
             persecution on return to Gambia as she would be  subjected  to
             FGM.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  decided  to  allow
             the appeal finding that he should follow the decision  of  the
             Tribunal in AMM (Somalia) and Others [2011] UKUT 00455.

         2.   The Grounds of Appeal, lodged by the  Respondent,  argue  that
             the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had misapplies (sic) that
             decision.

         3.   I consider the Grounds of Appeal are arguable."

The Representations

 6. Miss Patel on behalf of Ms Sanneh adopted a skeleton argument which was
    filed before First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox and noted that this  was  an
    unusual  situation  in  that  the  mother   Ms   Sanneh   was   granted
    discretionary leave to remain  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  but  her
    daughter, born on a date in May 2012, has refugee status in the  United
    Kingdom.  Miss Patel maintained to us, following paragraph  28  of  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cox,  that  the  mother  Ms
    Sanneh would not under any circumstances leave the United  Kingdom  and
    leave her daughter  behind.   It  was  maintained  that  there  was  an
    inconsistency of treatment from the Secretary  of  State  in  that  the
    child was a refugee with five years' leave to remain  and  the  child's
    mother had exceptional leave to remain for a period of just two  and  a
    half years.

 7. Miss Patel commended to us that paragraph 237 of  AMM  meant  that  its
    provisions were not confined to British citizens and that the  findings
    of the judge on the evidence were, in all the circumstances, completely
    open to him and that the Secretary of State's grounds  amounted  to  no
    more than mere disagreement with the findings of fact  reached  by  the
    judge.

Has the Judge Erred in Law?

 8. The issue for us at this stage of the review is whether the  judge  has
    made an error of law sufficient to warrant the determination being  set
    aside.

 9. We accept that it  was  completely  open  to  the  Judge  to  find  the
    following facts:

      i) FGM of the child would amount to persecution of the child's  mother
         Ms Sanneh.

     ii) Whilst AMM applies to  Somalia,  in  the  absence  of  any  country
         guidance case of a similar type for The Gambia, the judge was right
         to consider that the general principles of AMM (but not the  facts)
         applied equally to Gambia as they did to Somalia.

    iii) The mother would not wish to return to The Gambia leaving the child
         in the United Kingdom.

10. However in our conclusion the judge erred in failing to distinguish the
    facts of AMM from the facts of this specific case. Paragraph 237 of AMM
    states:

         "The  hypothesis  which  a  Tribunal  is  required  to   make,   in
         determining the entitlement of a person to refugee status or  other
         international protection, is, however, not limited to assuming  the
         return to the country of origin only  of  the  Appellant.   On  the
         contrary, on a daily basis, judicial fact-finders determine appeals
         by reference to the hypothetical return along with the Appellant of
         other persons, whether or not these are  British  citizens.   There
         is, accordingly, no impediment to Appellant MW pursuing  her  claim
         to be entitled to refugee status or subsidiary protection,  on  the
         basis that, if compelled to return to  Somalia,  it  is  reasonably
         likely that she would take her  children,  including  her  daughter
         (our emphasis) and that she would suffer serious harm in  the  form
         of anguish, in the event that her daughter was subjected to FGM."

11. Pertinently the finding in AMM was that if the Appellant were compelled
    to return to Somalia "it is reasonably likely that she would  take  her
    children including her daughter ..."

12. In this case the child of Ms Sanneh is a refugee.  She is  entitled  to
    remain in the United Kingdom for the next five years at least.  However
    in our conclusion, despite her tender  years,  the  Judge  should  have
    found that she could not be taken to  The  Gambia  because  any  travel
    document issued to her would not permit her to enter  The  Gambia.   If
    the child cannot enter The Gambia she cannot be  made  the  subject  of
    FGM.  If the child cannot be the subject of FGM  then  it  follows  the
    child's mother cannot succeed in asserting  that  she  is  entitled  to
    refugee status if her child is the subject of FGM,  when  there  is  no
    reasonable likelihood of that event occurring.

13. Whilst we found the difference between the mother having two and a half
    years' exceptional leave to remain and  the  child  having  five  years
    leave as a refugee to be somewhat disconcerting, we could not  conclude
    that the mother, in the absence of a real risk to her daughter  because
    the daughter cannot enter The Gambia, could be said to be  entitled  to
    refugee status.

14. There is no question of the mother having to leave the  United  Kingdom
    within the next two and a half years.  If in two and a half years' time
    the Secretary of State makes a decision  refusing  the  mother  further
    discretionary leave to remain then that decision would carry with it  a
    further right of appeal.  We are invited to deal with the appeal on the
    basis of the hypothetical position if Ms Sanneh left or was obliged  to
    leave the United Kingdom tomorrow.   Whilst  that  would  be  factually
    impossible, even if it were possible, the child could not  be  admitted
    into Gambia. Therefore the child could  not  be  the  subject  of  FGM,
    therefore Ms Sanneh's application for asylum status must fail.

15. As a consequence we find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox did make an
    error of law sufficient to warrant his determination being set aside by
    failing to understand or explain the difference between  the  facts  of
    AMM and the factual position of Ms Sanneh.

16. In setting Judge Cox's decision aside  we  substitute  a  new  decision
    dismissing the appeal of Ms Sanneh against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision  under  the  Asylum  and  Human  Rights  Conventions  and  the
    Humanitarian Protection Provisions.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Dearden
