
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10265/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19th April 2016                         |On 04th  August 2016             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              MS VALIYEH SAREMI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M K Bradshaw of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M Swinnerton, promulgated on 18th May 2015, following  a  hearing
    at Stoke-on-Trent on 1st May 2015.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, who  subsequently  applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Iran and was born on 23rd March
    1964.  She appeals against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of
    State, refusing her application for asylum and humanitarian  protection
    under paragraph 339C of HC 395, in  a  decision  dated  26th  September
    2014.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she has been accused of adultery, and  of
    running a  brothel  in  Iran,  and  that  she  has  been  subjected  to
    harassment by a Mr Haj Hassan.  She claims that  she  is  at  risk  for
    having conducted a relationship which may be  seen  as  improper.   Her
    alleged boyfriend is a man by the name of Hamid.  Haj Hassan has a role
    in the Basiji in Shiraz.  The Basiji  is  Iran's  secret  police.   The
    Appellant cannot return back to Iran.  The  Appellant  also  has  three
    adult children by the name of Marjan  Saremifard,  Mozhgan  Saremifard,
    and Hossein Saremifard, and she has a good  relationship  with  all  of
    them, all of them having lived with her in the family home.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge gave due regard to the Appellant's claim.  This was that  the
    Appellant's boyfriend, Hamid Rahimi, who is  a  teacher  in  Iran,  had
    placed her at risk even though she did not have a  sexual  relationship
    with him.  He would visit her weekly or fortnightly  and  stay  at  her
    home in a separate bedroom when he visited for one or two nights.   Her
    daughter, Marjan Saremifard worked in a hair salon and she was harassed
    by a man  on  a  few  occasions.   After  this  harassment  began,  the
    Appellant and the daughter went to the local office of  the  Basiji  to
    file a complaint against this man.  The Basiji office is based  at  the
    mosque and the Appellant and Marjan, her daughter, attended the  office
    there and informed Haj Hassan, who is a Basiji officer.   Subsequently,
    however, Haj Hassan, after making investigations, asked  the  Appellant
    and her daughter to  return  to  the  Basiji  office  to  identify  the
    culprit, who was harassing Marjan.  After the culprit  was  identified,
    the harassment that the Appellant's daughter Marjan had met with ended.
     However, Haj Hassan then started to attend at  the  Appellant's  house
    regularly bringing gifts and making excuses to go there.  He  tried  to
    encourage more observant behaviour in the family.  Haj Hassan asked the
    Appellant for a temporary marriage and the Appellant refused this.   On
    20th November 2013, when Haj Hassan arrived at the  Appellant's  house,
    her boyfriend, Hamid, answered the door.  Haj Hassan saw the  Appellant
    in her home wearing comfortable clothes and a fight started between him
    and her boyfriend, Hamid.  The Appellant was scared and distressed  and
    she ran out of the house.

 5. The refusal letter from the Respondent takes the fundamental point that
    the Appellant's claim is not based on a Convention reason at  all.   It
    is only accepted that the Appellant is an Iranian  national.   She  had
    failed to demonstrate a reasonable degree of likelihood that she  would
    be at real risk of persecution from Haj Hassan or the authorities.

 6. The judge had regard to the Appellant's medical condition and  referred
    to a report by Dr Sadeghi, which the judge  said  "lacked  credibility"
    (paragraph 21).  This was because the Appellant had  said  that  during
    her interview she was unable to answer questions properly  because  she
    suffered from memory loss.  The judge did not  accept  this.   He  also
    found  that  the  Appellant's  account  was   internally   inconsistent
    (paragraph 21).  Her evidence was that she had  "contradicted  herself"
    (paragraph 23).  Moreover, the Appellant's claim that an arrest warrant
    had been issued against her was not  believable  because  her  evidence
    about this is inconsistent in  the  asylum  interview  (paragraph  24).
    Furthermore, there was  lack  of  supporting  evidence  to  assist  the
    Tribunal in making findings in relation to the boyfriend, Hamid.

 7. Moreover, nothing was known about the incident involving the  boyfriend
    and Haj Hassan (paragraph  26).   There  was  also  no  evidence  which
    confirmed the existence of Haj  Hassan  and  his  role  in  the  Basiji
    (paragraph 27).  All in all, the judge rejected completely the evidence
    of the Appellant as not being a credible witness and

         "Did not accept that she had been subjected to  harassment  by  Haj
         Hassan, nor that the incident happened between him and  Hamid,  her
         boyfriend as she  claims.   Neither  do  I  believe  that  she  had
         conducted a relationship with Hamid which may be seen  as  improper
         and which would be considered to be adulterous in Iran"  (paragraph
         28).

    This was a case where the Appellant had left Iran on her  own  passport
    (paragraph 28) and this in itself showed that she would not be at risk.

 8. Regard was given to Article 8 of the ECHR but the claim  was  dismissed
    for the same reasons.

 9. Finally, the judge  considered  the  position  of  the  children  under
    Article 8.  The Appellant had a daughter resident in the UK by the name
    of Maryam Rowghankaran,  and  she  was  a  UK  citizen.   However,  the
    Appellant had spent far longer of her life in Iran and she had  a  home
    there because of her deceased's husband's military service, and she was
    entitled to free health care  there.   It  was  entirely  possible  and
    reasonable for the Appellant  to  return  back  with  the  three  adult
    children to Iran (paragraph 38).  The appeal was dismissed  both  under
    paragraph 276ADE and under Article 8.

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that the judge gave little  weight  to
    the medical evidence, and there  had  been  a  failure  to  assess  the
    witness evidence and to make findings in relation to what the witnesses
    said.  In particular,  the  Appellant's  children  gave  "other  highly
    irrelevant evidence to the Tribunal" (see paragraph 8 of  the  grounds)
    which had not been properly considered.   There  were  no  findings  in
    relation to this evidence.

11. On 11th June 2015 permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that
    given that the Appellant's adult  children  had  given  evidence,  this
    evidence should have been referred to and evaluated.

12. On 18th July 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered to  the  effect  that
    the judge was correct in dismissing the children's evidence that  their
    mother  suffered  from   memory   problems   in   trying   to   explain
    discrepancies.  The judge also referred to the children's  evidence  at
    paragraph 23 in the context of the claim to asylum.  The Appellant (the
    mother) was the main asylum seeker.   She  was  interviewed  and  given
    appeal rights.  The judge found that she lacked credibility.  The judge
    was entitled to view the situation in the round which he did.

Submissions

13. At the hearing  before  me  on  19th  April  2016,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr M K Bradshaw  of  Counsel,  and  the  Respondent  was
    represented by Mr J Parkinson, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
     Mr Bradshaw submitted that the core of this appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal was that the Appellant  had,  appearing  alongside  her,  four
    other witnesses, namely, her four children.  Of these  three  were  the
    children dependent upon her appeal, and the remaining  one  was  Maryam
    Rowghankaran, the daughter settled in the UK,  as  a  British  citizen.
    They had produced lengthy witness statements.  Yet, the judge  made  no
    reference at all to these witness statements.

14. The judge may have had concerns about the Appellant's own evidence, but
    he could only assess that claim accurately, if he considered it in  the
    context of all the evidence that was before him, and this included  the
    additional evidence of the four children of the Appellant.   Throughout
    the determination, there is reference to the children.   It  begins  at
    paragraph 9 of the determination, where reference is made to the  three
    children.  It is said, "during the  hearing  the  Appellant  gave  oral
    evidence as did four of her children" (paragraph 9).  Then at paragraph
    21 the  judge  considers  the  medical  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's claimed dementia, and her inability  to  recollect  events,
    and the judge ends with the statement that,  "in  the  absence  of  any
    credible medical evidence I attach little weight to  the  evidence  the
    Appellant's four children gave about her claimed  memory  difficulties"
    (paragraph 21).

15. However, there is no substantive evaluation of the  evidence  given  as
    such by these four different children.  Then, at paragraph 23 the judge
    observes, the evidence from her, the Appellant's four children, is that
    "none of whom saw the alleged incident Haj Hassan and  the  Appellant's
    alleged boyfriend Hamid" (paragraph 26).  However the evidence  is  not
    evaluated.

16. One reason why this could have led to a material error is that when the
    judge observes that the Appellant had the chance  to  claim  asylum  in
    France during the ten days  when  the  family  were  there,  the  three
    children were also able to attest to what happened, and how the  French
    authorities refused to consider the asylum  claim.   This  should  have
    been taken into account by the judge.

17. For his part, Mr Parkinson submitted  that  this  was  the  Appellant's
    claim.  The judge found the Appellant to  be  lacking  in  credibility.
    The children's evidence is almost identical in the  witness  statements
    to what the mother said.  In fact, it is essentially  based  upon  what
    the mother is alleged to have told the children.   The  mother's  claim
    itself  is  based  upon  the  incident  between  Haj  Hassan  and   the
    Appellant's boyfriend, but  the  judge  states  that,  as  far  as  the
    children are concerned, "none of whom saw the alleged incident  between
    Haj Hassan and the Appellant's alleged boyfriend Hamid" and  then  went
    on to conclude that, "I do not accept that  she  was  harassed  by  Haj
    Hassan at all" and does so on the basis that, "her evidence about  this
    has been internally inconsistent as has her evidence about her  alleged
    flight from her home" (paragraph 23).

18. This showed that, even if the evidence of the  four  children  was  not
    individually considered, it would  have  made  no  material  difference
    whatsoever.  The Appellant failed simply on  account  of  the  evidence
    that she herself gave.  In short, if the judge was entitled  to  reject
    the evidence of the Appellant herself, he was entitled  to  reject  the
    evidence of the four children as well, as that evidence simply repeated
    what the Appellant herself had said.

19. In reply, Mr Bradshaw submitted that it was not true that  the  witness
    statements simply reiterated what the Appellant herself had said.   For
    example, there were no findings in  relation  to  the  first  incident,
    namely, the incident where the Appellant's daughter  had  alleged  that
    she had been harassed by another man, after which Haj Hassan  had  come
    to their assistance, and then started taking interest in the  Appellant
    herself.  There ought to have been a finding on this  point.   Finally,
    as far as Ground 2 was concerned, there had been a flawed  approach  to
    the medical evidence.  This is because the year for which the Appellant
    was being treated had been misinterpreted given that it was put down in
    the Farsi text and  the  Persian  calendar  here  spans  two  Gregorian
    calendar years.

No Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

21. First, this is a case where the judge has  found  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence to be "internally inconsistent"  (see  paragraph  21  and  see
    paragraph 23).  He has not believed the alleged  incident  between  Haj
    Hassan and the Appellant's alleged boyfriend.

22. Second, insofar as it is said that the judge failed  to  make  specific
    findings on all issues before him, it is not material  that  the  judge
    made no finding on whether the Appellant's daughter  had  been  earlier
    harassed by somebody else, because the asylum  claim  itself  is  based
    upon the harassment by Haj Hassan, and that  evidence  is  specifically
    rejected by the judge as being lacking in credibility.

23. Third, the Appellant's claim that she had been affected by memory  loss
    and dementia is singularly rejected by the judge in a lengthy paragraph
    21, and it does not matter here that the reference is  to  the  Persian
    calendar or the Gregorian calendar, because the judge has not found  Dr
    Sadeghi to be a credible witness in his medical statement.

24. Fourth, the judge does consider  the  evidence  of  the  children,  but
    either finds that it is not  materially  relevant  to  the  main  issue
    before him, or rejects it outright.  For example, in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's memory loss, the judge states that, "in the absence of  any
    credible medical evidence I attach little weight to  the  evidence  the
    Appellant's four children gave about her claimed memory  difficulties".
    As far as the harassment from Haj Hassan goes when he saw the Appellant
    together with her alleged boyfriend, Hamid, the judge  makes  it  clear
    that none of the children saw the alleged incident,  and  rejects  this
    anyway on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant's  account  is  "internally
    inconsistent" and that the Appellant had contradicted  herself  in  her
    own evidence.

25. Finally, the judge was entitled to conclude as he did  in  relation  to
    the failure to claim asylum in France, and the evidence of the children
    is again not materially relevant, because  the  judge  makes  it  clear
    that,

         "Her claim that she told the French authorities she wished to claim
         asylum but was told that she had three days to  leave  the  country
         and no  application  for  asylum  processed  is  implausible.   The
         Appellant has not produced any  supporting  documents  to  evidence
         this claim and no credible explanation why she did not claim asylum
         in France" (paragraph 25).

    For all these reasons, the judge was correct to conclude as he did.

Notice of Decision

26. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

27.  No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 2nd August 2016
