

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10376/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 May 2015                        |On 12 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                              Mr HUMPHREY DUBE
                        (no ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant: Mr A Chohan, Authorised Representative (Genesis Law
                        Associates Ltd)
    For the Respondent:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Simpson on 6 March  2014  against  the  decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge made  in  a  decision  and  reasons
         promulgated on 5 February 2015 dismissing the  Appellant's  asylum,
         humanitarian protection and human rights appeals.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of  Zimbabwe,  born  on  5  December
         1965.  He had appealed against his removal from the United Kingdom,
         a decision taken by  the  Respondent  on  17  November  2014.   The
         Appellant had entered the United  Kingdom  some  six  years  before
         making an asylum claim.  He was a member of Zanu-PF but  maintained
         that as teacher he had been forced to join.  He had  left  Zimbabwe
         while under investigation by Zanu-PF for supporting  the  MDC.   He
         had also claimed that he had a family life in  the  United  Kingdom
         with his partner.

    3.     When granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Simpson considered that it was arguable that Judge Lodge had  erred
         in his assessment of the risk on return.  It was arguable  that  he
         had given insufficient attention to the Appellant's Shona ethnicity
         and to the country background evidence when considering the  asylum
         claim.  No merit was found in the assertion that the Article 8 ECHR
         claim had not been adequately addressed.

    4.     The Respondent filed notice under rule 24  indicating  that  the
         appeal was opposed.  Standard directions were made by the  tribunal
         and the appeal was listed for adjudication of whether or not  there
         was a material error of law.

    Submissions

    5.     Mr Chohan for the Appellant relied on  the  grounds  of  onwards
         appeal earlier submitted, together with the grant of permission  to
         appeal.  The judge had given undue weight to  minor  discrepancies.
         The  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  consequences   of   the
         Appellant's Shona ethnicity and to the fact  that  the  Appellant's
         membership of Zanu-PF was involuntary.  There was no good reason to
         have expected that the Appellant was on  a  "wanted"  list  to  the
         extent that he was unable to  leave  Zimbabwe.   The  finding  that
         relocation to Bulawayo was safe, possible  and  reasonable  was  at
         variance with the objective evidence.  The  judge's  findings  were
         unsound in all respects, including as  to  the  Appellant's  United
         Kingdom relationship with his partner.  The  decision  and  reasons
         should be set aside and the appeal reheard.

    6.      Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  for  the  Respondent   relied   on   the
         Respondent's rule 24 notice.  She submitted that the  decision  and
         reasons disclosed no error of law.  The  fact  that  the  Appellant
         admitted his Zanu-PF membership  was  decisive,  coupled  with  the
         judge's findings that the Appellant had  not  participated  in  MDC
         activities in the United Kingdom and  was  effectively  apolitical:
         see the  answer  to  Q78  of  the  asylum  interview  record.   The
         Appellant had made no claim of physical harm in Zimbabwe and indeed
         had claimed that due process had  been  observed  by  Zanu-PF  when
         (allegedly) investigating him.   In  any  event  the  situation  in
         Zimbabwe was much improved since 2007.  The Appellant  was  not  at
         risk as a teacher as the CG cases showed.  The judge  had  examined
         the case in the light of the objective evidence.  The Appellant was
         in contact with his family in Zimbabwe, as he  had  admitted.   The
         judge had been entitled to reach his adverse conclusions as to  the
         Appellant's claimed family life in the United Kingdom  and  it  was
         difficult to see what  other  conclusion  he  could  properly  have
         reached.  The decision and reasons should stand.

    7.     In reply, Mr Chohan reiterated his client's case.   The  adverse
         credibility  findings  were  in  effect  unsound.    The  objective
         evidence had not been properly considered, particularly with regard
         to the Appellant's Shona ethnicity.

    No material error of law

    8.     The tribunal accepts Ms  Brocklesby-Weller's  submissions,  save
         for the judge's treatment of the Appellant's  Shona  ethnicity  and
         the placing of that into the proper context of the current  country
         background evidence when approaching the issue of relocation within
         Zimbabwe.  But, as the tribunal will explain below, any error as to
         that aspect of the appeal was not material and certainly would  not
         justify setting aside the decision and reasons.

    9.     The judge heard and saw the Appellant and his partner and  found
         that both were wholly unreliable witnesses.  The judge  found  that
         the Appellant was  not  at  risk  of  serious  harm  on  return  to
         Zimbabwe.  It was admitted that the Appellant was a member of Zanu-
         PF and the judge gave full and sustainable reasons at [23]  of  the
         decision for finding that the Appellant was not under investigation
         in Zimbabwe for supporting the MDC.  The Appellant admitted that he
         had not participated in MDC activities in the United Kingdom.   The
         judge was entitled to factor into his  credibility  assessment  the
         Appellant's enormous and inadequately explained delay  in  claiming
         asylum.

    10.    There was, strictly speaking, no need for the judge to  consider
         the possibility of relocation, given his full and  adverse  primary
         findings of fact.  Hence, although the judge failed to consider the
         country background evidence about possible problems for persons  of
         unchallenged Shona ethnicity moving to, say, Bulawayo, the error of
         law is not material as relocation was not  needed.   The  Appellant
         was quite simply not at  risk  from  the  authorities.   The  judge
         sufficiently addressed the relevant case  law  as  to  teachers  in
         Zimbabwe at [22] of the decision and reasons.

    11.    The grant of permission to appeal did not formally extend to the
         judge's findings as to the Article 8 ECHR claim.  Nevertheless  the
         tribunal allowed Mr  Chohan  to  make  submissions.   As  indicated
         above, these failed to establish anything  remotely  approaching  a
         material error of law.  The decision and reasons shows  that  Judge
         Lodge gave careful attention to the evidence of the  Appellant  and
         his partner and was  not  persuaded  that  their  relationship  had
         continued despite what were admitted to have been  ups  and  downs:
         see [28].  There was thus no family life.  It was obvious  that  as
         the Appellant was a mature man who had spent most of  his  life  in
         Zimbabwe, and had family there, he had  retained  significant  ties
         and there were no significant obstacles to his  reintegration  into
         his country of origin.

    12.    The decision contained no material error of law.   There  is  no
         basis for interfering with the  judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the
         Appellant's appeal, which dismissal must stand.

    DECISION

    The tribunal finds that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    original decision, which stands unchanged






    Signed Dated 08 May 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
