
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10089/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21 September 2016                     |On 23 September 2016                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     rm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss E Heikkila, Counsel, instructed by Simman
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 21  June  1998.   He  is  an
    Iranian Kurd.  He arrived in the United Kingdom and claimed  asylum  on
    the basis that he had helped his father distribute leaflets  on  behalf
    of the Kurdish Democratic Party of Iran (KDPI).

 2. In July 2014 the appellant's father came home and told him that he must
    leave the country because the Iranian authorities had found out that he
    had been distributing leaflets and the  appellant  had  been  assisting
    him. The appellant's father left  the  same  day  and  the  appellant's
    mother and his paternal uncle then made arrangements for the  appellant
    to leave Iran, which he did two days later, travelling through a number
    of European countries prior to reaching the UK.

 3. Since his arrival in the United  Kingdom  the  appellant  has  attended
    meetings of the KDPI and also posted material on his Facebook  account.
    He fears return to Iran on the basis that he will be persecuted by  the
    authorities because of his association with the KDPI both in  Iran  and
    since he came to the United Kingdom.

 4. His asylum application was refused on 30 June  2015.  His  appeal  came
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dean  for  hearing  on  7  June
    2016.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on  24  June  2016,  Judge
    Dean dismissed the appeal. He made a number of  findings  including  at
    [11] that the appellant in interview had said that he himself was not a
    supporter of the  KDPI,  it  was  just  his  father.  That  relates  to
    questions 80 and 85 of the asylum interview.

 5. At [12] the judge found:

         "The appellant's father is nothing  more  than  a  very  low  level
         supporter of the KDPI  and  it  is  implausible  that  the  Iranian
         authorities would be interested in the appellant because he  was  a
         minor who was merely acting at the behest of his father."

 6. The judge went on to  find,  in  respect  of  screen  prints  from  the
    appellant's Facebook account at [26] and [27],  that  the  evidence  on
    Facebook i.e. an event of the UK KDPI in Manchester on 23 January  2016
    which showed the appellant with posters of the  founder  and  secretary
    general of the KDPI "this may or may not have been taken at  the  event
    in Manchester".

 7. At [27] the judge said

         "Other posts  on  his  Facebook  account  are  of  photographs  the
         appellant has placed  there  and  are  not  comments  or  political
         statements which the appellant  has  made.   Other  posts  are  not
         translated so it is not possible to evaluate their content although
         the KDPI logo can be seen.  Looking at this evidence in the  round,
         I find that at its highest it shows an interest in Kurdish  matters
         but consider that this is not unusual given that the  appellant  is
         Kurdish."

 8. And the judge went on to find that

         "The appellant has not made  adverse  comments  but  merely  posted
         material from other people which I find does not demonstrate to the
         required  standard  that  the  appellant  is  involved  in  Kurdish
         political activities."

 9. At [29] the Judge found that the appellant would  not  be  at  risk  or
    attract the adverse attention of the authorities and he would not be at
    risk on return.

10. An application for permission to appeal was made to the Upper  Tribunal
    on a number of bases: ground 1: that the judge unlawfully relied on the
    concept of plausibility; ground  2:  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
    account material evidence and  country  evidence,  in  particular,  the
    manner in which the judge dealt with the Facebook evidence  essentially
    failed to recognise that the appellant was plainly identifiable on line
    as someone supportive of Kurdish political  rights  and  the  political
    aspect of his Facebook feed demonstrates someone with much more than an
    interest in Kurdish matter and given that the KDPI is  banned  in  Iran
    and given the findings of the Upper Tribunal in AB and Others (Internet
    activity - state of evidence) Iran  [2015]  UKUT  0247  (IAC)  and  the
    evidence that the Iranian authorities employ  sophisticated  techniques
    when investigating internet activities, the appellant's online  profile
    is sufficient for the authorities to impute to him a political  opinion
    antagonistic to the current regime; Ground 3  asserte  that  the  judge
    misdirected himself regarding opportunism and sur place activities  and
    failed to take into account the decision in Danian [2000] ImmAR 96 (per
    Brooke LJ at [557]) and YB (Eritrea) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2008] EWCA Civ 360 per Sedley LJ at [13] to [15].  See also
    RT (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]  UKSC
    38.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge MacWilliam  on
    10 August 2016 on the basis that it is arguable that the judge did  not
    understand the potential significance of the Facebook photographs.

     Hearing

12. At the hearing before me Mr Jarvis for the Home  Office  accepted  that
    the  judge  had  erred  materially  in  law  in  his  approach  to  the
    appellant's material history and the distribution of KDPI leaflets.  He
    submitted it was unsafe for the judge  to  find  that  the  authorities
    would not have an adverse interest in a minor, and this was indeed  the
    judge's finding at [12] of his decision.  Mr Jarvis also submitted that
    the judge had erred in  his  approach  to  the  appellant's  sur  place
    activities in the United Kingdom.

13. I agree with Mr Jarvis' concession, which I find was properly  made.  I
    find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred  in  law  with
    the consequence that his decision no longer stands.



Notice of Decision

14. The appeal is remitted back to  Taylor  Houses  Hearing  Centre  for  a
    hearing de novo.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
