

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
AA/11020/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                         |Promulgated on:           |
|On 26 April 2013                            |On 18 June 2013           |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

                                   Between

                         Ms Fatoumata Cynthia Camara
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant :    Ms Mair, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Details of Appellant and basis of claim
   1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission on 13
      March 2013 by Designated Immigration Judge Zucker in respect of the
      determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hindson who dismissed the
      appeal following a hearing at Bradford on 25 January 2013 by way of a
      determination promulgated on 12 February 2013.The Appellant is a
      Gambian National born on 11 September 1984. She appeals against the
      decision of the respondent to remove her from the UK as an illegal
      entrant. She arrived in the UK on a student visa on 07 September 2009
      valid until 19 March 2012, having advised Pascal Francis Mendy, a
      former boyfriend, that she was arriving  she went to live with him on
      arrival.  The Appellant did not study. In September 2010 Mr Mendy was
      arrested working in possession of a false document for which he
      received a prions sentence. In May 2011 the Appellant 's leave was
      cancelled. In October 2011 Mr Mendy applied for leave outside of the
      rules with the Appellant and their eldest child as a dependent. The
      application was refused. The Appellant 's leave was curtailed. The
      Appellant made a claim for asylum on 20 August 2012. Her partner
      Pascal Francis Mendy (born 17/02/1978) and her two children Joshua
      Solomon Mendy (born 02/10/12) and Sampierre Francis Mendy (born 26/06
      2010) are all dependents in her claim.


   2. The Appellant claimed at her screening interview that her maternal
      family are Christian Ghanaians. Her mother went to the Gambia from
      Ghana and became the second wife of her father, a Serahule muslim. She
      is the only child of that union. Her maternal grandmother in Ghana was
      a witch. When the grandmother died her maternal family wanted her, in
      the absence of her mother who had dies of breast cancer in 2004, to
      become a witch. She refused and the family came to Gambia and tried to
      kidnap her and forcibly take her to Ghana to become a witch. In 2012
      her mother's brother came to look for her at her friend's house in
      London Corner in Serakunda and neighbours told him she had moved to
      the UK. She is frightened the family would kidnap her if she returned.




   3. At substantive interview the Appellant added two further bases of
      claim: that she converted to Christianity in 2006, and was, and would
      continue to be, persecuted by her father's family because of her
      conversion. That she will be forcibly circumcised by extended family
      on her father's side. Her father is a retired school teacher. He is
      alive. The Sarahule tribe practise FGM. He is not against
      circumcision, but her deceased Christian mother was, and so the
      Appellant was not circumcised. Since her mother's death the Appellant
      claims that in 2005 she put off a telephone enquiry about her
      circumcision and in 2006 she avoided her paternal aunt taking her to
      her village to be circumcised which led to her being slapped and
      beaten by the aunt. Her father divorced her mother and then lived full
      time with his first wife in Dippa Kunde,  when the Appellant  became
      pregnant out of wedlock, or alternatively when her mother, who had
      converted to Islam when she married him, converted back to
      Christianity.


   4. Appellant explains that initially on claiming asylum she only
      mentioned her mother's family in Ghana and the issue of witchcraft
      because she saw a male interviewer.


   5. The Appellant has a child from a former relationship living in The
      Gambia, with his father according to Mr Mendy's screening interview
      and with a friend according to the Appellant . The Appellant maintains
      that her account of the facts is correct and that she has no
      explanation as to why Mr Mendy account differs.  Mr Mendy has not
      provided a witness statement. The Appellant 's explanation for her
      late claim for asylum is a position of ignorance which she says only
      changed on being positively advised of a right to do so by lawyers in
      2012. The Appellant 's partner is not Serahule and is a Christian, who
      the Appellant  says has a brother and sister here in the UK but no
      family in The Gambia. The Appellant says her family would not approve
      of the match.


   6. The appeal was dismissed by the judge who decided: That the Appellant
      was not a credible witness, her claimed fear of witchcraft was
      fabricated in an effort to establish a claim for her and her family to
      stay here when other avenues had been exhausted. The judge found the
      objective evidence did not support a claim for persecution as a
      Christian, and her account of religious persecution/abduction for
      witchcraft was, at its highest, a stale incident of family disapproval
      which did not give rise to any current threat justifying international
      protection. That there was no real risk of forced circumcision,
      historically it had not happened, he rejected the account of threats
      from the paternal aunt, and noted that  the Appellant  in  any event
      now had a partner who would provide protection.


   The Appeal hearing


   7. At the hearing before me on 26 April 2013 the Appellant attended. Ms
      Mair expanded on the grounds. The grounds argue that the credibility
      finding is perverse, based solely on s8  (1) & (2) of the Asylum and
      Immigration Treatment of Claimants Act 2004, with too much emphasis
      given to the late claim which the Ft TJ had failed to appreciate was
      fully explained by her lack of knowledge that she could claim, as
      established by the fact that the letter from Immigration Aid dated 11
      July  2012 showed that that was the first time she had been advised
      that she could claim asylum, and it can be assumed that if she had
      already known the position there would have been no need for the
      advice. The adverse credibility finding in respect of the late claim
      had also led the Ft TJ to conclude that the Appellant had entered the
      UK pretending to be a student, when really she was coming to join Mr
      Mendy. In response Mr Harrison submitted that the Appellant's evidence
      had been heard and she had not been believed. As the entire claim was
      rejected, the claim of risk, including of FGM was not accepted. At the
      conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination which I now
      give.

   My Consideration Findings and Conclusions

   8. I find no merit in the challenge to credibility. The Ft TJ's reasoning
      makes it perfectly clear that it was not the late claim for asylum
      that was the ratio for the adverse credibility finding concerning
      entry to the UK. The Ft TJ explains clearly that he does not believe
      the Appellant ever intended to study here because she did not start
      studying when she arrived and made no contact with her college on
      arrival. She was not pregnant on arrival and even though she became
      pregnant shortly thereafter that her pregnancy would not have
      prevented her from starting the course as planned in September. This
      ground is also flawed in its reliance on the letter from Immigration
      Aid. The letter from Immigration Aid is not determinative of what the
      Appellant  knew, only of the advice given by those particular advisers
      at that time, and nor can it be reasonably be said that  the fact of
      the advice being given establishes a lack of knowledge prior, so that
      the letter reveals an incontrovertible mistake of fact. Nor can its
      import be said to be such that the Ft TJ was bound to remark on it,
      and that his failure to refer to it is an error of law.


   9. I find that the Ft TJ's adverse credibility conclusions were properly
      open to him on the evidence, and that there is no perversity. The
      Appellant's claim was internally consistent in parts but not in
      others, there was a poor immigration history, and the late claim had
      all the hallmarks of expediency. The claim that FGM was not initially
      mentioned because of the lack of a female interviewer is clearly
      undermined by the failure to mention the claim based on Christianity.


  10. In any event the criticisms made cannot sustain an error of law
      finding because they ignore the fact that the Ft TJ considers the
      position in the alternative, i.e. on the basis that the account of
      events in The Gambia is credible. Ms Mair submitted to me that it is
      not clear that the issues are considered in the alternative, but
      rather that the consideration of the different heads of claim show
      that,  contrary to the adverse credibility findings,  the FT TJ in
      fact accepted the account given in its entirety, but not the
      inferences drawn by the Appellant .  I am satisfied that when the Ft
      TJ says, at paragraph 61, "However I have considered the position if
      her account is true", he meant exactly that he was considering it in
      the alternative, and there is no inconsistency in his reasoning.


  11. The grounds do not challenge the findings in respect of the claim
      witchcraft and Christianity beyond the issue of credibility that I
      have dealt with, and it follows that I find no error in respect of the
      decision in respect of those parts of the claim.


  12. The last ground of challenge is that the FT TJ failed to properly
      assess the risk on return arsing from FGM. The particularisation is
      that the account of the Appellant  is that she was able to refuse her
      paternal aunt's attempts to take her back to her place of residence
      but that resulted in violence to her which underlined the serious of
      the threat that the aunt would return, and ignores the Appellant 's
      evidence that she had then moved away to avoid further threats, so
      that the Ft TJ's finding that the fact the Aunt had not returned
      showed there was little risk that she would be interested now, is
      unsafe.


  13. I find no merit in the basis of this challenge. It again ignores that
      it is a finding in the alternative. The primary finding is that the Ft
      TJ did not find credible the evidence that the maternal aunt had made
      any threat or that the Appellant had moved around because of it.


  14. I drew to the representatives' attention the new country guidance case
      of K and Others (FGM) The Gambia CG [2013] UKUT 00062. Both
      representatives indicated that they did not require an adjournment to
      deal with any matters arising from it, and were in agreement that I
      should take it into account in reaching my decision. I have considered
      whether in light of that case, the approach of the Ft TJ here reveals
      any material error of law. The head note states:
     1) FGM has been practised upon about  three  quarters  of  the  female
        population of The Gambia historically.  The most recent  scientific
        evidence, based on data from 2005, showed no significant change  in
        its  incidence.   There  are  ongoing  campaigns,  principally   by
        GAMCOTRAP (Gambia Committee on Traditional Practices Affecting  the
        Health of Women and Children), aiming to reduce and  eventually  to
        eliminate FGM. There has been some increase in published opinion in
        the Gambia against FGM, and there have been local  declarations  of
        renunciation, but  there  has  been  no  scientific  evaluation  of
        GAMCOTRAP's effectiveness in establishing a decline.
     2) Incidence of FGM varies by  ethnic  group.  Within  the  four  main
        ethnic groups there are subgroups, within which the  incidence  may
        vary - see the table below. In no  ethnic  group  is  the  practice
        universal; in some ethnic groups the  practice  is  absent.  Ethnic
        groups are thoroughly interspersed. The country is small and highly
        interconnected. (Where reference is made to ethnic group we include
        sub-groups save where specified)
     3) The evidence as at November 2012 falls short of demonstrating  that
        intact females in The Gambia are, as such, at real risk of FGM. The
        assessment of risk of FGM is a fact sensitive  exercise,  which  is
        likely to involve ethnic group, (whether parental or marital),  the
        attitudes of parents, husband and wider family  and  socio-economic
        milieu.
     4) There are significant variables which affect the risk:
           a.  the  practice  of  the  kin  group  of  birth:  the   ethnic
              background, taking into account high levels of  intermarriage
              and of polygamy;
           b. the education of the individual said to be at risk;
           c. her age;
           d. whether she lived in an urban or rural area before coming  to
              the UK;
           e. the kin group into which she has married (if married); and
           f. the practice of the kin group into which she has married  (if
              married).
     5) Also relevant is the prevalence of FGM amongst the extended family,
        as this may increase or reduce the relevant risk  which  may  arise
        from the prevalence of the practice amongst members of  the  ethnic
        group in general.


     6) In assessing the risk facing an individual, the starting  point  is
        to consider the statistical information currently known  about  the
        prevalence of the practice within the  ethnic  group  that  is  the
        relevant ethnic group in the individual's case, as follows:


     7) If the individual is unmarried and given that ethnicity is  usually
        taken from the father in The Gambia, the relevant ethnic  group  is
        likely to be the ethnic group of the father.


     8) If the individual is married to a man from an ethnic group that  is
        different from her father's ethnic group, then the relevant  ethnic
        is the ethnic group of the husband.


     9) The statistics from which the prevalence of  the  practice  of  FGM
        within the ethnic groups in the Gambia is drawn, vary  considerably
        given the lack of detailed research and analysis undertaken in  The
        Gambia.  From  the  material  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,   those
        statistics indicate as follows:


           |Ethnic group                       |Prevalence of FGM/C         |
|Mandinka                           |May be as high as 80-100%   |
|Fula (Overall)                     |30%                         |
|Hobobehs (sub group of Fula)       |0%                          |
|Jama (sub group of Fula)           |0%                          |
|Toranks, Peuls, Futas, Tukuleurs,  |Practise but % unknown      |
|Jawarinkas, Lorbehs, Ngalunkas and |                            |
|Daliankos (sub groups of Fula)     |                            |
|Serehule                           |May be as high as 100%      |
|Njefenjefe (within the Serehule    |0%                          |
|ethnic grouping)                   |                            |
|Niumikas (within the Serehule      |Practise but % unknown      |
|ethnic grouping)                   |                            |
|Jola & Karonikas                   |90 to 100%                  |
|Jola Foni                          |Practise but % not known    |
|Jola Casa                          |0%                          |
|Others                             |Variable                    |
|Wolof - those who migrated from    |0%                          |
|Senegal Oriental                   |                            |
|Wolof - those who migrated from    |Practise but % not known    |
|Sine Saloum                        |                            |


    10) The next step is to consider the various other factors mentioned in
        paragraph 4 above as some may increase the risk, whilst others  may
        reduce the risk.  Whist each case will turn on it  own  facts,  the
        following are of general application:
           a. In the  case  of  an  unmarried  woman,  parental  opposition
              reduces the risk. In the case of a married woman,  opposition
              from the husband reduces the risk.  If  the  husband  has  no
              other "wives", the risk may be reduced further.  However,  it
              should be borne in mind that parental/spousal opposition  may
              be insufficient to prevent  the  girl  or  woman  from  being
              subjected to FGM  where  the  extended  family  is  one  that
              practises it, although this will  always  be  a  question  of
              fact.
           b. If the prevalence of the practice amongst the extended family
              is greater than the prevalence of the practice in the  ethnic
              group in question, this will increase the  risk.  Conversely,
              if the prevalence of the practice amongst the extended family
              is less than the prevalence of the  practice  in  the  ethnic
              group in question, this will reduce the risk.
           c. If the woman is educated (whether she is single or  married),
              the risk will reduce.
           d. If the individual lived in an urban area prior to  coming  to
              the United Kingdom, this will reduce the risk. Conversely, if
              the individual lived in a rural area prior to coming  to  the
              United Kingdom, this will increase the risk.
           e. The age of a woman does not affect the risk measurably; it is
              an issue upon  marriage.  Amongst  the  Fula,  FGM  has  been
              carried out on babies as young as one week old.  The  average
              age at which FGM is carried out appears to  be  reducing  and
              this may be due to concerns about the international  pressure
              to stop the practice. Although there are statistics about the
              average age at which FGM is carried out on  girls  and  women
              for particular ethnic groups,  the  evidence  does  not  show
              that, in general, being above or below the  relevant  average
              age has a material effect on  risk.  It  would  therefore  be
              unhelpful in most cases to focus on the age of  the  girl  or
              woman and the average age at which FGM is carried out for the
              ethnic group of her father (if  unmarried)  or  that  of  her
              husband (if married).
    11) Thus, it is possible to arrive at a conclusion that the risk  faced
        by an individual is less than, or more than, the rate of  incidence
        of  FGM  in  the  ethnic  group  of  the  individual's  father  (if
        unmarried) or her husband (if married).  The rate of  incidence  of
        FGM in an ethnic group must therefore  be  distinguished  from  the
        degree of likelihood of infliction on  an  individual  against  her
        will or against the will of her  parents.   Some  individuals  from
        ethnic groups with a high incidence may not be at risk, while  some
        individuals from ethnic groups with a low incidence may be at risk.


    12) State protection: FGM  is  not  specifically  criminalised  in  The
        Gambia although it may be covered by the existing criminal  law  on
        assault or in The Gambia's Children's Act 2005. However, there  are
        no known cases of prosecutions under the general  criminal  law  or
        under the 2005 Act. There is no reliable evidence to suggest that a
        female who may be  at  real  risk  of  FGM  can  avail  herself  of
        effective State protection or that  her  father  or  husband  could
        invoke such protection on her behalf.
    13) Internal flight: As a general matter, an individual at real risk of
        FGM in her home area is unlikely to be able  to  avail  herself  of
        internal relocation, although this is always a  question  of  fact.
        Cogent reasons need to be given for a finding that  the  individual
        would be able to relocate safely,  especially  given  the  evidence
        that ethnic groups are  thoroughly  interspersed,  the  country  is
        small and ethnic groups in  different  parts  of  the  country  are
        highly interconnected.


  15. I note that the CG case confirms that the statistical evidence of  the
      practice of FGM of the ethnic group of  the  Appellant's  father,  the
      Serahule is  up  to  100%.  That  does  not  of  course  mean  without
      exception, as is self-evident here because, in fact, the Appellant  is
      intact.


  16. The factual basis relevant to  the  assessment  of  risk  is  not  the
      account put forward by the Appellant, but those  matters  accepted  by
      the Ft TJ. In summary that is that  the  Appellant's  father's  ethnic
      tribe widely practise circumcision, and her paternal  family  practise
      it, and her own father approved  of  it.  She  is  the  child  of  her
      father's second wife and  whilst  her  parents  remained  married  her
      particular family had not inflicted it forcibly against  her  mother's
      wishes, or against her own. After the death of her mother in 2004  and
      prior to her coming to the UK in 2009 she had not  faced  attempts  to
      forcibly circumcise her, as she claimed. She had not moved about in an
      effort to avoid forcible circumcision as she claimed. The position now
      is different from when the Appellant left in 2009. The  assessment  is
      not of the Appellant returning as a single woman, and to the  Serahule
      tribe.  She has a partner  with  whom  she  has  two  children.  I  am
      satisfied that there is no basis to  daw  a  distinction  between  the
      Appellant's relationship with Mr Mendy and a marriage in this context.
       Mr Mendy is of course a  dependent  in  this  claim.  They  would  be
      returned as a family unit.  Mr Mendy did  not  give  evidence  at  the
      First Tier; the Judge was advised that that was because the  Appellant
      did not see that he would add  anything  to  her  claim.  That  was  a
      decision properly open to her and her representatives.   The  CG  case
      makes clear that a woman's ethnicity is, whilst  she  is  single,  her
      father's, and once married, her husbands. The Appellant has said  that
      Mr Mendy is not of the Serahule ethnicity and that he is  a  Christian
      with no family in The Gambia. Indeed the lack of his having family  to
      support the couple was a concern militating against return.  There  is
      no evidence from which it can reasonably be inferred that Mr Mendy  is
      anything but supportive of the Appellant and her desire not to undergo
      FGM. The country  guidance  case  specifically  reminds  us  that  the
      attitude of the partner is significant when  assessing  risk.  On  the
      facts here Mr Mendy has no family in The Gambia who might subject  the
      Appellant to forced mutilation. The  Appellant   has  never  suggested
      that she fears any involvement from Mr  Mendy  in  terms  of  FGM,  or
      suggested that as a result of his ethnicity she would be at risk,  her
      claim has, since she made it, always been  that  it  is  her  paternal
      extended family who are the cause of her fear.

  17.  I have carefully considered all  the  submissions  and  the  evidence
      before arriving at  my  conclusions.  I  appreciate  that  there  were
      serious difficulties with the Appellant's evidence and that there were
      real concerns identified by the judge whose findings  were  made  with
      full consideration of the evidence, albeit not  the  country  guidance
      case. I note the compelling reasons given by the judge  for  rejecting
      the account. When considering the risk to the Appellant on  return,  I
      find that the judge considered all the  relevant  matters  upon  which
      evidence was provided, as referred to in the  country  guidance  case,
      including, on the judge's findings,  that  there  had  been  no  prior
      problems, as well as the support of the Appellant's partner,  and  how
      that might impact upon how she would be perceived on  return.  On  the
      particular facts of  this  case  the  FT  TJ's  conclusions,  although
      reached without the benefit of the new CG case, do not run contrary to
      it, but are very much in line with it. This is not a case where it can
      be said that simply  because  the  Appellant  had  Serehule  ethnicity
      through her father by birth, she would be at risk now, so that the  Ft
      TJ's findings are perverse.  For all these reasons  I  find  that  the
      First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  any  errors  of  law   and   the
      determination stands.
Decision
  18.  The First-tier Tribunal made no error of law. The decision dismissing
      the Appellant's appeal stands.
      Signed:

      E.Davidge   Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
      26 April 2013.
