

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
AA/11756/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard  at  Manchester  Piccadilly                                Decision  &
Reasons Promulgated
On the 18th March 2016                                               On  the
6th April 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

Between:
                                   MR A.M.
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Khan (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent: Mr Harris (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Shimmin promulgated on the 25th February 2015, in which
      he dismissed the Appellant's asylum appeal.

   2. Permission to appeal that decision has been granted by Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Perkins  on  the  8th  June  2015.  The  grant  permission  gave
      permission to appeal on all of the grounds raised within  the  grounds
      of appeal notice. Judge Perkins indicated  that  he  was  particularly
      concerned that, given the favourable findings of fact, the  First-tier
      Tribunal  might  not  have  given  adequate   consideration   to   the
      Appellant's claim that he could not safely  relocate  to  a  different
      part of Pakistan. However he reminded the Appellant that he would have
      to show that the Judge erred in some way, rather than simply that  the
      appeal could have been decided differently.

   3. Within the grounds of appeal it is argued by the Appellant that First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin had found  within  his  determination  the
      Appellant was a credible witness and that at [46] had stated  "I  find
      that the Appellant has proved to the required standard  of  reasonable
      likelihood that the facts he  alleges  are  true  and  that  he  is  a
      credible witness." It is argued that it is strange after such  finding
      and agreeing that the events as claimed  by  the  Appellant  occurred,
      that the Judge went on to dismiss the appeal and that  the  Judge  had
      failed to give  proper  consideration  to  the  threat  posed  to  the
      Appellant and to his family in Pakistan. Next, it is argued  that  the
      First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  inconsistent  in  finding  that  the
      Appellant had not established to the required standard that he is  the
      subject of persecution by non-state actors  on  account  of  his  Shia
      religion and that he had not established that he had a high profile in
      the eyes of non-Shia, despite having accepted the Appellant's  account
      was truthful and that the Judge had not given proper consideration  to
      the genuine threat to the Appellant  including  attacks  on  him,  his
      family and his mother. It is argued the Judge ignored  the  fact  that
      the Appellant's uncle and cousins had been  murdered  in  Pakistan  on
      different occasions due to his family's prominent  Shia  profile.  The
      argument is that the Judge failed to take  into  proper  consideration
      the objective evidence presented was presented before him.

   4. Within the Rule 24 reply it is argued by the Respondent that the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge properly directed himself and the Judge found  the
      Appellant was credible, but was nevertheless not a high  profile  Shia
      Muslim in the eyes of non-Shia, which it is argued was a finding  that
      was open to the Judge on the evidence. It is  argued  that  the  Judge
      found that  there  was  no  particular  evidence  that  the  documents
      produced by the Appellant could be relied upon, but he took them  into
      account generally. It is said the Judge did have in mind  the  claimed
      murders of the  Appellant's  relatives  but  the  Judge  accepted  the
      Respondent's view that the Appellant  was  speculative  regarding  him
      being approached at a fuel station by someone  who  is  said  to  have
      reached for a gun and that it was open to the Judge to  find  that  he
      was not satisfied that the Appellant's children had been approached by
      people linked with anti-Shia groups.

   5. In his oral submissions before me, Mr Khan relied upon the grounds  of
      appeal.  He  argued  that  the  Judge  had  accepted  the  Appellant's
      credibility but it was argued that the Judge had erred in finding  the
      Appellant was not a high profile Shia. He argued the Judge ignored the
      fact that members of the Appellant's family including  his  uncle  and
      cousins had been murdered  and  that  there  were  newspaper  articles
      showing the threat to his family and to the Appellant  personally.  He
      argued one member of the family had been murdered and another two  had
      left the  country.  He  referred  me  specifically  to  the  newspaper
      articles at pages 45, 48 and 50, and to the Internet article  at  page
      53 in this regard contained within the Appellant's bundle.

   6. Mr Khan  further  argued  that  the  Appellant's  children  were  also
      dependents in the  appeal,  but  the  Judge  had  failed  to  consider
      paragraph 276ADE properly and failed to take account of section 55  in
      this regard, when assessing whether or not the Appellant's private and
      family lives would be breached, where they  to  be  returned  for  the
      purpose of paragraph 276ADE.

   7. In his oral submissions Mr Harris relied upon the Respondent's Rule 24
      reply. However, Mr Harris properly conceded that  the  Judge  had  not
      specifically dealt with the newspaper articles  and  thereby  had  not
      dealt with the evidence that there was evidence that the Appellant was
      subject to a specific named risk of being killed, when  assessing  the
      Appellant's profile in Pakistan. He submitted that if I were  to  find
      that there was a material error in this regard, the matter would  need
      to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.

   8. Mr Harris also properly conceded that the children were parties to the
      appeal as dependents, and that the Judge  should  have  addressed  the
      question of section 55 and the best interests of the children with his
      determination, which he had not done and Mr Harris said the Judge  has
      not taken this into account when considering  the  Appellant's  appeal
      under Appendix FM or Paragraph 276 of the of the Immigration Rules.

      My findings on error of law and materiality

   9. Having carefully considered the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      Shimmin and having considered all of the evidence and the  submissions
      raised both within the grounds of appeal, the Rule 24 reply,  and  the
      oral submissions of the legal representatives, together with the grant
      of permission, and in light of the concessions  properly  made  by  Mr
      Harris on behalf the Respondent that the Judge has not dealt with  the
      evidence which was before him  as  to  the  newspaper  articles  which
      pointed to the Appellant as a specific named person who was at risk, I
      do find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has erred in  law  in  this
      regard by failing to take account of all of the relevant evidence when
      assessing the Appellant's profile.


  10. Contained within the Appellant's bundle  were  letters  and  newspaper
      reports indicating that  the  Appellant  was  as  a  named  individual
      subject to threats, and a plot to kill him and his family. I therefore
      do find that considered properly by Mr  Harris,  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge has failed to consider all  the  relevant  evidence  in
      this regard when assessing  the  profile  of  the  Appellant  and  the
      threats to which he been subjected and his risk upon return.  Had  the
      Judge properly considered this evidence he would have referred  to  it
      and dealt with it in his decision. He  has  not.  This  amounts  to  a
      material error in law.

  11. The argument that the Judge has  also  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
      consider section 55 when  considering  the  Appellant's  human  rights
      claim, given that his children were dependents upon his claim was  not
      contained within the  grounds  of  appeal  to  either  the  First-tier
      Tribunal or to the Upper Tribunal, and no permission was  sought  from
      me to amend the grounds of  in  this  regard.  I  have  therefore  not
      allowed the appeal on this ground, despite the concession made  by  Mr
      Harris.

  12. However, in any event, given that the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Shimmin does contain a material error in law, in  terms  of  his
      failure to take account of relevant evidence regarding the Appellant's
      profile, as set out above, I find  that  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Shimmin should be set aside in its  entirety,  and  the
      matter remitted for a hearing de novo before the First-tier  Tribunal,
      before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Shimmin.



NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin does  contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside in its entirety;

The case is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  hearing  de  novo,
before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Shimmin.

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.


Signed

R McGinty

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal  McGinty                            Dated
18th March 2016
