
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11081/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                        |      Decision and Reasons        |
|                                           |Promulgated                       |
|On 23 July 2015                            |      On 29 July 2015             |
|                                           |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                     MN
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondents:   Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 11 February  2015
    of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Raikes  which  refused  the  appellant's
    asylum and human rights claims.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  We  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to  avoid
    a likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant from the contents
    of the protection claim.

 3. The appellant is from Ethiopia. It was common ground before us that  he
    is of Oromo ethnicity.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant's account of  his  own
    and his father's involvement with  the  Oromo  Liberation  Front  (OLF)
    lacked any credibility. That aspect of the findings was not  challenged
    before us.

 5. The appellant's grounds of appeal against the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  were that Judge Raikes failed to deal adequately with:

         a. the appellant's sur place claim

         b. risk on return as someone of Oromo ethnicity  who  has  attended
         anti-government protests in the UK

         c. Article 8 where the country  evidence  showed,  at  the  lowest,
         discrimination against Oromos

 6. We did not find merit in any of the appellant's grounds.

 7.  The  appellant's  sur  place  claim  was  founded   on   attending   a
    demonstration in London in December 2014 and another  demonstration  in
    Birmingham.  He  provided  photographs  of  himself   at   the   London
    demonstration.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal  dealt with this part of  the  claim  at  [33],
    stating:

         "I have also noted that both demonstrations were after  his  asylum
         interview and whilst he was awaiting his appeal. I find  given  the
         circumstances that the photographs are wholly self-serving. I  find
         that they have been produced only in order to support his claim for
         asylum in another form."

 9. The appellant objects to that paragraph, maintaining that there  is  no
    clear finding as to whether he attended the demonstrations or  not.  We
    did not see anything in that submission. To our minds, a proper reading
    of the passage cited is that the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  accepted
    that the appellant attended the demonstrations but did  not  do  so  in
    good faith, the real reason being only in order  to  try  to  found  an
    asylum claim.

10. A lack of good faith or genuine political belief, of course,  does  not
    preclude a claimant from international protection; see  Danian  v  SSHD
    [2002] Imm AR96 , YB (Eritrea) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 360, SS (Iran)  v
    SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 310 and BA (Demonstrators in  Britain  -  risk  on
    return) Iran CG [2011]  UKUT 36  (IAC).  The  malign  profile  of  some
    regimes allows for adverse interest even where sur place activities are
    conducted in bad faith.

11. There remained a number of difficulties for this  appellant  in  making
    out such a case, however. Firstly, Judge Raikes made a clear finding of
    bad faith. Secondly, the country evidence that was  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not show a high level of surveillance  or  monitoring
    of such demonstrations in the UK. There was evidence of control of  the
    internet and other media within Ethiopia but nothing that  could  begin
    to show a risk of the Ethiopian authorities knowing of the  appellant's
    attendance at two demonstrations, let alone identifying him on  return.
    Further, it has never been the appellant's case that the photographs of
    him at the demonstrations have even been placed on the internet or made
    public in any other way.

12. In addition, we could not identify anything in the materials before  us
    that showed that the appellant would be questioned about any  political
    activities on return, even where he is Oromo. We were referred  to  the
    comments of Dr Love at [42] of MB (OLF and  MTA  -  risk)  Ethiopia  CG
    [2007] UKAIT 00030 which were as follows:

         "Dr Love considered that there was  a  chance  that  the  appellant
         might be detained at the airport, in order to account for  what  he
         had been doing since  he  left  in  1999,  particularly  given  the
         current political climate."

13. We did not find that evidence sufficient to show that  the  authorities
    regularly stop returnees and question them on their activities  abroad.
    No risk category of returnees or Oromo returnees was identified in  MB.
    Given that this appellant's account of any  political  profile  is  not
    accepted and that, at best, he only left Ethiopia only 2 years ago,  we
    did not find that he had shown that he would be at risk on  return.  As
    at [24] of SS (Iran):

         "It seems to me that it is not enough for such an applicant  simply
         to establish, as here, that he was  involved  in  activities  which
         were  relatively  limited  in  duration  and  importance,   without
         producing any evidence that  the  authorities  would  be  concerned
         about them, or even that they would be aware of them."

14. The appellant's second challenge  must  also  fail  given  the  country
    evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal. Certainly, someone of
    Oromo ethnicity with a profile or suspected of support  for  the  Oromo
    cause may be at risk on return. The evidence does  not  go  as  far  as
    indicating that all Oromos are  at  risk,  however,  or  that  returned
    Oromos are at risk.

15. It was also our conclusion that any Article 8 claim had to  fail  where
    the country evidence showed discrimination against Oromos  but  nothing
    sufficient to found a disproportionate interference with private  life,
    that case being additionally difficult  to  make  out  here  where  the
    appellant has been in the UK for only 2 years and entirely unlawfully.

16. Mr Howard, quite sensibly, in our  view,  did  not  seek  to  take  any
    further the final ground concerning what is clearly a typographic error
    in  [26]  of  the  determination  which  considered   the   appellant's
    inconsistent evidence on whether he was married.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no  error  and  shall
    stand.
Signed:[pic]                                 Date: 27 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
