
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11970/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 28th April 2017                    |On 11th May 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     HU
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Elliott-Kelly, Counsel, instructed by Paragon
Law
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appealed against a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Astle, who dismissed the appellant's appeal under  Section  83  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, against the  Secretary  of
    State refusal, on 18th October  2011,  of  the  appellant's  claim  for
    asylum and humanitarian protection.

 2. The appeal was formerly heard on 28th November 2011  but  following  an
    error of law in the decision by the First-tier Tribunal, the appeal was
    remitted by the Upper Tribunal for a hearing de novo  and  came  before
    Judge Astle.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan and after an  age  assessment
    his age was resolved and agreed as being as at [ ] 1997 making  him  14
    years on arrival and 19 years old at the date  of  the  hearing  before
    Judge Astle.

 4. The core of the appellant's claim was that he lived with  his  parents,
    younger brother and sister in the village of [P]  District  in  Baghlan
    Province and his father was a taxi  driver,  who  was  ordered  by  the
    Taliban to carry weapons for them in his vehicle.   After  receiving  a
    gunshot wound his father managed to return home  after  one  particular
    excursion carrying weapons but then disappeared from the  family  home;
    the appellant claimed that he had not seen him  since.   This  occurred
    prior to the appellant's arrival in the  United  Kingdom.   He  asserts
    that he does not know when  he  entered  the  United  Kingdom  but  was
    encountered in the back of a lorry in Spalding in 2011.

 5. The appellant maintained that the Taliban had attacked the  appellant's
    home believing the father had betrayed  them  and  thus  the  appellant
    escaped his own home and hid in the home of his maternal uncle for  one
    month.  His uncle arranged for him to leave the country.  On his way to
    the UK the appellant claims that he was told  by  the  agent  that  his
    uncle had died.  He also asserted he had been  unable  to  contact  his
    family since his arrival in the UK.

Grounds for Permission to Appeal

 6. The initial  first  ground  of  appeal  which  challenged  the  adverse
    credibility finding in  relation  to  the  appellant  was  not  granted
    permission to appeal.  The remaining grounds for permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal which were granted included:

         Ground 1

A failure to take account that the appellant would be at  risk  irrespective
    of any evidence against him/irrespective of whether he will come to the
    adverse attention of the authorities.

It was submitted that at paragraphs 23 to 25 of the 17th August 2014  report
    Dr Giustozzi indicated that there is a

    "... serious chance of  mistreatment  and  physical  harm  for  anybody
         arrested under the accusation of being linked  to  the  insurgency.
         ...  Arrests were often being carried  out  on  the  basis  of  the
         slimmest of evidence.   ...   H  would  therefore  be  at  risk  of
         arbitrary arrest even in the absence of any  evidence  against  him
         personally."

It was  submitted  that  the  judge  had  proceeded  on  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's account being accepted to be credible  as  the  only  basis
    upon which he may come to the adverse  attention  of  the  authorities.
    That was the wrong approach. On the analysis of  the  expert,  however,
    there was a real risk to the appellant on the basis of a  perceived  or
    suspected link to the insurgency even in the absence  of  any  case  or
    evidence against him personally.  There was therefore a  basis  of  the
    appellant being at risk irrespective of his account being true and  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had not addressed that.

         Ground 2

Failure to give any or sufficient reasons for departing  from  the  expert's
    conclusion as to the risk upon being questioned.

At paragraph 12 of his 17th October 2016 report the expert made  clear  that
    there was a real risk that the appellant would be arrested on return as
    a failed asylum seeker and thereby  he  risked  treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3 of the ECHR.  In principle it was open to the judge  to  find
    as she did that questioning of the appellant would not put him at  risk
    but the judge should have done so only after giving sufficient  reasons
    for departing from the expert's view in this respect and had not  given
    any or sufficient reasons for departing from that view.

         Ground 3

There was a  failure  to  consider  a  material  consideration  of  how  the
    appellant may be able to avail himself of family support.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge found  at  paragraph  31  that  the  appellant
    would not be without family members upon return simply because she  had
    found his account to be fabricated.  That may  well  be  a  sustainable
    finding but there was no consideration of how he would avail himself of
    support  of  family  members  even  if  they  did  exist.    This   was
    particularly significant because the  judge  appeared  to  accept  that
    travel to his home was likely to be problematic, see paragraph 30,  and
    in  light  of  the  judge's  findings  that  conditions  generally   in
    Afghanistan may have deteriorated, paragraph 32.

         Ground 4

With regards to humanitarian protection there was a failure to  have  regard
    to  a  material  consideration,  that  being  the  additional  risk  of
    marginalisation.

At paragraph 42 of his 17th August 2014 report Dr Giustozzi referred to

    "... the additional risk of marginalisation ...  which  would  compound
         his difficulties in seeking  accommodation  and  employment.   This
         would be even more so the case should his symptoms aggravate, which
         was not unlikely given that his access to mental health care  would
         be at best irregular and of low standards."

The judge made at paragraph 32 reference to the evidence  of  Dr  Winton  to
    the effect that the appellant's mental health would  not  be  disabling
    and while on Dr Winton's interpretation the effect on return per se may
    not be disabling, the deterioration in mental health should  have  been
    assessed in conjunction with the additional  risk  of  marginalisation.
    There was therefore a material factor which had been omitted  from  the
    assessment.

         Ground 5

No reason had been given for not departing from country guidance.

At paragraph 32 the judge stated:

    "Although conditions in Afghanistan may have deteriorated I do not have
         the evidence before me that persuades me  to  depart  from  current
         country guidance."

The current country guidance was AK (Article 15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
    UKUT 00163 (IAC) and  paragraph  243  of  AK,  made  reference  to  the
    importance of specific findings in relation to an  appellant.   On  the
    basis of the prevailing conditions in 2011 the Tribunal found Kabul  to
    be generally safe but the judge had material  evidence  before  her  to
    cause her to reappraise the country guidance or at least to  cause  her
    not to be bound by that guidance.  This evidence was in the  underlying
    parts of the background evidence which were handed up in the form of  a
    handwritten schedule.  Dr Giustozzi gave a  clear  opinion  as  to  the
    situation now being significantly worse than when  considered  for  the
    purpose of the current country guidance,  which  by  the  date  of  the
    hearing was of some vintage.  In  summary  the  material  parts  of  Dr
    Giustozzi's most recent report, which dealt with  2016,  were  that  at
    paragraph 7 the Taliban activities in Kabul had been  intensifying  and
    there was an escalation in the use of indiscriminate  violence  and  at
    paragraph 8 there was a  phenomenon  of  "ghosting"  in  terms  of  the
    security forces, the effect being a general diminution in their ability
    to protect the population.  Both from  the  perspective  of  the  sheer
    level of violence and the ability of the state to protect the  position
    it appears therefore would be qualitatively different from  that  which
    pertained in 2011 which  at  the  least  merited  consideration  as  to
    departure from a strict application of the country guidance.  The judge
    gave no reasons for saying why she  considered  herself  bound  by  the
    country guidance.

The Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me Ms Elliott-Kelly expanded on  the  grounds  on
    which she relied substantially.  She acknowledged that  the  judge  had
    found the appellant not credible but emphasised  that  the  appellant's
    family came from Baghlan and that he would not be able to travel  there
    and even though he had sought to contact his family via the  Red  Cross
    there was an inadequacy of findings  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    contact with his family.

 8. She submitted that the judge did not address  the  expert  evidence  in
    relation to relocation to Kabul and that his risk as an  asylum  seeker
    and under Article 15(c) should have been considered.  She accepted that
    he was not a minor but there  was  no  bright  line  and  he  had  left
    Afghanistan when he was only 13 years old and had  been  absent  for  a
    considerable period of  time.   The  question  of  family  support  was
    relevant to the reassessment of whether he would be at risk  on  return
    and there was no proper consideration.  The judge had  dealt  with  all
    the issue in a perfunctory manner and the reasoning was insufficient.

 9. In relation to the risk factors the  judge  had  not  made  an  express
    finding that the appellant had been in contact with the family and  the
    assessment thereto was inadequate.

10. In relation to the mental health  difficulties  this  referred  to  the
    medical report of Dr Winton at page 43 of the bundle  and  although  it
    was accepted that the appellant was not receiving any medical treatment
    the medical difficulties  were  a  fact  to  be  considered  under  the
    assessment for humanitarian protection and in relation  to  whether  it
    was unduly harsh to expect him to internally relocate to Kabul.  It  is
    important to take into account that the appellant may resort to an  IDP
    and that he would experience a marked deterioration in his health.

11. Turning to the last ground the judge had failed to give reasons for not
    departing from the country  guidance.   Ms  Elliott-Kelly  acknowledged
    paragraph 12 of the Practice Direction.  The country  guidance  was  in
    relation to Article 15(c) and the analysis by the judge was  unreasoned
    in relation to both the question of ability  to  relocate,  the  unduly
    harsh test and Article 15(c).  The judge had  not  properly  considered
    the documentary evidence.  She had further not considered the  question
    of the appellant being detained by virtue  of  being  a  failed  asylum
    seeker.

12. Mr Clarke strenuously resisted the application in relation to ground 2.
     He stated that the  quote  given  in  relation  to  ground  1  by  the
    appellant should be placed in context and I was referred  to  the  full
    paragraphs 23 to 25 of Dr Giustozzi's  report  and  reminded  that  the
    ground challenging the judge's finding  on  credibility  had  not  been
    granted.  The quote was in the context of the appellant being linked to
    the insurgency and it was found that he was not a suspected  insurgent.
    There was no risk to him from insurgents simply through being in  Kabul
    as there was no tangible link to the insurgence.

13. In relation to ground 2 Mr Clarke submitted that at  page  117  of  the
    appellant's bundle in relation to Dr Giustozzi's report  he  had  cited
    from a single source that being an interview with a police  officer  in
    2013 that the appellant would be at risk of being returned as a  failed
    asylum seeker.  There was no single example of an arrest as argued  and
    the interview was three years prior to the hearing.  It was not  enough
    to demonstrate through that reference in Dr Giustozzi's report that the
    appellant would be detained on return.  This was not a  material  error
    by the judge for failing to deal with this.

14. In relation to ground  3  and  the  reference  to  family  support  the
    argument was advanced on the basis that the family would have to go  to
    Kabul to meet the appellant.  The judge  had  addressed  the  issue  in
    relation to the family in two ways.  First, she was not satisfied  that
    the appellant had no means of contact in his family rather than  actual
    contact and, secondly, the judge at paragraph 32  made  an  alternative
    finding.  It was erroneous to argue  that  it  was  necessary  for  the
    family to be in Kabul.  The judge was entitled  to  take  into  account
    that the contact was there bearing in mind the credibility finding  and
    the findings in relation to contact with the family are not undermined.

15. In relation to ground 4 and the risk of marginalisation the judge found
    at paragraph 32 that the appellant had a mild depressive order  but  it
    could not be argued that the judge  had  not  taken  into  account  the
    mental health issues.  He found that the appellant was 19 years old and
    an adult and had family in  Afghanistan  and  had  taken  a  number  of
    factors into account.  It was not arguable that the judge had failed to
    take into account the relevant factors.

16. In relation to the final ground 5, that there were no reasons given for
    not departing from the country guidance,  Mr  Clarke  referred  to  the
    case of R (on the application of Naziri  and  Others)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (JR - scope - evidence) IJR  [2015]  UKUT
    00437 (IAC), which was a judicial review decision but which reviewed  a
    considerable body of evidence outlined at Schedules 1 and 2 of Appendix
    2 to R (on the application of R  (on  the  application  of  Naziri  and
    Others) and which had been upheld by the Court of Appeal  in  HN  &  SA
    (Afghanistan) (Lead Cases Associated Non-Lead Cases) v The Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 123.  Mr Clarke submitted
    that a comprehensive body of evidence had been  considered  in  Naziri.
    At paragraph 95 the Tribunal stated:

    "Within the limitations of a judicial review challenge and the  hearing
         which has taken place we find no warrant  for  departing  from  the
         current country guidance promulgated in AK.  In particular, we find
         that the evidence falls short of satisfying the  stringent  Article
         15(c) test."

         Mr Clarke then referred me to DSG & Others (Afghan Sikhs: departure
         from CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00148 (IAC)."

Mr Clarke submitted there should be very strong grounds for  departing  from
    country guidance.

17. Mr Clarke also referred me to paragraphs 62  to  63  of  Naziri,  which
    reiterated case law that a person may still be accorded protection even
    when the general level of violence is not very high if they are able to
    show that there are specific reasons, over and above  them  being  mere
    civilians, for being affected by the indiscriminate violence.  In  this
    way the Article 15(c) inquiry is two-pronged: (a) it asks  whether  the
    level of violence is so high that  there  is  a  general  risk  to  all
    civilians; (b) it asks that even if there is not such a  general  risk,
    whether there is a particular risk based on the "sliding-scale" notion.
     This was identified at paragraph 63  citing  in  turn  HM  and  others
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 409, paragraph 80:

    "In our judgment the nexus between the generalised armed  conflict  and
         the indiscriminate violence posing a real risk to life or person is
         met when the intensity of the conflict  involves  means  of  combat
         (whether permissible under the laws of war or not)  that  seriously
         endanger non-combatants  as  well  as  result  in  such  a  general
         breakdown of law and order as to  permit  anarchy  and  criminality
         occasioning the serious harm referred to in the Directive."

Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  there  was  a  population  of   30,000,000   in
    Afghanistan and that judicial notice may be  taken  of  this  and  even
    looking at the figures that indicated death and injury and  considering
    the diminution of security forces' ability there was  not  the  anarchy
    and breakdown of law and order that was required in relation to Article
    15(c).  In the light of the authority there would be little mileage for
    the judge trawling through the voluminous evidence of the authority and
    the judge cannot be criticised at paragraph 32 for evidence  which  did
    not persuade her to depart from the country guidance.

18. Ms Elliott submitted that the cases of Naziri,  HN  and  DSG  were  not
    country guidance cases and it was not for the Secretary of State to now
    undergo an analysis of the evidence.  The decision should be set  aside
    and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal and I was reminded that  Naziri
    and HN were both decided in the context of judicial review proceedings.
     The evidence submitted by the appellant was in relation  to  2016  and
    she identified that across the country 323,000  people  were  displaced
    because of the conflict and there was an upward trend.  There was ample
    evidence of the deteriorating strain  on  the  infrastructure  and  the
    healthcare which was evident in Kabul.

Conclusions

19. An  overall  reading  of  the  decision  demonstrates  that  the  judge
    carefully reviewed the evidence.   The judge recorded at paragraphs  14
    to 17 in her decision:

         "14. Dr Giustozzi has prepared a series of reports for this appeal.
              The first, dated 17 August 2014, offers a general  background
             to the situation in Baghlan and elsewhere in  Afghanistan,  as
             well commenting on this  specific  case.   He  says  that  the
             practice of the Taliban to threaten those they consider to  be
             collaborating  with  the  enemy  is  well  documented.    When
             intimidation does not work, assassinations are common.   There
             is evidence that the Taliban threaten or kidnap family members
             of  people  associated  with  the  government.   Relatives  of
             individuals  who  oppose  the  Taliban,   whether   government
             employees or village elders, are known to have  been  executed
             in retaliation.  'Relatives  are  targeted  particularly  when
             their family members collaborating with the government are out
             of reach.'

         15.  He comments that the Appellant would  not  be  safe  in  Kabul
             either but at paragraph 18 he says that  the  Appellant  would
             not be a high priority target of the Taliban outside his  home
             area.  However, compared to other targets of the  Taliban,  he
             would lack protection.  If returned  to  Kabul  the  Appellant
             would in all likelihood have to reside in one of  the  Pashtun
             neighbourhoods of the  city  which  tend  to  be  affected  by
             Taliban activity.  In addition he could be at  risk  from  the
             authorities as  they  might  not  be  convinced  that  he  was
             effectively coerced by the Taliban.  Arrests are often carried
             out on the basis of the slimmest evidence.  He says  that  the
             Appellant would not receive a level of mental health care even
             remotely comparable to what he could receive in  the  UK.   An
             additional risk would be that he would suffer marginalisation.
              People would tend to avoid him, a fact  that  would  compound
             his difficulties  in  seeking  accommodation  and  employment.
             There is little understanding about  mental  illness.   If  he
             relocated without any family support or state  assistance  and
             unable to secure a well-paid job,  he  would  be  at  risk  of
             becoming homeless.  Finding accommodation  will  be  difficult
             and expensive.

         16.  The second report is dated 30 July 2015.  In this he  comments
             that in 2014 the targeting of  collaborators  continued  on  a
             larger scale than ever.  Forms of  police  collaboration  with
             the Taliban continued.  He notes  the  increase  in  insurgent
             attacks in Kabul.   He  says  that  it  is  now  the  official
             position of the Afghan government that the country is not safe
             for returned failed asylum seekers.

         17.  In the most recent report, dated 17 October 2016, Dr Giustozzi
             says that in  the  summer  of  2016  the  Taliban  stepped  up
             operations in Baghlan.  Taliban activities in Kabul have  also
             been intensifying.  Evidence indicates a tendency  towards  an
             escalation in the use of indiscriminate violence.  The  Afghan
             security forces are afflicted by serious manning problems.  He
             refers to the use of 'ghost soldiers'  and  'ghost  policing'.
             Commenting on the particular claim he says  that  the  Taliban
             are known to coerce people from time to time  to  carry  their
             supplies and he finds the Appellant's account  plausible.   He
             says that the Taliban will find it harder to locate and strike
             at the Appellant in Kabul but much will  depend  on  where  he
             will be able to settle.  He comments on the expense of  living
             there and the failing economy.  Unless his father's  file  has
             been closed the authorities will still want to interrogate and
             perhaps detain him.  On return he will be questioned about his
             personal background."

20. The judge also specifically made a note at paragraph 18 of the decision
    as follows:

    "In addition to the above reports  I  have  taken  into  account  those
         passages in the background evidence underlined and  listed  on  the
         schedule supplied by Mr Dixon."

21. It is important at the outset to note that the judge found at paragraph
    22 of the decision that the  appellant's  account  was  not  reasonably
    likely  to  be  true  because  there  were  too  many  inconsistencies.
    Permission was not granted in relation to the challenge to the  adverse
    credibility findings and those stand. It is quite clear that the  judge
    did not accept the appellant's account in relation to his father and to
    the attack on his home, noting specifically at paragraph  28  that  had
    the Taliban been searching for the appellant or his  father  she  would
    have  expected  the  homes  of  the  family  members  to  be   checked.
    Individually with respect to the uncle the judge found that:

    "I am now told that the appellant heard that his uncle died of  natural
         causes but this stands in contrast to his answer at question 162 of
         his substantive interview where he said that he did  not  know  who
         killed his uncle or how he died."

In sum, the appellant's account was found not to be  credible  and  that  he
    had "not demonstrated that he is of adverse interest to the Taliban  or
    the Afghan authorities".  It is correct to state that  the  judge  made
    the credibility findings over a series of paragraphs after  having  set
    out the expert evidence from Dr Winton and Dr Giustozzi over paragraphs
    11 to 17 of her decision.  Although the judge's apparent assessment  of
    the appellant's ability to return  is  condensed  into  the  last  four
    paragraphs of the determination that does not undermine her decision.

22. That the appellant's  account  was  not  accepted  as  being  true  was
    fundamental to consideration of ground 1.  A fuller reading of the 17th
    October 2016  report was important in view of the way  the  ground  was
    put and Mr Clarke referred me to the context of Dr Giustozzi's  report.
    Dr Giustozzi at paragraph 23 of his report referred  to  the  appellant
    being

         "... effectively coerced by the  Taliban,  particularly  given  his
    escape."

23. In paragraph 23 Dr Giustozzi states:

    "The majority of individuals  arrested  are  detained  without  serious
         evidence, simply because they  are  found  near  the  place  of  an
         insurgent attack or because they are related to known insurgents."

24. The report from Dr Giustozzi  is  predicated  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant's account was true and that was specifically rejected by  the
    judge; as such the appellant was not linked to the insurgence let alone
    personally involved.  That the judge did not  place  reliance  on  this
    aspect of the report was open to her. I find no error on  the  part  of
    the judge to fail to take into account evidence which was predicated on
    the assumption of the appellant being linked to the insurgency when  he
    was not.   I therefore dismiss this challenge to the judge's decision.

25. Ground 2 was launched on the basis that the judge had  failed  to  give
    any or sufficient reasons for departing from the expert's conclusion as
    to his risk on being questioned.  I am not persuaded, in the light of a
    fuller reading of the report by Dr Giustozzi including  the  footnotes,
    which indicate the  sources,  that  the  judge  materially  erred  when
    failing to refer to any risk to  the  appellant  as  described  by  the
    expert, on returning to Afghanistan simply by  being  a  failed  asylum
    seeker.  In PM and Others (Kabul - Hizb-i-Islami) Afghanistan CG [2007]
    UKAIT 00089 there was a finding  that  simply  being  a  failed  asylum
    seeker would not put an appellant at risk on  return.   Notwithstanding
    that authority, the reference by  Dr  Giustozzi  and  reliance  on  one
    single interview with a police officer, in the 17th October 2016 report
    at paragraph 12, was insufficient evidence adduced by the appellant  to
    demonstrate that he would be at risk on return simply by being a failed
    asylum seeker.  There was no evidence adduced that the appellant  would
    be returned without documentation  and,  as  indicated,  there  was  no
    evidence presented before the First-tier  Tribunal  that  there  was  a
    single example of an arrest, merely on that basis, in  the  independent
    reports for example from Human  Rights  Watch.   There  as  simply  not
    enough evidence to demonstrate that he would be detained on return as a
    failed asylum seeker and a failure by the judge to  specifically  state
    that in light of the evidence was not a material error of law.

26. I turn to Ground 3, which alleged the judge had  failed  to  take  into
    account a material fact, the method of contact with  the  family,  when
    making the assessment of whether the appellant's  relocation  to  Kabul
    could be classified as unduly harsh in line with Januzi v  SSHD  [2006]
    UKHL 5  or fall into the category of Article  15(c),  risk  of  serious
    harm.  It was asserted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
    finding that the appellant would not be without family  members  simply
    because she had found his account to be fabricated. It was acknowledged
    in the grounds of challenge that that was a  sustainable  finding.   As
    pointed out by Mr Clarke, there does not have to be travel between  the
    appellant's family to Kabul or  vice  versa.   It  would  be  open  and
    clearly this was anticipated by the judge for the appellant  to  access
    support whilst in Kabul.  The judge did not accept that  the  appellant
    would be without family support and specifically  stated  at  paragraph
    31:

    "I do not know what information he  provided  to  them  but  there  are
         clearly difficulties for outside agencies working in Afghanistan."

The judge continued:

    "Nevertheless, given that I have found his claim fabricated, I  am  not
         satisfied that he is without the means of contacting family members
         once he returns there."

Not only did the judge therefore consider that the  appellant  could  derive
    support merely by contacting his family, and that she  does  not  state
    that she expects the family to be present in Kabul is not an  error  in
    itself, and the judge further at paragraph 32 notes that

    "... it is apparent from the background evidence that  the  problem  of
         IDPs is increasing but he does have  the  option  of  applying  for
         assisted return with the package of benefits that brings."

27. This avenue of support is a factor that the  judge  clearly  took  into
    account when making the assessment in relation to the  family  and  the
    overall welfare support that he would experience on  return  to  Kabul,
    albeit through financial means.  As submitted, it is not necessary  for
    the family to be actually in Kabul to obtain some form of support.  The
    judge did not accept as credible the story of the uncle's death and who
    had organised the appellant's departure.  It was open to the  judge  to
    assess the family contact circumstances as she did and find as she  did
    in relation to the appellant's welfare on return.  The  judge  assessed
    all the relevant facts and accorded due weight to the evidence.

28. In relation to ground 4 I am not persuaded  that  the  judge  erred  in
    relation to marginalisation.  The judge was criticised for  failing  to
    take into account the report of Dr Giustozzi at  paragraph  42  of  his
    August 2014 report when referring to

    "... the additional risk of marginalisation ...  which  would  compound
         his difficulties in seeking  accommodation  and  employment.   This
         would be even more so the case should his symptoms aggravate, which
         was not unlikely given that his access to mental health care  would
         be at best irregular and of low standards."

29. Before the First-tier Tribunal hearing  the  appellant  adduced  expert
    evidence from Dr F E Winton, consultant psychiatrist,  who  produced  a
    report on 6th August 2014.  The judge recorded at paragraph 12 that  Dr
    Winton had concluded that  the  appellant  had  a  'mixed  anxiety  and
    depressive disorder' and  in  terms  of  treatment  he  would  probably
    benefit from an antidepressant and "he should ideally stop his  hashish
    use" and he would "benefit from supportive psychotherapy".

30. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in her decision at paragraph 12  recorded
    the following from Dr Winton's report:

    "'It is my opinion that his anxiety and depressive symptoms will have a
         certain impact although not a highly disabling one on  his  ability
         to cope with the problems he would face in Afghanistan provided his
         symptoms remain as they are.'  Dr Winton also  concluded  that  the
         Appellant's mental health will deteriorate if he were  returned  to
         Afghanistan.   Evidence  from  his  support  worker   suggested   a
         significant demoralisation on the part of the Appellant which could
         lead to quite a fatalistic approach on his return."

31. The judge then referred to a further report  in  paragraph  13  of  her
    decision:

    "Dr Winton prepared a follow-up following a meeting with the  Appellant
         on 2 July 2015.  At this time the Appellant  was  living  with  his
         Hungarian girlfriend.  They had been in a relationship for the past
         year.  Indeed the Appellant  confirmed  at  the  hearing  that  the
         relationship continues.  He had been prescribed some medication but
         found it did not help and had stopped taking it.  He did not  drink
         or smoke cigarettes but used cannabis two times  a  week.   He  was
         trying to reduce this.  His sleep was interrupted.  He  experienced
         nightmares and suicidal ideas on  a  fluctuating  basis.   He  also
         experienced  symptoms  of  anxiety,   sometimes   associated   with
         palpitations  and  sweating.   From   time   to   time   he   would
         hyperventilate.   Dr  Winton  described  the  Appellant  as  mildly
         depressed and having subclinical  PTSD.   He  considered  that  the
         Appellant would benefit from doing regular exercise and attending a
         stress management course.  It was still his firm opinion  that  the
         Appellant's mental  health  will  deteriorate  if  he  returned  to
         Afghanistan."

32. It is clear from the judge's careful rehearsal of the  evidence  of  Dr
    Winton that it was taken into account in detail.  Although Ms  Elliott-
    Kelly criticised the reference by  the  judge  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's mental health "would not be disabling" she referred  me  to
    the later report of 25th July 2015  at  page  36  of  the  consolidated
    bundle which merely confirmed that the appellant had a 'mild depressive
    order'.   Indeed the judge referred to this  in  paragraph  32  of  the
    decision and noted paragraph 4.5 of Dr Winton's report:

    "It is my opinion that a slight worsening of  his  depressive  symptoms
         would  be  an  impediment  for  him  if  he  were  to   return   to
         Afghanistan."

33. Clearly the judge carefully addressed the evidence but on the basis  of
    the medical diagnoses and descriptions, themselves, I am not  persuaded
    that the judge erred in any material  way  by  her  assessment  of  the
    appellant's mental health difficulties or their impact on  his  ability
    to return.  They were set out in detail in  the  decision  and  clearly
    taken into account in paragraph 32 when coming to an overall assessment
    as to whether it would be either unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant  to
    relocate to Kabul or indeed whether he would expose himself to risk  of
    serious harm under Article 15(c).

34. In sum, it is important to set out  that  which  the  judge  states  at
    paragraph 32 and I do this below:

         "32. It is apparent from the background evidence that  the  problem
             of IDPs is increasing but he  does  not  have  the  option  of
             applying for assisted return with the package of benefits that
             brings.  He suffers from a mild depressive order and that  may
             cause  additional  difficulties  but  he  does  not  currently
             receive any medication or therapy.  Although  Dr  Winton  says
             that his health may deteriorate he does not consider  that  it
             would be highly  disabling.   He  will  be  returning  to  the
             country of which he is a national and of which he  speaks  the
             language.  I have referred above to  his  ability  to  contact
             family.  In any event he is 19 years  old  and  an  adult.   I
             fully accept that he will face difficulties but those are  not
             in my view at such a level that it makes the relocation option
             unreasonable.  Although conditions  in  Afghanistan  may  have
             deteriorated I  do  not  have  the  evidence  before  me  that
             persuades me to depart from current country  guidance.   Given
             my findings regarding the lack of adverse interest in him I do
             not consider questioning by the authorities is likely  to  put
             him at risk.  Having reviewed the evidence in the round I find
             that the Appellant is not a refugee."

There is no doubt that the  judge  took  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had access to the assisted return package, and that he had  a
    mild depressive disorder which may present  him  with  some  additional
    difficulties but the judge noted specifically that  the  appellant  was
    not currently  in  receipt  of  any  medication  or  therapy.   It  was
    identified in the reports that the appellant used cannabis on a regular
    basis, which may contribute to his condition.  As the judge stated,  he
    would be returning to the country of which he was a national and  where
    he spoke the language.

35. The judge at this point also took into account the fact that he had the
    ability to contact his family having failed to believe his inability to
    contact them.

36. Moreover, the judge took into account that the appellant was  19  years
    old and an adult and fully accepted that he would face difficulties but
    not at a level which made his relocation option  'unreasonable'.   That
    test does not even employ the "unduly harsh test" but apparently a test
    to the advantage of the appellant which was less onerous.

37. Turning to the last and final ground in which it was asserted that  the
    judge had not shown good reasons for not  departing  from  the  country
    guidance I am not persuaded that this challenge enunciates the  correct
    approach.  As DSG & Others, paragraph 26 confirms:

         "26. This has clear implications for other cases involving  claimed
             risk on return to Afghanistan for  Hindus  or  Sikhs,  in  the
             period between now and such time as further  country  guidance
             on the subject can be issued.  A country guidance case retains
             its status until  either  overturned  by  a  higher  court  or
             replaced by subsequent country  guidance.   However,  as  this
             case shows, country guidance cases are not set in  stone  (see
             also HS (Burma) [2013] EWCA Civ 67), and a  judge  may  depart
             from existing country guidance in the circumstances  described
             in the Practice Direction and the Chamber Guidance Note.  That
             does not amount to carte blanche for  judges  to  depart  from
             country guidance as it is necessary, in  the  wording  of  the
             Practice Direction to show why it does not apply to  the  case
             in question.  In SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 940, the  Court  of
             Appeal made it clear, at paragraph 47,  that  decision  makers
             and tribunal judges are  required  to  take  country  guidance
             determinations into account, and to follow  them  unless  very
             strong grounds supported  by  cogent  evidence,  are  adduced,
             justifying their not doing so.  To do otherwise will amount to
             an error of law."

The Court of Appeal in SG, as indeed do the  Practice  Directions,  make  it
    clear that decision makers and Tribunal Judges  are  required  to  take
    country guidance determinations into account and to follow them  unless
    very strong reasons supported by cogent evidence are adduced justifying
    their not doing so.  It is quite clear that the judge when referring to
    country guidance was referring to AK because she referred  to  "current
    country guidance" and that does indeed refer to AK.  It  was  open  for
    the judge to rely on the current country guidance  and  she  identified
    that she had  taken  indeed  into  account  the  various  documentation
    indicating the change in the security situation.

38. I am mindful of Ms Elliott-Kelly's submissions that Naziri and HN refer
    to judicial review proceedings and note within HN at paragraph 79  that
    it was specifically stated that it was not the function of the Tribunal
    or the court to enter into  a  detailed  examination  of  the  security
    situation in Afghanistan because the court was not adequately  equipped
    to make factual judgments about the situation and it was not  its  role
    in those proceedings.  That said, in Naziri the Tribunal was  presented
    with extensive updating material as outlined in Schedule 1 and Schedule
    2 of Appendix 2 up to April  2015.   At  paragraph  75  of  Naziri  the
    Tribunal stated that it was mindful of the oft-repeated admonition that
    judicial review is an unsuitable vehicle for resolving  disputed  facts
    but noted that this was a general rule but not an inflexible principle,
    noting that "disputed questions  of  fact  do  not  normally  arise  in
    judicial review cases but they can of course  arise  and  they  may  be
    crucial", quoting from R v Secretary of State for the  Environment,  ex
    parte London Borough of Islington [1997] JR 121.

39. As such the Tribunal rehearsed all the evidence and did  indeed  review
    the country background evidence finding at paragraph 95 that there  was
    no warrant for departing from the current country guidance  promulgated
    in AK and "in particular, we find that  the  evidence  falls  short  of
    satisfying the stringent Article 15(c) test" (paragraph 95).

40. As  such  the  background  evidence  in  relation  to  Afghanistan  has
    undergone  the  gaze  and  scrutiny  of  the  court  and  AK  was   not
    disapproved.  Ms Elliott-Kelly urged me to consider the fact that  much
    of the evidence submitted was in relation to 2016 but, for example, the
    Human Rights Watch World Report 2016 Afghanistan 27th January  2016  in
    fact refers to events and contents of 2015.

41. I was invited by both parties to review the material presented  to  the
    Tribunal in order to show that the evidence did underline  a  worsening
    security situation or, alternatively, did not underline a  considerable
    expansion in the death rate and  injury  of  the  civilian  population,
    albeit that any death rate and injury is to be lamented.

42. The critical point is to consider the background and general  level  of
    violence together with the particular circumstances of  the  appellant.
    Naziri at [63], reaffirmed the guidance (deriving from Elgafaji) on how
     Article 15(c) should be applied and   clearly  opined  there  was  not
    'such a general breakdown of law and order as  to  permit  anarchy  and
    criminality occasioning the serious harm referred to in the  Directive'
    such  that  violence  was  indiscriminate.  Taking  into  account   the
    appellant's particular and individual circumstances,  which  the  judge
    did, the judge clearly, on a reading  overall,  did  not  consider  the
    appellant's relocation as being either unduly  harsh  or  exposing  the
    appellant to risk of serious harm under Article 15(c).  It was the task
    of the judge to give reasons if she departed from the  county  guidance
    which she did not. I  am  not  persuaded  that  in  the  light  of  the
    background evidence, albeit voluminous, that the judge needed to expand
    on the reasons given, albeit that they are short, for  her  refusal  to
    depart from the country guidance.   She  did  consider  the  particular
    circumstances of the appellant as I have outlined above.

43. As set out in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT
    00085 (IAC)

'Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief  explanation  of  the
    conclusions on the central issue on  which  an  appeal  is  determined,
    those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole  makes
    sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge'.

On a careful reading of the decision  I  find  that  judge  gave  brief  but
    adequate reasoning for her findings and I conclude  that  there  is  no
    material error of law in the decision and the decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   Helen Rimington                              Date  Signed  9th  May
    2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
