
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11518/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 September 2015                  |On 14 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     M E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mohzam (solicitor), Lawrence & Co, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I make an anonymity order under Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant. In  doing  so  I  preserve  the  anonymity
direction made when this cased called before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.    This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Coffey promulgated on  29  April  2015  which  dismissed  the
appellant's appeal on asylum grounds and under Article 8 ECHR.

Background

3.    The appellant was born on 1 February 1986. He is a Jordanian  national
who claims to be of Palestinian background. He claimed  asylum  on  27  June
2014, claiming to have a  fear  of  persecution  of  the  Bani  Sakhr  tribe
because he pursued an extra-marital relationship  with  a  woman  from  that
tribe. The appellant claimed that the Bani Sakhr tribe  had  influence  over
the Jordanian authorities, so he also feared the Jordanian authorities.  The
appellant claimed that his rights in terms of Articles 2, 3 and  8  of  ECHR
would be breached by his removal from  the  UK.  On  3  December  2014,  the
respondent refused the appellant's application.

The Judge's Decision

4.    The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge  Coffey  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
respondent's decision.

5.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 27 May 2015, First Tier  Tribunal
Judge Page gave permission to appeal, stating inter alia:

    "The grounds of appeal argue that the  appellant  was  ill  during  the
    hearing and he may have been deprived of a right to a fair  hearing  if
    his illness caused him to lack concentration or to follow  the  hearing
    properly. It is argued that the judge failed to ascertain  whether  the
    appellant was fit to give evidence. Other grounds are also argued  that
    can be considered by the  Upper  Tribunal.  It  is  arguable  that  the
    matters raised in the  grounds  go  beyond  disagreement  and  identify
    arguable errors in proceedings so permission to appeal is granted."

6.    The appellant's solicitor, Mr Mohzam, argued that  the  appellant  was
significantly unwell throughout the hearing and  that  the  failure  of  the
judge to ask the appellant whether or not he was fit to  continue  the  case
amounts to a material error of law because it deprived the  appellant  of  a
right to a fair hearing and so was a procedural irregularity (Grounds 1  and
2 of the grounds of appeal). Mr Mohzam relied  on  the  appellant's  witness
statement and argued that because there had been breaks  in  the  course  of
the appellant's evidence to allow him to visit the bathroom, it was  obvious
that the appellant was unwell and should not have been  forced  to  continue
with the hearing. Mr Mohzam moved the third ground of appeal,  stating  that
it was a crucial part of the appellant's claim that he  is  a  Jordanian  of
Palestinian origin and that the immigration judge has not made any  findings
in fact in relation to his assertion that he is of Palestinian origin.

7.    Mr Mohzam moved the fourth ground  of  appeal,  arguing  that  between
[45] and [49] of the  determination,  the  judge  failed  to  carry  out  an
adequate balancing exercise. Mr Mohzam argued that at  [47]  the  judge  was
wrong to  find  that  the  appellant  was  not  involved  in  active  family
proceedings when adequate evidence had been produced to demonstrate that  he
is pursuing an action for contact to see his son and  that,  in  any  event,
the judge has not  explained  why  he  rejected  the  oral  and  documentary
evidence about the existence of family proceedings to  which  the  appellant
is a party.

8.    Mr Tarlow for the respondent  resisted  the  appeal,  relying  on  the
respondent's Rule 24 notice dated 4 June 2015. He relied on (and lodged)  an
extract from the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer's  note  which  indicated
that, in the middle of cross examination, the appellant  had  to  leave  the
court to visit the bathroom and, when  he  returned,  the  Judge  asked  the
appellant if he was well enough to continue. The  appellant  confirmed  that
he was well enough to carry  on.  He  argued  that  the  findings  contained
within the determination are findings which were open to the judge  to  make
on the evidence placed before  him  and  that  the  determination  does  not
contain material errors of law,  but  it  sets  out  findings  of  fact  and
conclusions which were open to the judge.

Analysis

9.     The  first  and  second  grounds  of  appeal  drive   at   procedural
irregularity, arguing that the  appellant  was  too  unwell  to  participate
meaningfully in the  proceedings  or  follow  the  proceedings,  so  that  a
procedural unfairness has resulted. It is not disputed that the  appellant's
evidence was interrupted on two occasions whilst the appellant went  to  the
bathroom. Mr Tarlow produced an extract of a note made by  the  Home  Office
presenting officer at first instance which indicated that  the  judge  asked
the appellant if he was well enough to continue. Mr Mohzam  appeared  to  be
surprised by the production of the note  from  the  Home  Office  presenting
officer and told me that he  was  not  familiar  with  the  notes  taken  by
Counsel who represented the appellant before the  First  Tier  and,  at  the
close of the hearing, asked to be allowed some days  to  produce  a  written
submission after he had discussed this matter  with  Counsel  who  initially
represented the appellant.

10.   Mr Mohzam conceded that grounds of appeal 1 and 2 have always  related
to the way the appellant was treated  in  the  course  of  the  hearing.  He
conceded that adequate notice of the time, date and place of today's  appeal
had been given. Mr Mohzam's  application  for  further  time  to  produce  a
written submission was made after all submissions had been  made  and  after
Mr Mohzam told me he had nothing further to add. I told  Mr  Mohzam  that  I
would determine this case on  the  basis  of  the  material  already  placed
before me.

11.   The judge's own record of proceedings is in two parts. One is  a  hand
written schedule of events with times noted next to each event.  The  second
part is a detailed, type written record of the evidence. The detailed,  type
written record does not  contain  any  note  of  the  interruptions  to  the
evidence. The handwritten record of proceedings, however, does. The  judge's
handwritten record of proceedings noted that at 11.52am, the appellant  felt
unwell and sought permission to leave, and that the hearing  recommenced  at
11.55am. At 12.45, the  appellant  left  the  hearing,  feeling  unwell.  At
13.00, the hearing was adjourned for lunch and recommenced at 14.02,  ending
at 14.40. The Home Office presenting officer's  record  that  the  appellant
was asked by the judge whether he was fit to continue is  not  reflected  in
the judge's own record of proceedings.

12.   What is clear from the record of proceedings  is  that  the  appellant
was represented by Counsel and that the appellant's  Counsel  did  not  make
any application to adjourn, nor  did  the  appellant's  Counsel  advise  the
Judge that the appellant was so unwell that he could not participate  in  or
follow the hearing.

13.    The  weight  of  reliable  evidence  before  me  indicates  that  the
appellant was unwell on the date of the hearing, but that  his  illness  did
not prevent him from participating in the  hearing  and  offering  his  oral
evidence. It is clear from the judge's own record of  proceedings  that  the
judge had no concerns about the appellant's ability to  participate  in  the
hearing. The judge records that the  appellant's  evidence  was  interrupted
and that the appellant left the hearing. The judge  was  in  a  position  to
observe the appellant and to listen to the  appellant.  He  was  in  a  good
position to determine whether or  not  the  appellant's  illness  interfered
with his ability to proceed with the hearing.

14.   It is the appellant's own case that he told his Counsel  that  he  was
unwell and Counsel  provided  him  with  paracetamol.  The  appellant's  own
Counsel knew the appellant's circumstances and not  only  chose  to  proceed
but did not make any application to adjourn.

15.   The weight of reliable evidence indicates that  the  appellant  had  a
fair hearing. It is  beyond  dispute  that  the  appellant  was  allowed  to
interrupt his own evidence so that he could deal with the  symptoms  of  his
temporary illness, collect  himself  and  return  to  the  proceedings.  The
weight of reliable evidence indicates that the appellant chose not  to  tell
the Judge that his suffering  was  such  that  he  could  not  proceed.  The
hearing in this case took place on 26 March 2015. The appellant  produces  a
witness statement dated  24  August  2015,  providing  the  details  of  his
illness of the day of the  hearing,  but  no  medical  evidence  at  all  is
produced to indicate the  nature,  extent  and  effect  of  the  appellant's
temporary illness.

16.   I find that there is no merit in  the  first  and  second  grounds  of
appeal and that although the appellant might have had some  ailment  on  the
date that his hearing took place, there has been no procedural unfairness.

17.   In HA (Conduct of hearing: evidence  required)  Somalia  [2009]  UKAIT
00018 the Tribunal said that where  a  party  who  was  represented  at  the
hearing seeks reconsideration on the basis of  the  way  it  was  conducted,
reconsideration will not normally be granted without evidence on  the  point
in question by way of a statement  of  truth  from  the  representative,  to
which should be attached either a copy of any note on the point made by  the
representative at or near the time of the hearing, or an explanation of  why
no such note is available. Although the appellant relies on his own  witness
statement, no support is provided for the  contents  of  his  statement.  No
medical evidence is produced, and importantly,  there  is  no  statement  of
truth for  either  the  appellant's  solicitor  nor  from  counsel  for  the
appellant.

18.   Having rejected the first and second grounds of appeal,  I  find  that
there is merit in the third and fourth grounds of appeal. It  is  a  crucial
part  of  the  appellant's  claim  that  he  is  a  Jordanian  national   of
Palestinian ethnicity. It is at the very core of the appellant's claim  that
he has pursued an extra-marital affair with a  woman  from  the  Bani  Sakhr
tribe. At [41], the judge briefly mentions the objective  evidence  relating
to honour killings and at [42], he refers to the "...the  diminished  rights
of many Palestinians in Jordan..." but the judge does not make any  findings
in fact in relation to the appellant's  claimed  extra-marital  affair,  nor
the claimed membership that the young woman had in the Bani Sakhr tribe.  In
short, there are inadequate  findings  in  fact  in  relation  to  the  core
aspects of the appellant's claim.

19.   It is a crucial part of the appellant's claim that he is  the  pursuer
in proceedings in the family courts for contact to his  son.  At  [46],  the
judge accepts that participation in family court proceedings may lead  to  a
grant of discretionary leave under Article 8  but  although  (at  [47])  the
judge says that he is not satisfied that sufficient  evidence  was  produced
that there are active family proceedings, the judge does not explain why  he
rejects the evidence that was produced of the existence of the pursuit of  a
contact action.

20.   In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

Findings of Material Error

21.   I therefore find that material errors of  law  have  been  established
and that the Judge's determination cannot stand and must  be  set  aside  in
its entirety. All matters to be redetermined afresh.

Remittal to First-tier Tribunal

22.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

23.   In this case none of the findings of fact are to stand and the  matter
will be a complete re hearing.

24.   I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
heard afresh before  any  First-tier  Immigration  judge  other  than  Judge
Coffey.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
