
[pic]
IAC-TH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11276/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2015                  |On 8 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              md. hamid hossin
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Ms S Iqbal of Counsel instructed by Bespoke
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Applicant, gives his  date
    of birth as 1 January 1986.  He states he was born in Myanmar and is  a
    Muslim Rohingya.

 2. He says that in 1992 his parents took him with them to Bangladesh.   In
    2006 he left Bangladesh and arrived in the United Kingdom  in  November
    2006.  It was not until June 2014 that he contacted the Applicant  (the
    SSHD) with a view to claiming asylum on the basis of his ethnicity.

 3. On 4 December 2014 the SSHD refused  his  application  for  asylum  and
    international surrogate protection  because  she  did  not  accept  his
    claimed ethnicity and considered he was a national of Bangladesh.   She
    proposed to make directions for his removal to Bangladesh.

 4. On 17 December the Applicant lodged notice of appeal under  Section  82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  (the
    2002 Act), essentially the grounds assert his  Rohingya  ethnicity  and
    fear of persecution in Myanmar on that account.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 5. By a decision promulgated on 13 April  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Rees found the Applicant was of Rohingyan  ethnicity  and  had
    been born in Myanmar which, with his parents, he had left when  he  was
    aged about 6 years.  The appeal was allowed on asylum grounds.

 6. On 28 April 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cruthers granted  the
    SSHD permission to appeal because it was arguable the Judge had  failed
    to engage with the SSHD's submissions about the "family book" which the
    Applicant had tendered as evidence to support his  claim  and  had  not
    generally given adequate reasons for the decision.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. The Applicant attended the hearing but appeared to have little  English
    and in any event took no material part in the proceedings.

 8. For the SSHD Ms Everett  relied  on  the  grounds  for  the  permission
    application which amounted essentially to a challenge  that  the  Judge
    had given insufficient reasoning to support the conclusions reached.

 9. For the Applicant Ms Iqbal relied on  the  detailed  skeleton  argument
    which had been submitted to the Judge and which she said addressed  all
    the issues raised by the SSHD in the permission application.  The First-
    tier Tribunal's decision had addressed them, mainly at paragraph 21.

10. The outstanding ground referred to in the SSHD's permission application
    was that the Judge had not addressed  whether  the  Applicant  was  the
    individual named in the "family book" which he had  produced.   It  was
    impracticable to require the Applicant to prove  his  identity  by  any
    further means and the Judge had accepted his account of his background.

11. Generally, the Judge had accepted  the  Applicant's  account  and  this
    would include accepting he was the person  identified  in  the  "family
    book".  The issue had been dealt with at paragraph 21 of the  decision.



12. The Applicant in his interview had shown an  appropriate  knowledge  of
    the Rohingya culture and the skeleton argument  before  the  Judge  had
    referred  to  the  relevant  parts  of  the  Applicant's  evidence  and
    background information.  The Judge had made sound findings based on the
    evidence and the decision contained no error of law.

13. Ms Everett had no further submissions for the SSHD.

Findings and Consideration

14. The First-tier Tribunal's decision is sparse but just about adequate in
    its exposition of reasons given at paragraphs 21 and 22 to support  the
    Judge's  conclusions  when  considered  in  the  light  of  a  positive
    credibility finding for which again just about sufficient  reasons  are
    given.

15. The first ground for appeal asserted the Judge  failed  to  decide  the
    Applicant's identity which had been  raised  at  paragraph  43  of  the
    SSHD's reasons letter.  Having  set  out  the  Applicant's  account  at
    paragraph 6 and referred to the relevant evidence at paragraphs 13, 14,
    16 and 18, the Judge was entitled to conclude the "family  book"  which
    the Applicant had kept did in fact relate to his family.

16. Background evidence identifying the places named by  the  Applicant  as
    his place of birth and the camp in Bangladesh where his  family  stayed
    are identified and cross-referenced at pages 3 and 5  of  the  skeleton
    argument before the Judge.

17. Similarly, the issue of the knowledge of Rohingya songs  was  addressed
    at page 5 of the same skeleton argument.  There was  no  evidence  that
    this matter was pursued at all at the hearing before the Judge.

18. The Judge took account of the fact the Applicant had left his home area
    when he was a young child and from then until he  left  Bangladesh  had
    lived in an environment in  which  the  language  and  culture  of  the
    authorities and in which he had been taught was Bangladeshi.  The Judge
    addressed the language assessment at  paragraph  22  of  the  decision.
    Reasons were given why little  weight  was  attached  to  the  language
    assessment.  The language assessment suffered from severe  limitations:
    paragraph  22  of  the  decision  shows  clearly  that  the  Judge  had
    considered it and especially paragraph 3.3.6 'Other Comments' at page 6
    of the assessment.

19. I have described the Judge's decision as sparse  but  this  is  not  by
    itself sufficient to amount to a material error of law.  The Judge gave
    the minimum of reasoning to support the  conclusions  reached  and  the
    decision does not contain any material error of law such that it should
    be set aside.

Anonymity

20. There was no request for an anonymity order and having  considered  the
    papers in the Tribunal file  and  heard  the  appeal  I  find  none  is
    warranted.



NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law and it shall stand.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 08. ix. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
