
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11614/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22nd July 2015                    |On 30th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                            MR HAMIDREZA BAGHERI
                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of the appellant
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Mensah, promulgated
    on  the  26th  February  2015,  to  dismiss  his  appeal  against   the
    respondent's refusal to grant him asylum and  decision  to  remove  him
    from the United Kingdom.

 2. There was no attendance by or on behalf of the appellant at the hearing
    before  me.  By  letter  dated  the  8th  July  2015,  the  appellant's
    representatives notified that the Tribunal that they were  coming  "off
    record" due to the failure  of  the  appellant  to  provide  them  with
    instructions following the grant of permission to appeal. I noted  that
    the appellant had been personally served with notice of the hearing  at
    the address provided for this purpose in his Notice of Appeal.  In  all
    the circumstances, including the fact  that  grounds  setting  out  the
    legal challenge to the decision had been  drafted  by  very  experience
    Counsel, I decided that it was fair to proceed to decide the appeal  in
    the appellant's absence.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on the 24th March 1986.
    His claim for asylum may be summarised  as  follows.  He  converted  to
    Christianity having met and become romantically involved with  a  woman
    called 'Fatemeh' in around January 2014. Around five months  into  this
    relationship, Fateman informed him that she was a Christian convert. He
    was shocked and upset at first, but quickly decided to do whatever  was
    necessary to preserve the relationship. He therefore attended  a  house
    church meeting with Fatemeh on the  8th  May  2014.  This  led  to  his
    decision to convert. He informed his father of his decision to  convert
    and of  his  wish  to  marry  Fatemeh.  On  the  19th  June  2014,  the
    authorities raided a house  church  meeting.  He  was  able  to  escape
    because he was in an outside toilet at the time. However, he fears that
    Fatemeh (from whom he has  not  since  heard)  was  arrested  with  the
    others. On returning home, he informed his father of what had  occurred
    and his father arranged for him to leave  Iran.  He  travelled  to  the
    United Kingdom (via Turkey) where he arrived on the 12th July 2014.  He
    fears ill-treatment on return as an apostate  who  has  converted  from
    Islam to Christianity.

 4. Judge Mensah did not believe the appellant's account. Her  reasons  are
    contained at paragraphs 13 to 18 of her decision:

         13   At paragraphs 8 & 9 of the Refusal Letter it is accepted  that
             the appellant is an Iranian national  given  he  speaks  Farsi
             which is the national language of Iran and his knowledge about
             Iran was consistent with the country information. I accept the
             appellant is a national of Iran.

         14. The appellant claims that on 11 February 2012 he was  arrested
             for breaching  the  peace  and  being  involved  in  a  fight,
             breaking a car window and stealing a  car  stereo.  He  claims
             that he was sentenced to 88 lashes. At  paragraph  11  of  the
             Refusal Letter it was accepted that the appellant had given  a
             reasonably detailed and plausible account but the timeline  he
             had provided  equated  to  1  nights  detention  when  he  had
             asserted he had been detained for 3 days. When this was put to
             him in interview he averred it was a single day.

         15. At the hearing the  appellant  was  asked  if  there  was  any
             connection  between  this  event  and  his  claim   that   the
             authorities where now looking for him. I understand  from  his
             evidence that he is claiming that the authorities will  impute
             anti-government views to the appellant not  only  because  his
             identity papers were discovered in a  church  house  but  also
             because he had been drunk and disorderly on  Independence  Day
             on  11  February  2012.  I  have  therefore  decided   it   is
             appropriate to consider this incident in the round of the rest
             of the evidence.

         16. The appellant claims that he was born a Muslim,  that  he  did
             not practice his religion and  began  a  relationship  with  a
             woman outside of wedlock in January 2014. He  claims  to  have
             discovered that she had  converted  to  Christianity  and  was
             secretly attending house church meetings. Despite the  obvious
             risks he explained in the interview that he had decided to  do
             whatever it took to make his relationship  with  Fatemeh  work
             and so agreed to attend a house church  meeting  with  her.  I
             find the claimants' account as to why  he  began  attending  a
             house  church  as  contradictory  and  inconsistent  with  his
             evidence as to what happened when he fled Iran. At the hearing
             he was asked about the contact he had had with anyone in  Iran
             since he had left. His evidence being that he  had  fled  Iran
             without knowing what became of Fatemeh and those  arrested  at
             the house church. He explained that he had  had  contact  with
             his  family  and  they  had  informed  him  that  the  Iranian
             authorities had been looking for the appellant. In fact he had
             had multiple internet conversations with his family  since  he
             left and yet at no point does he  appear  to  have  asked  his
             family what became of Fatemeh. I  find  it  lacks  credibility
             that the appellant would claim to be so in love and  dedicated
             to Fatemeh that he would risk his  own  safety  and  attend  a
             house church and yet appear to completely  fail  to  make  any
             enquiries as to what had happened to her after she  was  taken
             from the house church. This is compounded further by the  fact
             that  he  disclosed  to  his  father  what  had  happened  and
             therefore he had no apparent reason not to ask his  father  to
             find out what had happened to Fatemeh.

         17. The appellant claims that on 8 May 2014 he  attended  a  house
             church meeting. This is  inconsistent  with  the  timeline  of
             first meeting Fatemeh and discovering  she  had  converted  to
             Christianity. At question 46 of the interview  of  31  October
             2014 the appellant repeated 4 times  that  he  had  been  with
             Fatemeh 5 months before he had confronted her  and  discovered
             she had converted to Christianity. That  would  mean  that  he
             first knew in June 2014 and yet inconsistently  he  claims  to
             have attended a house church on 8 May 2014, having met Fatemeh
             in January 2014.

         18. The appellant claims that after attending 6 church meetings he
             had absorbed  sufficient  information  about  Christianity  to
             satisfy him to convert. When screened by the Home  Office  the
             appellant was asked ''what is your religion''?  ,  he  replied
             ''Muslim''. At the hearing the appellant was  asked  questions
             about his conversion and in particular when he decided to call
             himself a Christian.  At the hearing he said it was one  month
             before he came to the UK. The appellant claims he  arrived  in
             the UK on 12 July 2014 and therefore his evidence  to  me  was
             that he decided to become a Christian sometime in  June  2014.
             In the interview at question 60  on  page  B15  the  appellant
             claims that he decided he wanted to become a  Christian  on  8
             May 2014. It was argued that the question led the appellant to
             give that date as the date he wanted to become a Christian but
             had not yet become one.  He went on to say that  even  at  the
             date of the interview on 31 October 2014 he could not claim to
             be a true Christian then and that  was  why  he  said  he  was
             Muslim in the screening  interview.  I  find  the  appellants'
             explanation in interview inconsistent with his evidence to  me
             that he had decided to call himself a Christian in  or  around
             June 2014. I therefore  do  not  accept  that  his  answer  in
             interview can be explained as his  misunderstanding  or  being
             mislead. This is important because the  appellant  has  argued
             that  he  lacked  knowledge  of  Christianity   and   answered
             questions  incorrectly  because  he  had  not  completed   his
             conversion to Christianity. I find it implausible that  a  man
             would call himself a Christian in June 2014 and then a  Muslim
             on 12 July 2014, I further find it lacks credibility  that  he
             would make the decision to call himself a  Christian  when  he
             wrongly believed that Christmas formed part of  Easter,  could
             not name the disciple who betrayed Jesus, or quote  a  passage
             from the Bible. It is argued that he did provide a  number  of
             correct answers regarding Christianity and that this should be
             given weight. I accept that weight  should  be  given  to  the
             correct answers but consider the incorrect answers to be  such
             an intrinsic part of  the  Christian  faith  that  it  overall
             undermines the appellant's credibility.

         19. Turning more specifically to his account of attending a  house
             church meeting  on  19  June  2014  I  have  again  found  the
             appellant gave inconsistent evidence about that  incident.  In
             the interview the appellant described the  house  as  a  large
             house with a garden and within the garden at the end of it  on
             the right hand side was a toilet and on the left hand side was
             a shed. One of the toilets being inside the property  and  the
             other being outside. At question 70  the  appellant  confirmed
             that the security forces had entered  the  house  through  the
             front and question 68 he confirmed he had  been  in  the  back
             yard in the toilet. When asked why the Sepah  would  not  have
             raided the  house  from  both  the  front  and  the  back  the
             appellant said that the walls were very high and  he  was  not
             able to escape that way. However at the hearing the  appellant
             was asked about the property and  was  asked  if  he  had  re-
             entered the property via the back door. The appellant told  me
             that the property did not have a back door and  only  had  one
             door through which he had re-entered. At question 79 at B18 he
             described his manner of re-entry and said that he pushed  back
             the window and it was open and he entered  the  house  through
             the window. I do not accept that the appellant could make such
             a fundamental mistake and find that he has given  inconsistent
             evidence about how he re-entered the property which undermines
             his credibility. This is further compounded in interview  when
             he stated that he had to pass his own chair to escape from the
             property (questions 81-83).

         20. The appellant claims that he is a  genuine  Christian  convert
             and as evidence has produced a letter from St  Georges  Church
             in Leeds  dated  3  November  2014  which  confirms  that  the
             appellant attends meetings at the church and has done so since
             7 October 2014, a short letter which is not on  letter  headed
             paper from a Daniel Abdi who describes himself as the Minister
             of the Bible at Jehovah's Witnesses Kingdom Hall, in which  he
             stated the appellant had  attended  Persian  class  ''for  few
             times'', a letter dated 9 January 2015 from Reverend  Jonathan
             Clark stating that a Mr Majtaba Darzi had been given  pastoral
             responsibility for Farsi speakers at St  Georges  Church,  and
             finally a To  Whom  It  May  Concern   letter  from  Mr  Darzi
             confirming the appellant had attended  several  more  meetings
             since the letter of the 3 November and that he  believed  that
             someone who declares by their mouth that ''Jesus is Lord'' and
             believes in their heart that God will raise them from the dead
             will be saved; therefore  believing  the  appellant  would  be
             saved. I accept that the appellant  has  attended  St  Georges
             church and some Persian classes at Jehovah's Witnesses Kingdom
             Hall. I have no reason to doubt that Mr Darzi believes that if
             somebody verbally says Jesus is Lord and believes it  then  he
             believes they will be saved. I however have to decide  whether
             I find the appellant credible based upon the consideration  of
             the totality of evidence before me. Taking all of the evidence
             together I find the appellant  has  failed  to  establish  his
             history is as claimed: his conversion is genuine, he left Iran
             illegally, is wanted by the authorities and  therefore  is  at
             risk if returned. I reject the entirety of his claimed history
             other than he is an Iranian national.

 5. I deal with the grounds of appeal against the above findings in turn.

 6. Firstly, it is argued that the judge acted unfairly by failing to  give
    the appellant an  opportunity  to  address  the  specific  question  of
    whether he had enquired after Fatemeh's welfare with his parents before
    concluding that he had not done so. For her  part,  Mrs  Pettersen  was
    content to accept that the appellant had not been asked  this  specific
    question at the hearing, but argued that  the  judge  was  nevertheless
    entitled to conclude that it was reasonable to  expect  that  he  would
    have mentioned it either in his interview or at the hearing if  he  had
    in fact done so. I agree. Throughout the  course  of  both  his  asylum
    interview and at the hearing of his appeal,  the  appellant  was  given
    ample opportunity to mention any concerns that either he or his parents
    may have expressed concerning Fatemeh's fate. By way of  example  only,
    Mr O' Ryan's noted that in the course of the Presenting Officer's cross-
    examination of the appellant, he had been asked whether his family  had
    mentioned anything else happening beyond a  previously-mentioned  visit
    to the family home by the Iranian authorities some two days  after  his
    departure. I pause to note that this question was an entirely open  one
    and was not in any sense limited  in  scope  to  matters  touching  and
    concerning the appellant's  own  welfare.  Mr  O'Ryan  noted  that  the
    appellant replied to this by stating  that  the  authorities  had  made
    enquiries about his whereabouts at the family  home  on  some  2  to  3
    occasions, as well as at the homes of neighbours and at the premises of
    the family business. The appellant appears  to  have  been  anxious  to
    mention his particular concern that the authorities had  cancelled  his
    business insurance. By  contrast,  he  made  no  reference  at  all  to
    Fatemeh. In my view, the judge was entitled to  infer  from  this  that
    neither the appellant nor his parents had shown the slightest  interest
    in  Fatemeh's  fate  during  the  course  of  their  mutual   telephone
    conversations. She was not therefore required specifically to  ask  the
    appellant whether (and if not why) he had not done so.

 7. Secondly, it is argued that (contrary to  the  finding  of  the  judge)
    there was no material discrepancy in the  appellant's  account  of  the
    chronology of events leading up to his  first  attendance  at  a  house
    church meeting, which he said had occurred on the 8th May  2014.  Given
    the approximation of the timing of  other  events  in  the  appellant's
    chronology, I agree that this finding was unsound. However, rather than
    characterise it as "irrational" (as in the grounds) I would  prefer  to
    hold that  it  was  a  finding  that  lacked  evidential  support.  The
    remaining question, therefore,  is  whether  this  error  affected  the
    overall outcome of the appeal.

 8. Under the heading  "Conclusion",  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal 'commented' that although it is true that  the  judge  gave  two
    other reasons for finding that the Appellant's account was  unreliable,
    it nevertheless 'observed' that -

          i) conversion is rarely something that happens overnight, and  is
             an organic process in which  precise  timescale  would  rarely
             apply; and

         ii) differences in the Appellant's evidence as to  the  layout  of
             the house Church is not a solid basis to reject his claim  for
             international protection.

 9. In my judgement, the above comments  and  observations  are  simply  an
    undisguised attempt to re-argue the merits of certain  aspects  of  the
    appellant's case. They do not purport to identify an  "error  of  law".
    Thus, insofar  as  they  merit  analysis,  I  adopt  the  comments  and
    observations that were made by Judge Cruthers in granting permission to
    appeal. Having explained  his  decision  in  relation  to  the  grounds
    considered above,  he continued as follows:

         "... more generally, the judge's  conclusions  may  be  sustainable
         even without the points  in  her  paragraph  16  and  17.  In  that
         connection, I  note  that  the  grounds  (unsurprisingly)  seek  to
         significantly  downplay  the  judge's  credibility  reasoning.  For
         instance, as I  read  the  judge's  paragrpah  18,  there  are  two
         distinct credibility point in that paragraph (the  second  starting
         from "I further find ..."). And  when  one  turns  to  the  judge's
         paragraph 18, one can see that her "layout point"  may  go  to  the
         heart of the appellant's  "escape  account",  as  well  as  to  the
         question of whether the appellant ever attended a house  church  in
         Iran or not.

         Referring to paragraph 20 of  the  determination,  the  appellant's
         representatives will be  aware  of  relevance  cases  such  as  Ali
         Dorodian (01/TH/1537), notified on 31 July 2001 and  SJ  (Christian
         Apostates Evidence) Iran [2003] UKAIT 00158, notified on 12  August
         2003."

10. I read Judge Mensah's decision in the same way as did Judge Cruthers. I
    am thus satisfied that, with  the  exception  of  the  finding  that  I
    considered at paragraph 7 (above), the judge's findings  of  fact  were
    each sustainable on the evidence that was before her,  and  that  their
    combined effect was sufficient to justify the conclusion to  which  she
    came.

Notice of Decision

11. The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity is not directed



Signed   Date

Judge Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

