
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11152/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4th July, 2017, signed                  |On 11th July 2017                |
|And sent to Listing on                     |                                 |
|8th July 2017                              |                                 |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                    [N N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar of Counsel, instructed by S Satha & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  G  A  Black,  who,  by  a
    decision dated 26th January  and  promulgated  on  30th  January,  2017
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against  refusal  of  his  asylum  and
    human rights claim.

2.   On behalf of the appellant medical reports were  submitted  which  were
    prepared by Professor Persaud, a Consultant Psychiatrist  and  Emeritus
    Visiting Gresham Professor for Public Understanding of Psychiatry.  His
    original report was dated 11th March, 2015 and in an addendum  to  that
    report dated  8th  June,  2016  Professor  updates  the  state  of  the
    appellant's health.

3.   Unfortunately, page 5 of the  supplemental  report  appears  to  be  an
    exact copy of page 4 of the original report and although at page  6  of
    the supplemental report, the author of the report does give an extended
    history,  unfortunately  it  does  not  assist  in  understanding   the
    appellant's medical condition.  In his original report,  the  Professor
    concluded  that  the  appellant  suffers  from  a  serious  psychiatric
    disorder including major depression and in the more  recent  report  he
    refers to the fact that the appellant's  general  medical  practitioner
    appears not to be prescribing for the appellant's condition.

4.   The reports read together are by no means clear.  At  paragraph  14  of
    the judge's  determination  she  criticises  the  appellant,  since  no
    evidence of scarring had been produced to her, despite  the  fact  that
    the appellant indicated that  he  would  produce  medical  evidence  of
    scarring and the judge was of the opinion that the medical evidence did
    not support the appellant's claim.  It is not clear whether  she  meant
    from that that it did not support his claim to have suffered  scarring,
    or that it did not support his claim to have  been  detained  and  ill-
    treated.

5.   She accepted that he had been diagnosed with OCD  and  depression,  but
    criticism is made that she failed to engage properly  with  the  report
    and places little weight on its conclusions.  The judge refers  to  the
    psychiatrist suspecting that the  appellant's  mental  health  problems
    were the result of past torture,  whereas  the  psychiatrist  expresses
    this  suspicion  in  relation  to  the   appellant's   physical   pain.
    Permission was granted on the basis that the judge had failed  to  give
    sufficient reason for discounting the opinion of the psychiatrist as to
    the cause of the appellant's psychiatric condition.

6.   The second challenge was in relation  to  what  the  judge  said  about
    documents relied on by the appellant, including an arrest warrant and a
    letter from an attorney in Sri Lanka.   The letter confirms that having
    spoken to the officer in charge of  the  relevant  police  station  the
    Attorney established that there is an outstanding warrant  which  bears
    the same number  as  the  copy  provided  to  him  by  the  appellant's
    solicitors and which actually relates to the appellant.

7.   The letter from the attorney also refers to a member of the  attorney's
    staff inspecting the court file, as a result of which the attorney says
    he is satisfied as to the authenticity of the  documentation.   Dealing
    with this in paragraph 17 of the judge's determination, the judge says:

         "The letter from an advocate is not independent or reliable and has
         not  been  show  [sic]  to  be  authentic  with  reference  to  any
         independent evidence.  The letter refers to having pursued informal
         enquiries and unofficial inspection of the court file, which I find
         is not persuasive evidence as there appears to  be  no  reason  why
         such enquiries could not be officially followed up at the court.  I
         find that the appellant was vague as to when he came to  know  that
         the warrant existed."

8.   Before me, Mr Gajjar has suggested that there was no  consideration  by
    the judge  of  the  two  medical  reports  of  Professor  Persaud.   He
    submitted that it was insufficient for the judge to say as she  did  in
    paragraph 14 of the determination and  then  to  say  that  she  placed
    little weight on the conclusions made  in  the  report,  aside  from  a
    diagnosis.  There is no definitive conclusion as to  the  causation  of
    the appellant's mental health difficulties, but  nonetheless  they  are
    medical reports from an eminent  medical  practitioner  whose  opinions
    should be carefully considered.

9.   In the original report, Professor Persaud concluded that the  appellant
    continues to suffer from serious psychiatric disorder, including  major
    depression and this is likely secondary to past traumas  the  appellant
    claims.  He expresses the  view  that  he  did  not  believe  that  the
    appellant would survive in Sri Lanka,  because  of  his  mental  health
    problems and  his  health  would  deteriorate  dramatically.   He  also
    expresses the opinion that the risk of suicidal behaviour is  enhanced.



10.  The addendum refers to this and, understandably, Professor  Persaud  is
    critical of the fact that the appellant  has  not  been  obtaining  the
    treatment that he requires.  His conclusion was that essential services
    the appellant  needs  have  continued  to  be  denied  him  because  of
    bureaucratic confusion, combined with his own  lack  of  assertiveness.
    He concludes that the appellant's mental state appears to have worsened
    and that he is much more hopeless than before and has all the  symptoms
    much worse and has been feeling more  suicidal.   His  conclusions  are
    that  the  appellant  continues  to  suffer  from  serious  psychiatric
    disorder  including  major  depression  and  these  are  likely  to  be
    secondary to his past trauma claims.

11.  The judge's  consideration  of  the  medical  report  is,  suggests  Mr
    Gajjar, insufficient.  The Presenting Officer submitted that the  judge
    made findings which were open to her  on  the  report,  which  was  not
    Istanbul compliant.  The appellant had failed to provide  any  evidence
    as to scarring despite having  indicated  that  he  would.   The  judge
    accepted that the appellant suffered from OCD and depression.

12.  As to the second challenge Mr  Gajjar  submitted  that  it  was  simply
    insufficient for the judge to say that the letter from letter  from  an
    advocate was not independent or reliable and has not been shown  to  be
    authentic with reference to any independent evidence.  He relied on  PJ
    (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 1011 and in particular paragraph 41.

13.  The judge gives no reasons for making these findings.  The letter  from
    the advocate clearly shows that  the  officer  in  charge  advised  the
    advocate that an original of the arrest warrant bearing the same number
    was held at the police station in respect of the appellant and that his
    colleague had verified the arrest  warrant  with  the  registrar.   The
    colleague was able to unofficially  inspect  the  court  file  and  was
    satisfied that the copy of the arrest warrant was identical to that  on
    the file, but  this  of  course  had  already  been  confirmed  by  the
    registrar.  The judge fell into  error  by  ignoring  this  and  simply
    suggesting that it was not reliable.  The Presenting Officer  suggested
    that the judge had explained the reasons  for  her  findings  and  made
    findings which were open to her to make.

14.  I have concluded that the  determination  cannot  stand.   The  medical
    evidence is not in the format that one would normally expect it  to  be
    and does not comply with the Istanbul Protocol, but nonetheless  it  is
    medical  evidence  which  must  be  respected  and  must  be  carefully
    considered.  I believe that the judge has erred in  what  she  said  in
    relation to the medical evidence and  by  indicating  that  she  placed
    little weight on its conclusions, aside from the diagnosis.

15.  I believe that the judge has also erred in dealing  with  the  evidence
    from the lawyer  in  Colombo.   It  is  insufficient  to  dismiss  such
    evidence by simply suggesting that the letter  is  not  independent  or
    reliable.  It is made by someone purporting to be a member of  the  Sri
    Lankan  bar  and  a  former  Member  of  Parliament  and  former  local
    councillor.  It has not been shown by the respondent to be  a  document
    which cannot be relied upon.  It  is  a  document  which  needs  to  be
    considered in the context of  Tanveer  Ahmed  but  it  is  insufficient
    simply to say that the judge takes into account background evidence  as
    to the ease with which such documents can be forged.

16.  The appeal has already been to the Upper Tribunal once before  and  was
    remitted  in  March  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    I   have   given
    consideration to the appeal being retained by the Upper Tribunal but  I
    believe that the matter needs careful  consideration  by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge who needs to make clear and properly reasoned  findings.
    It is to be hoped that before the matter is  heard  afresh,  up-to-date
    medical evidence might be submitted  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    condition, which alarmingly, appears to be deteriorating.

Summary of Decision

17.  First-tier Tribunal Judge G A Black made material errors  of  law  such
    as require her decision to be set aside in its entirety.  The appeal is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by a judge other
    than Judge G A Black or Judge Mozolowski.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

On 8th July, 2017
