
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number:  AA/11030/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Sent           |
|On 7th May 2014                               |On 23rd July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIS

                                   Between

                             MR MIRAN ABDULZARDA
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                             First Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr J Nicholson, Counsel
For the Respondent:     Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant was born on 1st  September  1991.   He  claims  to  be  a
    citizen of Iran.  The Appellant claims to have arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 5th October 2013 travelling clandestinely  in  the  back  of
    several  lorries.   He  claimed  asylum  on  15th  October  2013.   The
    Appellant's application for asylum  was  based  upon  a  fear  that  if
    returned he would face mis-treatment due to his political opinion.  His
    application  for  asylum  and  for  consideration  for  a   claim   for
    humanitarian protection and under  the  European  Convention  of  Human
    Rights was refused by a reasons for refusal letter by the Secretary  of
    State dated 30th November 2013.

2.   The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge  of  the  First
    Tier Tribunal Thorne sitting at Manchester on 7th February 2014.  In  a
    determination promulgated on 25th February 2014, the Appellant's appeal
    was dismissed on all grounds.

3.   On 3rd March 2014, the Appellant lodged grounds of appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds  specifically  contended  that  the  Appellant
    maintains that the First Tier Tribunal Judge erred in failing  to  give
    any adequate consideration to whether the Appellant  is  a  non-Iranian
    Kurd would be persecuted or subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment
    if returned to Iran, (the only country named in the Removal Direction).



4.   Permission was granted by First  Tier  Tribunal  Grant  on  14th  March
    2014.   Whilst  noting  the  grounds  of  appeal  the  Judge   granting
    permission considered that it was more correct to assert that the First
    Tier Tribunal Judge having found that the Appellant was not an  Iranian
    National or to have allowed the  appeal  to  the  extent  that  it  was
    remitted back to the Secretary of State  to  reconsider  the  issue  of
    nationality and/or destination on removal, and  that  therein  lay  the
    arguable error of law.

5.   On 3rd April 2014 the Secretary of State responded to  the  grounds  of
    appeal under Rule 24.  That response noted that a  Section  10  removal
    decision has been made in respect of this matter, and that the  country
    of destination was the proposed destination not the actual  destination
    and that that allowed the Appellant to appeal and to establish a  claim
    from where he came from.  The Secretary of State  did  not  necessarily
    accept that assertion and that a Section 10 decision is the Immigration
    decision which triggered a right of appeal and that removal  directions
    on the other hand are very different from a decision  to  remove.   The
    Rule 24 response noted that a removal decision could only be made to  a
    country from which a person is a national or if  there  are  reasonable
    grounds to believe that a country may admit the person.   The  Rule  24
    Response contended that the First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  right  to
    dismiss the appeal as the Appellant has  failed  to  show  that  he  is
    outside the country of his nationality and was unable to, or  owing  to
    such fear, unwilling  to  avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  that
    country.

6.   It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me. The  Appellant  is
    represented by his instructed Counsel Mr Nicholson.  The  Secretary  of
    State is represented by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr  McVeety.



7.   There is agreement between both Mr  McVeety  and  Mr  Nicholson  as  to
    whether there is a material error of law in the decision of  the  First
    Tier Tribunal and for the stance that they wish me to take.  I  confirm
    that having heard their submissions I am in total  agreement  with  all
    that they suggest.

8.   Firstly, it is agreed that there is a material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First Tier Tribunal Judge.  That is not to say that the
    vast majority of what the Judge has found is wrong.  It is important to
    note that the Judge made a  finding  that  the  Appellant  was  not  an
    Iranian National. What the Judge thereafter failed to do,  was  to  add
    additional paragraphs to his decision, and to make findings as  to  the
    position that the Appellant would find himself in  being  both  Kurdish
    and non  Iranian.   It  was  incumbent  upon  the  Judge  to  give  due
    consideration to this feature and to make findings and he failed to  do
    so.  In reaching this decision, I have also given due consideration  to
    the authority of KF (removal directions and statelessness) Iran  [2005]
    UKIAT 00109.

9.   Neither legal representative nor I  are  remotely  persuaded  that  the
    correct course of action  is  that  suggested  by  the  Judge  granting
    permission, and indeed in granting permission,  with  the  greatest  of
    respect to the Judge who has done so, he  has  failed  to  address  the
    material issue that was before him and substituted  his  own  analysis.
    That is not the correct approach.

10.  I am urged both by Mr McVeety and by Mr Nicholson to  take  the  rather
    unusual step of remitting this matter  back  specifically  reserved  to
    First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Thorne  so  that  he  can  consider  these
    additional steps that are required to be taken. Bearing in  mind  Judge
    Thorne's experience and detailed knowledge of this matter, that seems a
    perfectly sensible course of action.

11.  There is lodged at Court a report from Mr George Joffe.  I  acknowledge
    that there may be benefit in referring  to  objective  evidence  and  I
    consequently admitted this report pursuant to Rule 15(2)(a).

Decision and Directions

12.  (i) The decision of the First Tier Tribunal contains a  material  error
    of law solely relating to the consideration of whether the Appellant as
    a non Iranian Kurd would be persecuted  or  subjected  to  inhuman  and
    degrading treatment if returned to Iran.

     (ii)     The decision of the First Tier Tribunal is  set  aside  solely
    for reconsideration on that specific issue and is remitted to the First
    Tier Tribunal to be heard reserved to Immigration Judge Thorne  sitting
    at Manchester on the first available date convenient both to the  Judge
    and to the Tribunal.

     iii) That the estimated length of hearing be 3 hours.

      iv) That leave be granted to the Appellant's Solicitors to rely on the
          report of Mr George Joffe.

       v) That there  be  leave  to  both  parties  to  admit  such  further
          objective evidence upon which they seek to rely, copies  of  which
          are lodged at the Tribunal and served on the other party at  least
          7 working days pre hearing.

      vi) Kurdish (Sorani) interpreter required.

13.   No  Anonymity  Order  was  made  by  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.    No
    application is made to vary the Order and none is made.


Signed   D N Harris                              Date:  16th July 2014


D N Harris
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


