
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11086/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 September 2016                          |On 11 October 2016            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

           Appellant and Respondent to cross-appeal ('Appellant')

                                     and

                                     J p
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIon made)

           Respondent and appellant in cross-appeal ('Respondent')


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms I Sabic of Counsel instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS





Introduction


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings

 2. There is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    and a cross-appeal by Mr Popalzai in this  matter.  The  appellant  was
    successful overall  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appellant
    however has appealed against the findings of the judge on the issue  of
    internal relocation.  I shall refer to the Secretary of  State  as  the
    respondent and Mr Popalzai as the appellant as  they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal to avoid confusion.  I refer  to  their  respective
    appeals as the appeal and the  cross-appeal  to  provide  clarity  when
    addressing the grounds and submissions made.

 3. The respondent and the appellant appeal and cross-appeal (respectively)
    against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal, Judge I Malcolm, who  in
    a decision promulgated on 22 June 2016 allowed the  appellant's  appeal
    on Article 8 grounds.

 4. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  His date  of  birth  is  1
    January 1997.  He made an application for asylum on 17th May 2013.   On
    28 July 2015 the respondent refused the appellant's claim.  In  essence
    the respondent did not consider that  the  appellant  was  at  risk  of
    persecution  on  return  to  Afghanistan.   Further,   the   respondent
    considered that the appellant could relocate within  Afghanistan.   The
    respondent  did  not  consider  that  the  appellant  was  in  need  of
    humanitarian protection or that removal of the appellant  would  breach
    Article 8 on the basis of the appellant's private life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The respondent also considered whether or not there might  be
    exceptional circumstances that warranted a grant  of  leave  to  remain
    outside of the Immigration Rules HC 395  (as  amended)  but  considered
    that no such exceptional circumstances existed in this case.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against   the
    respondent's  decision.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  found   that   the
    appellant would be at risk of forced recruitment by the Taliban in  his
    home area  of  Afghanistan.   However,  the  Tribunal  found  that  the
    appellant would be able to relocate within Afghanistan.   The  Tribunal
    then went on to consider the appellant's right to respect  for  private
    life under Article 8.  The Tribunal considered paragraph 276ADE of  the
    Immigration Rules and found that the appellant would  not  be  able  to
    reintegrate into Afghanistan  if  required  to  return.   The  Tribunal
    therefore allowed the appellant's appeal under paragraph 276ADE of  the
    Immigration Rules.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The respondent applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the finding of the judge that the appellant would be at risk of
    being forcibly  recruited  by  the  Taliban  in  his  home  area.   The
    Respondent also appealed against the judge's  finding  in  relation  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  On 7 July  2016  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Murray granted the respondent permission to appeal.

 7. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  Tribunal's
    finding in relation to internal relocation.  On 23  August  2016  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Deans granted the appellant permission to appeal.

Summary of Submissions

The Respondent's Appeal

 8. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge, having accepted  that  the
    appellant would be at risk of forced recruitment by the Taliban in  his
    home area, gives no reasons, however brief, to support this conclusion.
     It is asserted that no reference is made  to  the  actual  content  of
    either the report of Dr  Egnal  or  Mr  Foxley  at  any  point  in  the
    determination.  It is submitted that in the absence  of  any  reasoning
    the respondent is unable to understand why the judge has held that  the
    appellant would be at risk of forced recruitment by the Taliban.  It is
    further asserted that the judge found that  the  appellant's  voluntary
    returns to Afghanistan were difficult to reconcile with  the  claim  of
    forcible recruitment.  The judge has not taken this into  consideration
    when considering the risk on return. Mr Tufan submitted that  there  is
    no analysis of the evidence contained within the reports by the  judge.
    He submitted that at paragraph 12 of the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    there is a reference to the background information and that many people
    volunteer and there is a general willingness to join the  Taliban.   It
    is not therefore clear why somebody such  as  the  appellant  would  be
    forced to join the Taliban.  Against this background evidence the judge
    did not evaluate the evidence appropriately.  It is also submitted that
    the  appellant  has  repeatedly  left  Afghanistan  and   returned   to
    Afghanistan and at no time was forced to join the Taliban.   The  judge
    has not taken this into consideration when reaching her findings.

 9. Ground 2 of the  grounds  of  appeal  assert  that  although  there  is
    reference to the report of Dr Egnal the judge notes that the  appellant
    has shown resourcefulness in the past that  he  has  made  friends  and
    attends college in the UK.  It is submitted that the judge  has  failed
    to give adequate reasons to show that there would be  very  significant
    obstacles to the  appellant's  integration  into  Afghanistan.   It  is
    asserted that the determination does not disclose, even in brief terms,
    what problems the appellant would  seem  to  have  or  why  this  would
    prevent his adjustment to living in Afghanistan.  It is  also  asserted
    that it is not clear as to whether it is Dr Egnal who is proposing that
    the appellant would be unable to adjust to life in Afghanistan  and  if
    that is the case how he is qualified to comment upon the  situation  in
    Afghanistan.  It is submitted  that  the  judge  also  notes  that  the
    evidence elsewhere in respect of the  appellant's  college  attendance,
    ability to form friendships, voluntary return to  Afghanistan  and  his
    high degree of resourcefulness would conflict with the conclusion  that
    the appellant would be unable to reintegrate into Afghanistan.   It  is
    submitted that  there  is  no  suggestion  in  the  evidence  that  the
    appellant has lost his understanding of the culture in Afghanistan,  he
    spoke Pashtu at appeal - these  matters  were  raised  in  the  refusal
    letter.  It is also submitted that the fact that the judge  found  that
    internal relocation is viable and  so  would  therefore  be  reasonable
    appears to conflict with the  finding  that  the  appellant  could  not
    integrate on return  to  Afghanistan.   Mr  Tufan  submitted  that  the
    conclusion of the judge at paragraph 119 that the appellant would  have
    difficulty indicates that the judge has not applied the  correct  test.
    The test is very significant obstacles to  re-integration  which  is  a
    high hurdle. He submitted that the judge has not considered or set  out
    what those difficulties are and that it is not sufficient for the judge
    to merely refer to the reports of Mr Foxley and Egnal.   He  relied  on
    the case of Bossade  (ss.117A-D-interrelationship  with  Rules)  [2015]
    UKUT 415 (IAC) (although concerned with deportation)  by  analogy.  The
    comments made in that case are relevant to this appeal, in essence that
    very significant obstacles is a high hurdle to overcome.

10. Ms Sabic provided a skeleton argument and a Rule 24 response.  The Rule
    24 response asserts that contrary to the respondent's  submission  that
    no reference is made to the content of either the report of Dr Egnal or
    Mr  Foxley  the  judge  has  noted  the  conclusions  of  each  report.
    Reference is made to paragraph 89 of the Tribunal's  decision.   It  is
    submitted  that  this  alone  is  sufficient  for  the  respondent   to
    understand the reasoning and to understand why the  judge  reached  the
    conclusions that she did.  It is further  submitted  that  the  judge's
    finding is supported by the respondent's public policy document Country
    Information  and  Guidance  Afghanistan:   Security   in   Humanitarian
    Situation v.3.0.   Reference  is  made  to  paragraph  2.3.14.   It  is
    submitted that there can be no doubt what the judge meant, that is,  in
    reliance on the expert report which concludes that the appellant  would
    be at risk of forcible recruitment she found he would be at  risk.   It
    is submitted that the judge  did  take  into  account  the  appellant's
    previous return to Afghanistan at paragraphs 104, 110, 112 and 113  but
    ultimately held that this was irrelevant.  It  is  submitted  that  the
    judge was well aware of and referred to the  respondent's  position  on
    forced  recruitment  but  ultimately  preferred  the  evidence  in  the
    detailed expert report of the highly qualified country expert which  is
    supported by the respondent's own evidence. Ms Sabic submitted that the
    appellant would be returning to a known and  accepted  Taliban  hotbed.
    She submitted that although the appellant disagrees  with  the  judge's
    conclusion in relation to the legal issue of  internal  relocation  his
    factual conclusions are clear and based on referenced evidence.

11. Regarding  the  finding  that  the  appellant  would  face  significant
    obstacles to his integration she submitted that the detailed report  of
    Dr Egnal was referred to by the judge who  concluded  that  the  report
    indicated the significant obstacles  that  the  appellant  would  face.
    Reference is made to paragraph 118 where the judge sets out  from  that
    report  that  the  appellant  is  "generally   of   learning   disabled
    intellectual functioning and clearly is not intellectually  capable  of
    adjusting to life in  Afghanistan"  and  at  paragraph  119  that  "the
    appellant would face  difficulty  if  returned  to  Afghanistan".   She
    submitted that the  judge  reached  that  view  after  considering  the
    psychological assessment by Dr Egnal which, amongst other things  found
    that the appellant suffered from learning disabilities, has a  moderate
    to severe level of post-traumatic stress disorder, moderate  depression
    and that he is over compliant  and  vulnerable  to  exploitation.   She
    submitted that the judge took into account  the  respondent's  contrary
    view at paragraph 119.  She submitted that the fact that the  appellant
    who is supported in the UK as a former looked-after child who lives  in
    supported housing, attends college and has made friends says nothing of
    his ability to live alone permanently in  Kabul.   She  submitted  that
    there  could  not  reasonably  be   any   challenge   to   Dr   Egnal's
    qualifications or conclusions,  that  the  appellant  is  a  vulnerable
    learning disabled young person who is vulnerable to  exploitation.  She
    submitted that it is not correct that the judge simply considered  that
    there would be difficulty.

12. In reply Mr Tufan submitted that although there are  learning  problems
    that does not amount to very  significant  obstacles.   To  reach  that
    conclusion there would have had to have been more  analysis.   He  also
    submitted that there was no analysis of the psychologist's report.   He
    referred to page C9, at paragraph 6 and paragraph 7.11, paragraph 7.12,
    page C12.  He noted that the appellant was assessed to be at the  upper
    level  of  the  learning  range.   He  referred  to  the  case  of   KH
    (Afghanistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 1354 and  the  health  issues  submitting
    that the appellant does not meet a very high threshold.   He  submitted
    that there is no analysis in the decision of any of this evidence.

The Appellant's Cross-Appeal

13. The appellant asserts  that  the  judge's  view  on  the  viability  of
    internal  relocation  is  directly  inconsistent   with   the   judge's
    conclusion  that  the  appellant  is  genuinely  of  learning  disabled
    intellectual functioning and clearly is not intellectually  capable  of
    adjusting to  life  in  Afghanistan  and  at  paragraph  119  that  the
    appellant would  face  difficulty  if  returned  to  Afghanistan.   She
    submitted that  the  judge  reaches  that  view  after  reliance  on  a
    psychological assessment by Dr Egnal which  found  that  the  appellant
    suffered from learning disabilities, has a moderate to severe level  of
    post-traumatic stress disorder, moderate depression, that  he  is  over
    compliant and vulnerable to exploitation.  It  is  submitted  that  the
    judge goes on to state that there would be insurmountable obstacles  to
    the appellant's reintegration in Afghanistan.  It is submitted that the
    judge should have applied these  findings  of  fact  to  the  issue  of
    whether it was reasonable  or  not  for  the  appellant  to  internally
    relocate from Helmand to Kabul.  It is asserted  that  consistent  with
    the country guidance of AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG  [2012]  UKUT
    163 ('AK') internal relocation will in general  be  reasonable  but  it
    will be dependent  on  a  particular  profile  and  the  facts  of  the
    appellant's case.  It is asserted that the judge appears  at  paragraph
    116 to have treated AK as finding that internal relocation will  always
    be reasonable.  Reference is made to paragraph 115 where the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge explicitly states that he has had regard to AK  and  the
    country evidence in assessing whether internal relocation is viable but
    the judge has not had regard to all the circumstances of the  appellant
    nor his particular profile when assessing that viability.

14. Ms Sabic submitted that the question is,  was  the  judge  entitled  to
    accept the expert's reports.  If the judge was entitled to  accept  the
    reports then the judge ought to have  taken  those  into  consideration
    when considering the viability of relocation.  She submitted  that  the
    expertise of the experts  was  not  challenged  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  She referred to paragraph 115  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision and said that the only consideration  of  internal  relocation
    was by reference to the country guidance case.  She  also  referred  to
    paragraph 116 where the judge set out that it is clear from the country
    information and guidance that the appellant would be able to return  to
    another area of Afghanistan.  Again she submitted the judge has  failed
    to look  at  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  appellant.    She
    submitted that the factors feed into both tests, that is whether  there
    are very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  reintegration  and
    whether it is reasonable for the appellant to relocate.  She  submitted
    that there was no evidence that the reports  were  taken  into  account
    when considering viability of relocation.

15. Mr Tufan submitted that the judge's findings  that  the  appellant  can
    relocate are not flawed.  It is asserted that the  judge  has  assessed
    the claim from the actions of the appellant together with the  relevant
    country guidance in  arriving  at  the  conclusions  made  on  internal
    relocation.

Discussion

The Respondent's appeal

Forcible recruitment by the Taliban

16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraph 112 sets out:

         "112.    Whilst the appellant has claimed that  he  is  fearful  of
             returning to Afghanistan for fear of being forcibly  recruited
             by the Taliban, this I found difficult to reconcile  with  the
             actions taken by the appellant  in  voluntarily  returning  to
             Afghanistan, and again making a subsequent decision to  return
             (even taking into account the age of the appellant when  these
             decisions were made).

         113. Having considered Dr Egnal's  report  and  the  report  of  Mr
             Foxley I accept that the appellant would be at risk of  forced
             recruitment by the Taliban in his  home  area.   However,  the
             appellant has shown a high degree  of  resourcefulness  and  I
             have to give consideration to whether the appellant  would  be
             able to relocate.

         114. Whilst, as detailed, the  appellant  has  shown  a  degree  of
             resourcefulness I cannot ignore the  information  detailed  in
             the reports from Dr Egnal and Mr Foxley.

         115. In considering the country background information and  country
             guidance case of AK I considered that internal  relocation  to
             Kabul is a viable option.

         116. As I considered that internal relocation is a viable option  I
             do not find that the appellant's asylum  claim  succeeds.   As
             detailed the appellant has had no  personal  involvement  with
             the Taliban and even if he were unable to return to  his  home
             area it is clear from the  country  information  and  guidance
             that the appellant would be able to return to another area  of
             Afghanistan, for example Kabul."

17. It would appear that the judge  does  not  accept  that  the  appellant
    himself is fearful subjectively of  being  forcibly  recruited  by  the
    Taliban.  The judge's findings that the appellant would be at  risk  of
    forcible recruitment arises apparently solely from the  reports  of  Dr
    Egnal and Mr Foxley.  The judge does not set out what aspects of  those
    reports lead him to that conclusion.  It is not necessary for  a  judge
    to always set out relevant parts of reports if it is clear overall what
    the thrust of those reports are.  However, in this case, there is  very
    little by way of reference to any specific detail in those reports.  Dr
    Egnal concluded that the appellant's overall  intelligence  is  in  the
    learning disabled range and that he  is  compliant  and  vulnerable  to
    exploitation. The report by Mr  Foxley  concluded  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk in his home area from local Taliban groups 'as a young
    unemployed Pushtun male he appears  ideal  recruiting  fodder  for  the
    Taliban' (paragraph 80). Although I  accept  that  the  judge  did  not
    expressly set out the findings of the  reports,  she  relied  upon  the
    factors identified by Dr Egnal and  the  conclusion  of  Mr  Foxley  in
    reaching her conclusion that the appellant would be at risk of forcible
    recruitment from the Taliban. The reports had been made  available  and
    the respondent was represented at the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal where reference was made to the reports.  This is  just  about
    sufficient for the respondent to know why the judge  made  the  finding
    she did. As submitted by Ms Sabic the expertise  of  Dr  Egnal  and  Mr
    Foxley was not questioned by the respondent.

Very significant obstacles

18. The judge sets out at paragraph 118 the following:

         "118.    An important factor in this case  however  is  the  report
             which has been provided from Dr Egnal.  In particular  I  have
             noted in Dr Egnal's report it is detailed that  the  appellant
             appears to be  generally  of  learning  disabled  intellectual
             functioning and  clearly  is  not  intellectually  capable  of
             adjusting to life in Afghanistan.

          119.    In relation to the appellant's private life in the  UK  he
             is attending college  and  is  assisted  by  social  services.
             There is also a report from Dr Qureshi reporting concerns with
             the appellant's progress at college.  Whilst I have  noted  Mr
             Archie's comments on the appellant's learning  difficulties  I
             do  consider  that  this  is  a  factor  in  considering   the
             appellant's ability to reintegrate into Afghanistan.  I accept
             that the appellant  has  shown  a  degree  of  resourcefulness
             however I do not  consider  that  I  am  able  to  ignore  the
             forceful comments and opinions in the reports provided.  Given
             the terms of Dr Egnal's report  I  consider  that  the  report
             clearly supports the position that the  appellant  would  have
             difficulty if required to return to Afghanistan.

         120. The report from Dr Egnal weighs heavily  in  the  balance  and
             having given full consideration to the terms of this report  I
             consider  that  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
             appellant's reintegration  into  Afghanistan  if  required  to
             return."

19. The respondent submits that the judge did not apply the high  threshold
    required when considering the test of  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration that the appellant had to meet to satisfy paragraph  276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules. The respondent refers to  paragraph  119  and
    submits that the judge has considered that the requirement is that  the
    appellant would have 'difficulty'. I do not accept this submission. The
    judge at paragraph 120 sets out that having given full consideration to
    Dr  Egnal's  report  she  considered  that  there  are   insurmountable
    obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration  into  Afghanistan.[1]  The
    question is did the judge consider that the test was a stringent one in
    order to satisfy the requirement in paragraph 276ADE.

20.  The  judge  has  taken  into  consideration  that  the  appellant  has
    demonstrated resourcefulness  and  also  took  into  consideration  the
    respondent's representative's  submissions  regarding  the  appellant's
    learning disabilities. The judge gave full consideration to the  report
    of Dr Egnal finding that it weighed heavily in the balance when finding
    there were 'insurmountable' obstacles. Dr Egnal set out in his report 9
    specific aspects of his assessment of the appellant that  are  relevant
    to his ability to integrate in Afghanistan. In essence Dr  Egnal  found
    that the appellant suffers from moderate to severe  PTSD  and  moderate
    depression and anxiety and that these make it more difficult for him to
    cope with and deal effectively with his life. His  intelligence  is  in
    the learning disabled range. He is compliant  and  thus  vulnerable  to
    exploitation; his limited intellectual coping skills would make it more
    difficult for him to adjust. His depressed and anxious state would make
    it difficult for him to care  for  himself  and  protect  himself  from
    danger. This paints a picture of a very vulnerable young  man  open  to
    exploitation notwithstanding his resourcefulness. It  is  not  entirely
    clear whether the judge applied her mind to the stringency of the test.
    If that was an error I do not consider it was a material error. In  the
    context of the demanding standard I consider that this is a  borderline
    case. However, there is sufficient evidence in the report of  Dr  Egnal
    to support a finding that the appellant  would  face  very  significant
    obstacles to integration. Whilst I accept that  this  is  a  conclusion
    that not every judge may have reached in this case, I do  not  consider
    that this decision is irrational or  that  it  was  not  based  on  the
    evidence before the judge. The finding of the judge was  therefore  one
    that was open to her on the evidence before her.

21. The finding  that  internal  relocation  is  a  viable  option  is  not
    inconsistent with a finding that there are very  significant  obstacles
    to integration. These are two different concepts and  are  viewed  from
    different perspectives. The  threshold  for  a  finding  that  internal
    relocation is unreasonable is a very stringent test in the context of a
    claim to require international protection as discussed below.

22. There were no material errors  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision. The respondent's appeal is dismissed.

The Appellant's cross- appeal

23. The judge has dealt with internal relocation very  shortly.  The  judge
    considered:

         113. Having considered Dr Egnal's  report  and  the  report  of  Mr
         Foxley I accept that the Appellant  would  be  at  risk  of  forced
         recruitment by the Taliban in his home area. However, the Appellant
         has shown a high degree of  resourcefulness  and  I  have  to  give
         consideration  as  to  whether  the  Appellant  would  be  able  to
         relocate.

         114. Whilst, as detailed, the  Appellant  has  shown  a  degree  of
         resourcefulness I cannot ignore the  information  detailed  in  the
         reports form Dr Egnal and Mr Foxley.

         115. In considering the Country Background Information and  Country
         Guidance case of AK I considered internal relocation to Kabul is  a
         viable option.

         116. As I considered that internal relocation is a viable option  I
         do not find that the Appellant's asylum claim succeeds. AS detailed
         the Appellant has had no personal involvement with the Taliban  and
         even if he were unable to return to his home area it is clear  form
         the country information and guidance that the  Appellant  would  be
         able to return to another area of Afghanistan, for example Kabul.

24.  The  appellant  asserts  that  the  only  consideration  of   internal
    relocation was by reference to the country guidance case  -  the  judge
    has failed to look at the particular circumstances of the appellant.  I
    do not accept this submission. The judge, in the process of considering
    whether the appellant would be able to re-locate, specifically set  out
    that whilst the Appellant has shown a  degree  of  resourcefulness  she
    cannot 'ignore the information detailed in the reports  from  Dr  Egnal
    and Mr Foxley'. This was the judge's starting  point  when  considering
    internal relocation. I accept that she then did not make  reference  to
    any specific findings in those reports. However, it was the appellant's
    submission in respect of the judge's finding on forced  recruitment  to
    the Taliban that reference by the judge to  the  expert's  reports  was
    sufficient for the respondent to know why the  judge  had  reached  her
    findings.

25. At paragraph 76 of his report Mr Foxley concluded that the Appellant is
    unlikely to be pursued by the Taliban in Kabul. The judge had concluded
    that the risk to  the  appellant  in  terms  of  persecution  was  from
    forcible recruitment by the Taliban. I have  set  out  above  the  main
    findings of Dr Egnal. The appellant submits that  a  finding  that  the
    appellant  would  face  significant   obstacles   to   integration   is
    inconsistent with a  finding  that  internal  relocation  is  a  viable
    option. I do not accept this  submission.  The  context  in  which  the
    reasonableness of internal relocation is to be considered is the  claim
    to require international protection. The rigorousness of  the  test  as
    expressed in the speech of Lord Brown of Eaton-Under-Heywood in  Januzi
    (FC)  (Appellant)  v.  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Respondent) [2006] UKHL 5 ('Januzi') is:

         '42 ...Given that they can now safely be returned home, only  proof
         that their lives  on  return  would  be  quite  simply  intolerable
         compared even to the problems and deprivations of so many of  their
         fellow countrymen would entitle them to refugee status.  Compassion
         alone cannot justify the grant of asylum.'

26. This is not the same as a test under the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights (paragraph 276ADE reflecting Article 8 considerations)

27. As held in Secretary of State for the Home Department (Appellant) v. AH
    (Sudan) and others (FC) (Respondents)  [2007]  UKHL  49  the  disparity
    between the rights enjoyed under Article 8 of the ECHR  should  not  be
    taken into account when judging reasonableness and undue harshness:

         '3. The decision of the House in Januzi [2006] 2 AC  426  was  also
         directed to the problem of internal  relocation  of  claimants  for
         asylum who had a well-founded fear of persecution in  one  part  of
         their home state but who, it was said, could reasonably and without
         undue harshness be returned to and relocated  in  another  part  of
         that state. The common issue  in  the  appeals  (see  para  1)  was
         whether, in judging reasonableness  and  undue  harshness  in  this
         context, account should be  taken  of  any  disparity  between  the
         civil, political and socio-economic rights which a  claimant  would
         enjoy under the leading international human rights conventions  and
         covenants  and  those  which  he  would  enjoy  at  the  place   of
         relocation. The clear conclusion of the House was  that,  excepting
         breaches of fundamental rights such as are protected by articles  2
         and 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights,  it  should  not:
         paras 20, 23, 45-46, 61, 67, 70.'

28. The correct approach was demonstrated in Januzi  when  considering  the
    claim in relation to Mr Januzi:
         52.     ... He raised a problem that is particular to  Mr  Januzi's
         own case, in view of the prospect that his already  fragile  mental
         health would deteriorate  if  he  were  to  return  to  Kosovo.  He
         submitted that the evidence showed that conditions for the  medical
         treatment that he would need in the place of relocation  are  below
         the standards for the provision of basic norms of civil,  political
         and  socio-economic  rights  that  are   regarded   as   acceptable
         internationally. His case is that it would be unduly harsh, in  the
         context of an  untreated  severe  psychological  distress,  for  Mr
         Januzi to be required to live in a place where he has no family  or
         friends or community ties, no independent means of subsistence  and
         no prospect of gainful  employment.  The  submission  that  account
         should be taken of the extent to which conditions in Pristina  fall
         below those which are regarded internationally as acceptable was an
         essential step in that argument.

         53.     The Court of Appeal followed the guidance that  was  to  be
         found  in E  and  another  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2004] QB 531, para 67. They confined their attention to
         the situation in  the  country  of  Mr  Januzi's  nationality.  The
         evidence showed that the  difficulties,  both  in  terms  of  their
         likely effect on him and also of the availability of treatment  for
         his mental condition should  it  deteriorate,  extended  throughout
         Kosovo. There was nothing to show that the problems that  he  would
         face in obtaining accommodation and enjoying other civil, political
         or socio-economic rights were not a pan-Kosovo problem also.  In  a
         judgment with which the other members of the court  agreed,  Buxton
         LJ noted that in Karanakaran (Nalliah) v Secretary of State for the
         Home Department [2000] 3 All ER 449, 456 Brooke LJ  described  the
         test of undue harshness as a very rigorous one. But in his judgment
         it was clear that, applying any sort of rigorous  test,  relocation
         was an option that was available to Mr Januzi.

         54.     Once it is accepted, as in my opinion it must  be,  that  a
         comparison between the basic norms of civil, political  and  socio-
         economic rights that are regarded as acceptable internationally and
         the situation in Kosovo is not relevant, the  argument  that  there
         was a defect in the Court of Appeal's reasoning in Mr Januzi's case
         falls away.


29. The appellant has not asserted that the judge was not entitled to reach
    the conclusion arrived at taking into account the  conclusions  in  AK.
    Although I accept that the judge did not set out which aspects  of  the
    reports she took into consideration when referring to the reports of Mr
    Foxley and Dr Egnal it is clear that  she  did  not  make  her  finding
    without considering the  particular  circumstances  of  the  appellant.
    Given the rigorousness of the test the finding of  the  judge  was  one
    that was open to her.

30. There was no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision.
    The appellant's cross appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The respondent's  appeal  is  dismissed.  The  appellant's  cross-appeal  is
dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 10 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw



-----------------------
[1] Although the judge sets out the incorrect test referring to
insurmountable obstacles rather than very significant obstacles both tests
are stringent and therefore nothing turns on this. Neither party took a
point on this.

