
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11284/2014
                                                               AA/11286/2014
                                                               AA/11291/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 27 May 2015                       |On 10 June 2015                      |
|Prepared on 28 May 2015              |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    K. K.
                                    R. K.
                                    A. K.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, Counsel, instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellants are citizens of Sierra Leone, a  mother  and  her  two
       young daughters. The First Appellant entered the United Kingdom on  8
       August 2011 using her own passport and  with  entry  clearance  as  a
       visitor. Her two children entered separately in the  company  of  her
       husband in April 2012. She and her daughters  claimed  asylum  on  11
       October 2012, asserting that she did not now know where  her  husband
       was.

    2. The Respondent refused the asylum claims on 16 October  2014  and  in
       consequence made a decision of the same date to remove the family  to
       Sierra Leone.

    3. An appeal against those removal decisions was heard  and  allowed  by
       First Tier Tribunal Judge Dearden in a  Decision  promulgated  on  26
       February 2015. There were very significant issues that arose over the
       credibility of  the  First  Appellant,  because  there  were  serious
       inconsistencies between the account she  gave  in  evidence  and  the
       details she had given of herself in her VAF, so that at least one  of
       those accounts had to be a fiction.  There  was  also  a  significant
       delay since  she  had  entered  the  UK  before  she  had  sought  to
       regularise her immigration status.  She  claimed  to  have  lost  her
       passport, but she had not reported its loss, and had claimed that she
       felt unable to approach the Embassy for the issue of  a  replacement,
       even though she had no fear  of  the  authorities  in  Sierra  Leone.
       Despite this the Judge accepted that she was a truthful  witness.  He
       accepted that her two girls were at risk of FGM,  and  that  she  had
       been forced to intervene on four  occasions  to  prevent  them  being
       taken for FGM against her  wishes  by  members  of  the  Sowei  Bondo
       Society. He accepted that neither her husband, nor the authorities in
       Sierra Leone, were willing or able to provide protection against  the
       risk of harm that the girls faced.  He also found that the Appellants
       would be at risk of a breach of their Article 3 rights in  the  event
       of their return to a country in the grip of an Ebola epidemic, as  he
       found Sierra Leone then was.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted to  the  Respondent  by  First  Tier
       Tribunal Judge McDade on 17 March 2015. There were only two  grounds,
       and neither sought to challenge any of the findings of  primary  fact
       that the Judge had made. First, it was said to be arguable the  Judge
       had failed to offer adequate reasons as to why the  Appellants  could
       not avoid the risk of harm through relocation  within  Sierra  Leone.
       Second, it was also said to be arguable  that  there  was  no  proper
       basis for allowing the Article 3 appeals on the basis  of  the  Ebola
       epidemic.

    5. The Appellants filed a Rule 24 Notice on 17 April 2015.  They  argued
       that the Judge had directed himself appropriately, and that there was
       no material error of law in his decision.

    6. Thus the matter comes before me.

   Internal relocation

    7. I am satisfied that it is unsafe to consider only  the  jurisprudence
       upon FGM relating to the country of origin of a particular  claimant.
       There is much useful guidance to be found by taking  a  broader  view
       than only that presented in FB (Lone women, PSG, internal relocation,
       AA (Uganda) considered) Sierra Leone [2008] UKAIT 90, for example  by
       considering the approach adopted in K and others (FGM) The Gambia  CG
       [2013] UKUT 62. Whilst the  Judge  did  not  in  fact  refer  in  his
       decision to any of the jurisprudence relating to either the  risk  of
       FGM, or the expedient of internal relocation, that does not  however,
       of itself, give rise to a material error of law, and it is not argued
       before me that it did.

    8. In this case the Judge's findings must include  his  acceptance  that
       the two girls were at risk of harm from the Sowei Bondo Society,  and
       from members of their extended family. He accepted that the  practice
       of FGM was common across all sectors of society within Sierra  Leone,
       so that data from 2008 showed that 91.3%  of  women  aged  15-59  had
       undergone FGM. He also accepted that it was most  commonly  performed
       on girls aged 10-14 as part of their initiation into  women's  secret
       societies, and coming of age ceremonies. (Both girls  are  below  the
       age of 14.) He also accepted that early marriage was common, with 22%
       of women married by the age of 15, and 56% of women  married  by  the
       age of 18. In the light of this data he accepted  that  there  was  a
       real risk that the two girls would be taken  from  their  mother  and
       subjected to FGM and/or early marriage. There is no challenge to this
       finding.

    9. The Judge dealt with internal relocation very  briefly  in  the  sub-
       paragraph dedicated to that issue, saying simply that  the  Appellant
       was living in the urban area of Freetown before she left, and that it
       would be more difficult to relocate to a rural area than to remain in
       Freetown [22(5)]. However the sub-paragraph dedicated to  Ebola  also
       contained findings  that  were  material  to  the  issue.  The  Judge
       accepted on the basis of the Foreign Office's own advice  to  British
       nationals that the general medical facilities throughout Sierra Leone
       were under severe strain due to Ebola, that there  were  restrictions
       on movement in some areas, and that pregnant women were at  increased
       risk from the disease [22(7)].

   10. Ms Rackstraw argued that the Judge had  failed  to  engage  with  the
       Respondent's case as it had been put in the letter giving reasons for
       the refusal of the asylum  claim.  This  was  an  urban  family  from
       Freetown, who could relocate to another urban  area,  since  Freetown
       was not the only urban area within  Sierra  Leone.  Relocation  to  a
       rural area was  not  their  only  option.  The  First  Appellant  had
       identified the risk of FGM from the Bondo Society  as  arising  as  a
       result of the attitudes of her parents in law, and not the population
       at large. Nor had she ever identified a  risk  from  the  authorities
       within Sierra Leone; the high point of her case in relation  to  them
       was that she did not believe they were willing or able to provide any
       effective protection to herself or  her  daughters  against  the  FGM
       risk. Thus the group of non state agents who the Judge  had  accepted
       posed a risk to this family was  in  reality  very  small,  and  very
       easily avoided, possibly even by relocation within Freetown itself.

   11. Whilst the Judge plainly did not refer himself to the  detailed  step
       by step analysis of the risk of FGM faced  in  the  Gambia  that  was
       undertaken by the Upper Tribunal in K and others, it is  possible  to
       draw a number of parallels between the findings made in that case and
       the findings of fact  that  the  Judge  made  in  this.  The  overall
       incidence of FGM is not dissimilar between the two countries, and the
       Judge was not given statistical information as part of  the  evidence
       placed before him that would allow him to find that there was no risk
       within specific ethnic groups, or to the ethnic group  of  which  the
       Appellants were members. In K and others the  Upper  Tribunal  warned
       that whilst the risk of FGM could be reduced if the children's father
       was opposed to it, it may not be sufficient to avoid that risk if the
       extended family were in favour of FGM. Living in an urban area  would
       reduce the risk, whilst living in a rural  area  would  increase  it.
       That strikes me as guidance of general application when considering a
       risk of FGM, and not guidance that was specific only to the Gambia.

   12. The guidance offered upon the issue of internal relocation in  K  and
       others was that as a general rule an individual at risk of FGM in her
       home area would be unlikely to be able to avail herself  of  internal
       relocation. Cogent reasons would be needed for a sustainable  finding
       that an  individual  could  relocate  safely,  especially  given  the
       evidence  that  in  the  Gambia   ethnic   groups   were   thoroughly
       interspersed, the country was small and ethnic  groups  in  different
       parts of the country were highly interconnected.

   13. Whilst Sierra Leone is a larger country than the  Gambia  (about  six
       times the size), with a higher  population  (about  three  times  the
       size) the guidance to be found in K and  others  upon  the  issue  of
       internal relocation is plainly relevant to  a  consideration  of  the
       risks faced by young women in  that  country.  I  am  satisfied,  and
       indeed Ms Rackstraw  did  not  dispute,  that  however  he  expressed
       himself, the Judge must be taken to have found  that  the  Appellants
       were at risk in their home area of  Freetown  from  members  of  both
       their extended family, and the Sowei Bondo Society.  He  gave  brief,
       albeit sound, reasons for his finding that  it  was  unreasonable  to
       expect the Appellants to seek to relocate to a  rural  area,  and  Ms
       Rackstraw did not seek to challenge that finding.

   14. What then upon a proper analysis was left in  dispute?  In  terms  of
       avoiding the family and the members of the particular  Bondo  Society
       identified by the Appellants, the Respondent does not seek  to  argue
       that the evidence before the Tribunal showed  that  the  position  of
       different ethnic groups in  the  urban  areas  of  Sierra  Leone  was
       materially different to that prevailing in the Gambia. The  inference
       must be therefore that within the urban areas  of  Sierra  Leone  the
       different  ethnic  groups  are  thoroughly  interspersed,   and   the
       different ethnic groups highly interconnected. It was therefore  open
       to the Judge to find that the risk of harm  from  the  group  of  non
       state agents identified extended across all of the  urban  areas.  If
       so, then the conclusion would be that internal relocation to an urban
       area would not avoid the risk under consideration.

   15. Whilst he did not perhaps deal with the possibility  with  his  usual
       clarity, the findings that the Judge did make also raised  the  wider
       issue of a risk of FGM and/or forced marriage at  the  hands  of  the
       wider community, that their mother as a  lone  woman  without  family
       support would be unable to protect them from. If the girls  did  face
       such a generalised risk from the population  at  large  within  their
       home area of Freetown, against which the authorities were  unable  or
       unwilling to offer protection, as the Judge appears to have accepted,
       then it is extremely difficult to see how internal relocation  within
       Sierra Leone to any particular location could  avoid  that  risk.  No
       such location was identified by the Respondent.

   16. In the circumstances I am  not  persuaded  that  the  Respondent  has
       established that there was any material error of law in the decision,
       given the unchallenged findings of primary fact.

   Ebola

   17. It is not disputed before me that it was open to the Judge to find on
       the evidence before him that Sierra Leone remained in the grip of  an
       epidemic of Ebola, even if the incidence of new cases of that disease
       had fallen dramatically by the date of the hearing. There was however
       no consideration by the  Judge  of  whether  the  authorities  within
       Sierra Leone had reacted (with the benefit of international  support)
       to that disease in such a way as to afford  its  population  adequate
       protection against infection and  against  the  disease  itself  once
       contracted. Equally, however, it is not disputed before  me  that  if
       the Judge was correct to find that the Appellants faced a  real  risk
       of harm across Sierra Leone as a result of  the  risk  of  FGM/forced
       marriage, that there could be no material error of law in any finding
       by the Judge that the Ebola epidemic alone constituted a real risk of
       a breach of their Article 3 rights upon return.

DECISION

   The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  26
   February 2015 therefore contained no error of law  in  the  decision  to
   allow the appeals of the Appellants appeal which requires that  decision
   to be set aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 28 May 2015

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

   Unless and until the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellants  are
   granted anonymity throughout  these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
   proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them.  This  direction
   applies both to the Appellants and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
   with this direction could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt
   of court.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 28 May 2015
