
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11683/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th December 2016                 |On 11th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                     TA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V James of Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. On 15th March  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Saffer  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Asjad who dismissed the appeal on  all  grounds
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse  asylum,  humanitarian
    and human rights protection to the appellant, a female adult citizen of
    Eritrea.

 2. The matter then came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis on 5th May
    2016 who decided that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law.  It was then adjourned  to  a
    further hearing before the Upper Tribunal  for  the  re-making  of  the
    decision of the First-tier.  On 25th October  2016  Principal  Resident
    Judge Dawson made a transfer order to allow for the  re-making  of  the
    decision to be heard by a differently constituted  Tribunal.   On  that
    basis, the matter came before me on 5th December 2016.

Error on a Point of Law

 3. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis decided that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal contained an error on a point of law  for  the  following
    reasons:

         "13. The Judge had conflicting evidence on the current position  in
             Eritrea.  The evidence the Judge relied on was criticised  and
             undermined by  other  evidence  and  the  Judge's  failure  to
             consider the same undermined the whole decision.  There was an
             error in law.

         14. Mr Mills handed me a letter dated December 1, 2015  signed  by
             Principal Resident Judge Dawson in which the Tribunal made  it
             clear that Eritrean appeals in the Upper Tribunal were  to  be
             stayed  pending  a  future  Country  Guidance  cases.   Having
             checked with the Principal Resident Judge I agreed to  adjourn
             the matter  until  such  time  as  the  Tribunal  listed  such
             appeals.

             DECISION

         15. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
             involve the making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside
             the original decision and adjourned the matter for  a  further
             substantive hearing on a date to be fixed."

Re-Making the Decision

 4. When the matter came before me the  Tribunal  had  issued  the  country
    guidance set out in Eritrea: MST and Others (National  service  -  risk
    categories) (CG) [2016] UKUT 443 (IAC).  The head note summary in  that
    case states (at paragraph 10):

         "10. Accordingly, a person whose asylum claim has  not  been  found
             credible, but who is able to satisfy a decision-maker (i) that
             he or she left illegally, and (ii) that he or  she  is  of  or
             approaching draft age is likely to be perceived on return as a
             draft evader or deserter from national service and as a result
             face a real risk of persecution or serious harm."

 5. Both Mr Bates and Ms James confirmed to me that  the  country  guidance
    summarised above applied in the circumstances of  this  case.   I  also
    heard brief evidence from the appellant who stated that she is fit  and
    well and would be liable to military service if returned to Eritrea.

 6. In the circumstances I concluded that the appellant would be at risk of
    persecution or serious harm if  returned  to  Eritrea  because  of  her
    acknowledged liability to national service as an illegal  departee  and
    that she is, as a result, a refugee.  I announced that  I  would  allow
    the appeal.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and is set aside.  I re-make the  decision  by  allowing  the
appeal on asylum grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

It appears that no fee was payable in this appeal and  therefore  there  can
be no fee award.  In the event that a fee was payable then I make  no  award
as the decision of the respondent to refuse  the  application  was  properly
made at the time in the light of the country guidance then in existence.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

