
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11621/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 August 2015                    |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                    k_ n_
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, Counsel instructed by Kanaga Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought in relation to the  determination  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Housego which was promulgated  on  13  April  2015.
    The appeal is brought with the permission of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Heynes who on 8 May 2015 gave reasons for permission as follows:

         "The grounds of appeal complain  that  the  Judge  made  irrational
         credibility findings and erred in considering risk on return.

         There is an arguable error of law in that the Judge  accepted  that
         the Appellant had been tortured (para 50) but appears to contradict
         that finding (para 61)."

 2. The submissions that I have heard on this appeal have been  focused  on
    the apparent contradiction  between  those  two  paragraphs  and  I  am
    grateful to Mr Muquit of Counsel for the appellant and  to  Mr  Walker,
    the Home Office Presenting Officer, for  the  pragmatic  and  realistic
    manner in which they have both approached this appeal.  I hope  that  I
    can state to the background relatively  shortly  bearing  in  mind  the
    narrowness of the issue.

 3. The appellant is a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  born  on  2  May  1975  who
    travelled to this country via both Turkey and France and made his claim
    for asylum on 14 October 2013.  The issues raised both in  the  refusal
    letter and in the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  concerned
    injury  inflicted  during  a  shell  attack  in  1992   together   with
    allegations of torture  and  involvement  in  the  LTTE,  bringing  the
    appellant to the attention of the Government of Sri Lanka.

 4. Having set out  the  conflicting  evidence  and  then  dealt  with  the
    submissions made on behalf of the Home Secretary and the appellant, the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge made a number of findings of fact.  The first
    of those so far as is material to this appeal is at paragraph 50  which
    reads as follows:

         "At some point the appellant has  suffered  torture.   The  medical
         evidence of Dr Martin is clear.  The physical location of the scars
         is such that not all of them could have been  self-inflicted.   The
         circular scars are not consistent with shell injuries nor random so
         as to be consistent with an accident.  They are of a magnitude such
         as to make it unlikely that  they  would  be  self-inflicted.   The
         report contains a series of descriptions of  the  scars  making  it
         likely that they are the  result  of  torture  inflicted  upon  the
         appellant.  The age of the scarring cannot be dated precisely, only
         that it was at the date of the report, more than one or  two  years
         old."

 5. Later in the determination, at paragraph 61,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge says the following:-

         "Given the appellant's life history from 2007 onwards there  are  a
         number  of  possible  explanations  for  the  infliction  upon  the
         appellant of these injuries.  I find that they were  not  inflicted
         as the appellant asserts."

 6. It is  impossible,  reading  the  determination  in  its  entirety,  is
    reconcile the judge's apparent findings in paragraph 50 with set out in
    paragraph 61.  It seems to me that when first addressing this issue the
    judge appears to accept that the  appellant  suffered  torture  and  in
    doing so accepts at face value the evidence of Dr Martin which, amongst
    other things, discounts possible alternative  explanations  as  to  the
    cause of that scarring.

 7. Paragraph 61 is diametrically opposed to this and is a positive finding
    that the scarring, which is the only material injury  in  dispute,  was
    not inflicted  as  the  appellant  asserts.   It  is  not  possible  to
    reconcile that contradiction.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge has  given
    no explanation or reason as to coming to the conclusion which he did at
    paragraph 61.  This is perhaps a little surprising because elsewhere in
    the determination there is clear evidence of  a  careful  balancing  of
    conflicting versions and  an  appropriate  fact-finding  process  being
    undertaken. This clear inconsistency amounts to an error of law and one
    that requires the decision to be made again.

 8. I have turned my mind today as to whether any of the findings  of  fact
    by the First-tier Tribunal can properly be preserved and whether I,  in
    the Upper Tribunal, can properly re-make the decision.  Both Mr  Muquit
    and Mr Walker incline to the view that the only proper course in  these
    circumstances, where a finding is central to the issue  of  credibility
    and plausibility, the only proper course is to remit the matter to  the
    First-tier Tribunal in order that the determination can be made  afresh
    and it seems to me that this common view must be correct.

 9. The matter must be remitted so that a  fresh  hearing  can  take  place
    before a different First-tier Tribunal Judge, who, looking at  all  the
    evidence in the round, can come to proper conclusions on the  issue  of
    torture. It is because the matter requires a  re-hearing  that  I  have
    been circumspect and economical in  what  I  have  said  regarding  the
    disputed facts because clearly they remain contentious and  by  setting
    aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge they will need
    to be looked at afresh. Therefore, I decline to express any view.

10. This appeal is allowed.  The  matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.

Directions:

 1. Remit to First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross

 2. Not to be heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego.

 3. Tamil interpreter required.

 4. Time estimate - 3 hours.

 5. All evidence to be relied upon  to  be  submitted  in  compliance  with
    standard directions.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill         Date 4 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
