
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11145/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7th December 2016                       |On 19th January 2017             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                            mr ali tahsen hassan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Hussain, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Iraq  born  on  12th  May  1990.   The
    Appellant claims to have left Iraq on 4th February 2015 travelling  via
    Turkey arrived in the UK on 14th February 2015 when he claimed  asylum.
    On 15th February 2015  the  Appellant  was  convicted  at  West  London
    Magistrates' Court after pleading  guilty  to  having  entered  the  UK
    without a valid travel document and  was  sentenced  to  three  months'
    imprisonment.

 2. The Appellant's claim for asylum is based upon a fear that if  returned
    to Iraq he would face mistreatment due to his political opinion because
    he fears the mujahedeens who have targeted him and threatened  to  kill
    him because his father used to work for the Americans.  The Appellant's
    claim for asylum was dismissed by Notice of  Refusal  dated  29th  July
    2015.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Birrell sitting at Manchester on 1st August 2016.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 11th August  2016  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 4. On 23rd August  2016  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On  5th  September  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Grant noted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge accepted much of the Appellant's evidence  of  what  had
    happened to his mother and father as a result of his father's work  for
    the international coalition in Iraq and the reasons that the  Appellant
    fled Iraq and finds that the Appellant would be at risk  on  return  to
    Baghdad.  Judge Grant noted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found
    the Appellant did not come within  the  risk  factors  set  out  in  AA
    because he had previously lived in Iskandarya for five  years  and  has
    relatives there and can relocate there.  It is the Appellant's case  he
    has no family in Iskandarya and the grounds submit that the judge erred
    in fact which amounts to an error of law.

 5. On 19th September 2016 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24  noting  that  the  judge  had  given  adequate
    reasons for finding that the Appellant could  relocate  to  Iskandarya.
    The findings are set  out  at  paragraphs  63  and  67  and  the  judge
    considers the issue of the Appellant's claim in relation to religion at
    paragraph 64.  The judge had found that the Appellant did not have  any
    significant problems regarding religion.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there are any material errors of law in the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears by his instructed
    solicitor Mr Hussain.   The  Respondent  appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Bates.

Submission/Discussion

 7. Both legal representatives acknowledged that the  question  outstanding
    is whether or not the Appellant is  capable  of  return  to  Iskandarya
    which is some 35 miles from Baghdad.  Mr Hussain relies on the  Grounds
    of Appeal but submits that the claim in  fact  goes  further  than  the
    simple relocation point contending that the judge erred with regard  to
    the claim on the basis that the Appellant is no longer a Muslim and his
    case is that the Appellant had become an atheist.  He submits  that  at
    paragraphs 63 to 77 of the judge's decision she has failed to give  due
    and proper consideration to the issue of  religion.   He  submits  that
    apostates are killed and are  at  risk  in  Iran  and  that  non-Muslim
    minorities (which he submits includes the  Appellant)  are  obliged  to
    follow Islamic beliefs.  He submits that the judge has failed  to  look
    properly at the Appellant's atheism and that it is implicitly  accepted
    at paragraph 64 that the Appellant has given up his Islamic  faith  and
    that there is no finding that the Appellant was not  credible  in  such
    circumstances.  He thereafter submits that the judge  has  not  engaged
    with the country evidence.

 8. He takes me to the Appellant's bundle that was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and submits that Judge Birrell has  not  properly  taken
    into account comments found  therein  with  regard  to  persecution  of
    atheists and secondly that the Appellant has no close family to  return
    to in Iskandarya and that  he  has  no  contact  with  extended  family
    members.

 9. Mr Bates starts by considering the family members  that  the  Appellant
    has indicated he has in Iskandarya pointing out that he  answered  this
    at question 17 of the initial interview and that at  the  time  of  his
    interview he made no such claim that he could not return there.  In any
    event he submits that this  is  not  material,  the  Appellant  led  an
    independent life as a lorry driver travelling around and to what extent
    the Appellant had need of other family members was not  an  issue  that
    was considered nor needed to be and that the findings made by the judge
    were open to her.

10. As to the Appellant's atheism he submits that this  is  different  from
    being an  agnostic  or  a  lapsed  Muslim.   He  points  out  that  the
    Appellant's evidence was that he was no  longer  a  practising  Muslim.
    Consequently the Appellant may merely be someone who has  rejected  the
    practice of Islam.  He submits that this has been thoroughly dealt with
    at paragraphs 64 and 65 of the judge's decision.  Further he points out
    that the judge had noted that the Appellant at paragraph 65 states that
    he had had no significant problems and that he merely states that he is
    an atheist.  No evidence was available before the Tribunal that he  had
    renounced Islam and no suggestion has been made that he disparages  the
    religion.

11. Returning to the issue of family he points out the Appellant does  have
    family in Iskandarya, he could contact them if he  wanted  to  but  the
    Appellant has lived an independent life and the fact that  he  has  not
    attended a mosque for a long  time  has  never  previously  caused  any
    problems.  He submits that the judge has given cogent reasons and  that
    there is no error of law and asked me to dismiss the appeal.

12. In brief response Mr Hussain points out that  it  is  acknowledged  the
    Appellant has given up on Islam and therefore he would be at risk.   He
    points out it has been accepted that the Appellant would be at risk  in
    Baghdad so why would he not be at risk in Iskandarya and that the  risk
    remains.  It is his contention that there are material errors  of  law,
    that I should set aside the decision and remake the  decision  allowing
    the appeal.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

15. There are two issues raised in this matter  by  the  Appellant's  legal
    representatives contending that there are material errors of law.   The
    first relates to the ability of the Appellant to relocate to Iskandarya
    and the second as to whether he would be at risk on the basis  that  he
    is an atheist.  I remind myself that the judge heard full  evidence  in
    this matter.  She has addressed the  issues  upon  which  concerns  are
    expressed.  At paragraph 62  she  has  given  reasons  as  to  why  the
    Appellant would be at risk in Baghdad.  Thereinafter  at  paragraph  63
    she has given cogent reasons as to why the Appellant  could  return  to
    Iskandarya pointing out that he had no problems there  before  he  fled
    from Iraq; that Iskandarya is not a contested zone and that he has both
    Iraqi ID and his nationality certificate.  The judge pointed  out  that
    the Appellant is fit and  healthy,  well-educated  and  has  previously
    worked in Iraq and that he has relatives in  Iskandarya  who  might  be
    able to provide him with support.

16. Further as Mr Bates has pointed out the Appellant lived an  independent
    life and was a lorry driver.  The issue as to the extent  to  which  he
    would  need  relatives  for  support  is  one   that   received   scant
    consideration by any party before the First-tier Tribunal.  I find that
    the judge has considered the issue and given cogent reasons as  to  why
    the Appellant would not be at  risk  on  return  to  Iskandarya.   That
    ground discloses no material error of law.

17. The second ground relates to the risk contended by  the  Appellant  and
    his legal representatives that the Appellant would be exposed to on the
    basis that he is an atheist.  This has been thoroughly addressed by the
    judge at paragraphs 64 to 66 in her decision.  She has noted that there
    is no evidence to say that the Appellant has renounced Islam nor turned
    to another religion.  All the Appellant's evidence is, is that he is no
    longer a practising Muslim.  These factors have  been  fully  addressed
    and considered by the judge  particularly  at  paragraphs  64  and  65.
    Further the judge has gone on to consider  the  objective  evidence  at
    paragraph 66.

18. At paragraph 67 the judge has made findings having considered  all  the
    material in the round and noting that the Appellant may be at  risk  in
    Baghdad but that he could reasonably relocate to  Iskandarya  where  he
    had lived for five  years  without  any  serious  problems  in  a  non-
    contested area.  Further Judge Birrell has  gone  on  to  consider  the
    position relating to the Appellant's loss of faith and concluded  on  a
    reasoned analysis that the Appellant had not demonstrated that he  came
    within any of the risk factors set out in AA (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG
    [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC).

19. Overall this is a very thorough decision from an experienced judge  who
    has set out a full and  well-reasoned  decision.   The  submissions  in
    essence of Mr Hussain amount to little more than disagreement with  the
    findings of the judge.  The  decision  overall  discloses  no  material
    error of law and the Appellant's appeal is consequently  dismissed  and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of  law
and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

