
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/11025/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3rd January 2017                |On 5th January 2017                |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                  HOUDA [Z]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr G Brown for Crumpsall Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates.

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Appellant was born on 24 July 2015 and is a national of Morocco.

3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.

Preliminary Discussion

4. Mr Brown provided me with a document purporting to be a Rule 24  Response
   and Cross Appeal. I indicated to Mr Brown that I was satisfied that there
   was an authority that indicated he  could  not  argue  a  'cross  appeal'
   unless permission had been granted for such an appeal. I  was  unable  to
   recollect the authority but it is EG and NG (UT rule 17: withdrawal; rule
   24: scope) Ethiopia [2013] UKUT 00143(IAC) headnote 3 of which reads

      "A party that seeks to  persuade  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  replace  a
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal with a decision that would make  a
      material difference to one of the parties needs permission to  appeal.
      The Upper Tribunal cannot entertain an application  purporting  to  be
      made under rule 24 for  permission  to  appeal  until  the  First-tier
      Tribunal has been asked in writing for permission to  appeal  and  has
      either refused it or declined to admit the application."

5. In this case the Respondent sought, and was granted  permission  and  the
   Appellant did not. The matter will proceed on the basis of the appeal  by
   the Respondent. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision
   of First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson promulgated on 5  March  2016  which
   refused the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
   dated 24 July 2015  to  refuse  her  claim  for  asylum  or  humanitarian
   protection but allowed her appeal on human rights grounds.

6. The decision in relation to the refusal of  refugee  protection  has  not
   been challenged and is a matter of record. The human rights appeal  which
   was based on the Appellants marriage to a British Citizen Reza  Eskandari
   and her relationship with Mr Eskandari's son because it was not  accepted
   that the Appellant and Mr Eskandari were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
   relationship.

The Judge's Decision

7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Simpson ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
   decision in respect of the refugee claim but  allowed  the  appeal  under
   Article 8 in essence because she found that the Appellant's marriage  was
   genuine noting that the Appellant was also pregnant and her  child  would
   be a British Citizen.

8. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  arguing  that  the  Judge's  approach  to
   Article 8 as  she  failed  to  approach  it  through  the  prism  of  the
   Immigration Rules specifically Appendix FM.

9. On 26 May 2016 First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holmes  gave  permission  to
   appeal noting that the Judge had failed to acknowledge that the Appellant
   did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  for  a  grant  of
   leave as a partner and there was no assessment of whether she could  make
   an application for entry clearance as a partner from  Morocco  and  there
   was no reference to the statutory public interest factors in section 117B
   of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

10. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Bates  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that :

   a) The Judge had failed to consider the countervailing  factors  and  ask
      whether the Appellant met the requirements of the Rules.

   b) There was no consideration of whether a temporary separation would  be
      proportionate.

   c) The Judge appeared to find that  her  step  sons  and  future  child's
      citizenship were trump cards.

   d) There was no assessment of whether  the  financial  requirements  were
      met.

   e) He did  however  concede  that  the  balance  in  the  proportionality
      exercise moved back towards the Appellant where  there  were  children
      involved.

11. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Brown submitted that :

   a) The issue was one of materiality as he had to accept  that  the  Judge
      had failed to address the statutory criteria in her  assessment  under
      Article 8.

   b) The Judge was alive to the nature of the relationship with her husband
      and stepson and accepted that they could not relocate to Morocco.

   c) If the matter were to be looked at again if  anything  the  Appellants
      case was stronger as she is  breastfeeding  a  young  baby  who  is  a
      British Citizen.

The Law

12.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible.

Finding on Material Error

14. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made errors of law that were material  to  the  outcome  in  the
   decision.

15. The Judge manifestly did  not  refer  to  or  apply  the  provisions  of
   section 117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  she
   was required to in considering the  public  interest  in  her  Article  8
   assessment. Although this was not an appeal against a refusal  under  the
   Rules clearly the question  of  whether  the  Appellant  could  meet  the
   requirements of Appendix FM was relevant to  the  wider  public  interest
   that the Judge was obliged to take into account.  In  general  terms  her
   findings did appear to suggest that the most significant factor  was  the
   nationality of her step son and her child who was due shortly  after  the
   hearing. These were errors of law The failure of the First-tier  Tribunal
   to address and determine whether the appeal should succeed under  Article
   8 on the correct legal basis constitutes a clear error of law. This error
   I consider to be material since had the Tribunal conducted this  exercise
   the outcome could have been different. That in my  view  is  the  correct
   test to apply. I therefore set that part of the decision aside.

16. Both Mr Brown and Mr Bates indicated that they were content  for  me  to
   remake the decision on the basis of the evidence in the  bundle  and  the
   preserved findings made in relation to Article 8 and the relationship  in
   issue.

Remaking the Decision

17. My starting  point  are  the  preserved  findings  in  relation  to  the
   Appellant being in a genuine relationship with a British citizen  husband
   and step child.

18. Section 117A (2) of the 2002 Act  provides  that  where  a  Tribunal  is
   required to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration  Acts
   would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  it  must,
   in considering 'the public interest question', have regard in  all  cases
   to  the  considerations  listed  in  section117B  of   the   Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended by the Immigration Act 2014).
   Section 117 (3) provides that the 'public interest  question'  means  the
   question of whether an interference with a person's right to respect  for
   private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).

19. The S117B considerations are as follows:

         "(1)     The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
             the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak English, because persons who can speak
             English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,that is
                  established by a person at a time when the person is in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)      Little weight should be given to a private life
             established by a person at a time when the person's
             immigration status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
             the public interest does not require the person's removal
             where-

             (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                  the United Kingdom."

  20. The definition of "qualifying child" is found in section 117D:

           "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
           who-

             (a) is a British citizen, or

             (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
             seven years or more;"

21. I have taken into account the guidance given in R  (on  the  application
   of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v UT (IAC) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705  which
   in relation to the issue of reasonableness at paragraph 45 it states:

      "In my judgment, if the court should have regard to the conduct of the
      applicant and any other matters relevant to the public  interest  when
      applying the "unduly harsh" concept under section 117C(5),  so  should
      it when considering  the  question  of  reasonableness  under  section
      117B(6).....

      But the critical point is that section 117C(5) is in substance a free-
      standing provision in the same way as section 117B(6), and even so the
      court in MM (Uganda) held that wider  public  interest  considerations
      must be taken into account when applying the "unduly harsh" criterion.
      It seems to me that  it  must  be  equally  so  with  respect  to  the
      reasonableness  criterion  in  section  117B(6).   It  would  not   be
      appropriate  to  distinguish  that  decision  simply  because  I  have
      reservations whether it is correct.  Accordingly,  in  line  with  the
      approach in that case, I will analyse the appeals on  the  basis  that
      the Secretary of State's submission on this point is correct and  that
      the only significance of section 117B(6) is that where the seven  year
      rule is satisfied, it is a factor of some weight leaning in favour  of
      leave to remain being granted."

22. As to the relevance of the Respondents policy in relation  to  Appendix
   FM and children at paragraph 46-47 it states:

      "46. Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the fact  that  a
      child has been here for seven years must be given  significant  weight
      when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed, the  Secretary
      of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of  Immigration
      Directorate Instructions  entitled  "Family  Life  (as  a  partner  or
      parent) and Private Life: 10  Year Routes"  in which it  is  expressly
      stated that once the seven years' residence requirement is  satisfied,
      there need to be "strong reasons" for refusing leave  (para.  11.2.4).
      These instructions were not in force when the  cases  now  subject  to
      appeal were determined, but in my view, they merely  confirm  what  is
      implicit in adopting a policy of this nature. After such a  period  of
      time the child will have put down roots and developed social, cultural
      and educational links in the UK such that it is likely  to  be  highly
      disruptive if the child is required to leave the UK. That may be  less
      so when the children are very young because the focus of  their  lives
      will be on their families, but the disruption becomes more serious  as
      they get older.  Moreover, in these cases there must be a very  strong
      expectation that the child's best interests will be to remain  in  the
      UK with his parents as part of a family unit, and that must rank as  a
      primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.

      47. Even if we were applying the narrow reasonableness test where  the
      focus is on the child alone, it would not in my view follow that leave
      must be granted whenever the child's best interests are in  favour  of
      remaining. I reject Mr Gill's  submission  that  the  best  interest's
      assessment automatically  resolves  the  reasonableness  question.  If
      Parliament had wanted  the  child's  best  interests  to  dictate  the
      outcome of the leave application, it would have said so."

23. The Appellants appeals against the decision of the Respondent is on the
    basis that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights
    Act 1998.

24. I have determined the issue on the basis of the questions posed by Lord
    Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27

Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?

25. I have preserved the findings made by the Judge that the Appellant  and
    her husband are in  a  genuine  marital  relationship.  The  Appellants
    husband's child Sam appears to have a particularly  close  relationship
    to the Appellant having formed the view the first time he saw her  that
    she was his mother (his own mother having abandoned him and returned to
    Iran). The Appellant and her husband now have a  child  together  Rayan
    born on 14 May 2016 who is of course a British Citizen as  is  Sam  and
    her husband.

If  so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

26. I am satisfied that removal would have consequences of such gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.



If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

27. I am satisfied that there is in place the legislative framework for the
    decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights which is
    precise and accessible enough for the Appellant to regulate her conduct
    by reference to it.

If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
others?

28. The interference does have legitimate aims since it is  in  pursuit  of
    one of the legitimate aims set  out  in  Article  8  (2)  necessary  in
    pursuit  of  the  economic  well  being  of  the  country  through  the
    maintenance of the requirements of a policy of immigration control. The
    state has the right to control the entry  of  non  nationals  into  its
    territory and Article 8 does not mean that  an  individual  can  choose
    where she wishes to enjoy her private and family life.

If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?

29. In making the assessment I have also taken into account  ZH  (Tanzania)
    (FC)  (Appellant)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home   Department
    (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 4 where Lady Hale noted Article  3(1)  of  the
    UNCRC which states that "in all actions  concerning  children,  whether
    undertaken  by  ...  courts  of  law,  administrative  authorities   or
    legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a  primary
    consideration."

30. Article 3 is now reflected in section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 which provides that, in relation, among  other
    things, to immigration, asylum or nationality, the Secretary  of  State
    must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring  that  those   functions   "are
    discharged having regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
    welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom".  Lady  Hale  stated
    that "any decision which is taken without having regard to the need  to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of any children involved will not  be
    "in accordance  with  the  law"  for  the  purpose  of  article  8(2)".
    Although she noted that national authorities were expected to treat the
    best interests of a child as "a primary consideration", she  added  "Of
    course, despite the looseness with  which  these  terms  are  sometimes
    used, "a primary  consideration"  is  not  the  same  as  "the  primary
    consideration", still less as "the paramount consideration".

31. There are two children who would be affected by any  decision  in  this
    case and I am satisfied on the basis of the preserved findings and  the
    evidence of the birth of the new child that their best interests lay in
    being brought up by their mother and father in the UK. Sam is  in  full
    time education in primary school but given his age he is still  focused
    on his immediate family relationship. He wrote a letter to court  which
    expressed very clearly how much he loves his mother, the Appellant.  In
    Sam's case I am persuaded that continuity is particularly important  as
    he has effectively 'lost'  a  parent  once  already.  Family  life  and
    continuity can only ever be in the UK.

32. I now turn to the wider proportionality  assessment  and  I  take  into
    accounts those factors which I am obliged  to  consider  under  section
    117B of the 2002 Act:

33. I would start by accepting that the Appellant now  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with both her step son and her  own  child  who
    are both qualifying children for the purpose of s117B6. I am  satisfied
    that it would not be reasonable for the  children  to  be  removed  and
    indeed Mr Bates did not seek to argue that this was a case where family
    life should continue in Morocco but rather suggested that  a  temporary
    separation might  be  appropriate  to  allow  for  an  entry  clearance
    application to be made. I am satisfied that in this case it  would  not
    be appropriate.

34. I have already noted above the  unusual  circumstances  of  Sams  first
    meeting with the Appellant, how he believed her to be  his  mother  and
    was hysterical at the prospect of her leaving him again. I accept  this
    evidence. In this case I find it would be  wholly  disproportionate  to
    expect Sam to have to go through such a separation, for an  unspecified
    period. I also note that the Appellant has a young baby  who  is  being
    breast fed. It was unclear whether the suggestion was that this British
    Citizen child should be separated  from  his  brother  and  father  and
    return to Morocco with his mother or stay with his father. Again  I  am
    not satisfied that either option is proportionate or  indeed  practical
    particularly given that Mr Eskandari is 59 years old and in poor enough
    health to receive DLA and unlikely to be able to care for a young  baby
    on his own.

35. Even taking into account the wider public interest I am fortified in my
    view in this case. I note in this context that while  this  is  not  an
    appeal against  the  refusal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  that  the
    Appellant in all likelihood met the  requirements  of  the  Rules.  The
    challenge raised in the refusal letter under Appendix FM was as to  the
    nature of the relationship and no other issue was I accept  considered.
    The relationship issue has been resolved in the Appellants  favor.  The
    only other matter raised by Mr Bates were the financial requirements of
    the Rules but I note that there is  evidence  in  the  bundle  that  Mr
    Eskandari is in receipt of the highest level of DLA and  therefore  the
    Appellant was exempt from the financial requirements of the  Rules.  No
    other challenge or suggested countervailing factor  was  raised  by  Mr
    Bates. Nevertheless I  can  see  that  there  is  accommodation  as  Mr
    Eskandari owns a house and the Appellant came to the UK to improve  her
    English as she was already studying it when in Morocco. Given that  the
    Rules are intended to reflect the Government's and Parliament's view of
    how, as a matter of public policy, the balance should be struck between
    the right to respect  for  private  and  family  life  and  the  public
    interest there would be no merit in arguing that the public interest in
    immigration control required the Appellants  removal  if  she  met  the
    requirements for leave as a partner.

36. While  I  accept  that  the  relationship  and  any  private  life  was
    established  while  the  Appellants  status   was   precarious   I   am
    nevertheless persuaded that the particular  circumstances  underpinning
    the Appellants life in the United Kingdom taken  together  cumulatively
    outweigh the legitimate purpose of the Appellants removal.

Decision

23. There was an error on a point of law in the decision of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal with regard to Article 8 such that the decision is set aside

24. I remake the appeal.

25. I allow the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

Signed                                                              Date
4.1.2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.

Signed
Debra Birrell
Deputy                 Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge
   Date4.1.2017


