
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11244/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5th August 2016                        |On 9th August 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [I H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

For the Respondent:    Ms D Dhaliwal (instructed by Halliday Reeves)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State, with
    permission, in relation to the Decision and Reasons of a Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hollingworth) promulgated on 15th April 2016
    in which he allowed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal of his asylum claim.

 2. The Appellant is a national of  Zimbabwe.   He  had  travelled  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2001 and applied for asylum for the first time on the
    12th October 2002.  That claim was on the basis that he and his  father
    were active members of the MDC  in  Harare.   His  appeal  against  the
    refusal of that that application was heard  by  Adjudicator  Gordon  on
    26th January 2004 and dismissed on 12th February 2004.

 3. The Appellant next appeared before the First-tier Tribunal on 16th July
    2008.  On that occasion he was appealing against a decision  to  deport
    him following a conviction  of  affray,  common  assault  and  damaging
    property for  which  he  received  a  combined  custodial  sentence  of
    eighteen months.  That appeal was also dismissed.

 4. Hs claim to have been involved in the MDC had  been  found  not  to  be
    credible.

 5. The appeal before Judge Hollingworth was in relation to  a  refusal  to
    revoke the deportation order and to  refuse  a  further  asylum  claim.
    This time the Appellant claimed to have a significant profile and to be
    an  active  member  of  ROHR  in  the  UK  which  is  a  human   rights
    organisation.  The Judge accepted his evidence and found  that  he  did
    have a significant profile and allowed the appeal.

 6. The Secretary of State sought and was  granted  permission  to  appeal.
    The grounds as argued before me were that the Judge erred  in  allowing
    the appeal and the Appellant had no significant MDC profile which would
    result in his facing a real risk in Zimbabwe.   They  relied  upon  the
    country guidance case of CM (EM Country Guidance; disclosure)  Zimbabwe
    CG [2013] UKUT 00059 (IAC).  The grounds argued that the Appellant  had
    been found to have no  credible  claim  as  a  member  of  the  MDC  in
    Zimbabwe.   His  own  evidence  was  that  ROHR  was  a  human   rights
    organisation and not a political party and as such the Judge  erred  in
    finding that he would be at risk on return.

 7. It was also argued before me that having previously lost an  appeal  on
    the basis that he would not  carry  out  any  political  activities  in
    Zimbabwe then the same should  apply  to  his  current  activities  and
    therefore he would not be at risk.

Findings

 8. The judgment of Judge Hollingworth is very lengthy  and  detailed.   It
    explains the chequered history that the appeal had before him including
    numerous adjournments.  It first came before him in April 2015 and  was
    only ultimately and finally heard in April 2016.  The  Judge  was  well
    aware of the previous decisions.  At Paragraph 55 he confirmed he  took
    as his starting point the  findings  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    credibility as set out in the previous  decisions.   However,  he  also
    pointed out that the essence of the Appellant's  case  before  him  was
    that he should be granted protection based upon the activities  he  had
    carried out in the United Kingdom which would render him at risk if  he
    were to be returned.  It is true that the  Judge  refers  to  political
    activity in relation to the Appellant's activities with ROHR  and  ROHR
    is documented to be and confirmed by the Appellant to be a human rights
    organisation rather than a political party.  That notwithstanding I  do
    not find that the Judge has made an error of law.  It is quite clear at
    Paragraph 58 that the Judge had considered the considerable evidence in
    detail and found the evidence of the Appellant's  activities  would  be
    easily accessible on the internet.  He had attended the Zimbabwe  vigil
    which is available  on  Facebook  but  the  ROHR  involvement  was  the
    greatest.  The Judge found at  Paragraph  63  that  search  results  on
    Google, the vigil website  and  Facebook  means  that  the  Appellant's
    activities and profile with ROHR, which is significant, would be easily
    identified.  The Judge at Paragraph 65 appreciated that the Appellant's
    activities were for a human rights organisation rather than a political
    party.  He  also  correctly  identified  the  country  information  and
    country  guidance  cases,  although  amended  several  times,  had  not
    concluded that people with  a  significant  profile  for  human  rights
    organisations would  not  be  at  risk  in  Zimbabwe.   The  Judge  was
    therefore entitled to find that his profile was  significant  and  that
    that significant profile would place him at risk.

 9. It is not relevant whether or not the  Appellant  would  continue  with
    those activities in Zimbabwe.   The  risk  to  him  would  lie  at  the
    airport.  The intelligence led  enquiries  about  the  Appellant  would
    reveal his activities and it would be at the  airport  where  he  would
    encounter problems.  His problems would be  with  the  authorities  and
    therefore internal relocation would not be available.

10. Mr McVeety sought to argue that the  Appellant's  activities  were  not
    genuinely held  and  were  undertaken  purely  as  a  means  to  obtain
    international protection.  That may well be the  case  but  it  is  now
    trite law that a person's motives are irrelevant if the result  of  the
    activities in fact places them at risk.  The Judge in this  case  found
    that they did and I can discern no material error of law in the Judge's
    reasoning which is detailed and thorough.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

There has been no application for an anonymity order and I do not make one


Signed                              Date 8th August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


