
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11628/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 May 2016                                 |On 20 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     R A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Reynolds, Counsel, instructed by Migrant Legal
Project


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is a citizen  of  Libya.  He  has
advanced kidney disease which according to the medical  evidence  is  likely
to progress to end stage renal failure necessitating a  combined  liver  and
kidney transplant. He came to the UK as a student in 2010 with  leave  until
17th August 2011. On 12 January 2012 the appellant (hereafter the  Secretary
of State or SSHD) granted him a period of discretionary leave until 11  June
2012. When his application for further leave was refused in  July  2013,  he
appealed. His appeal was dismissed by FtT Judge Holmes. On 10 July  2014  he
made a claim for asylum on the basis that he  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution in Libya because of  his  medical  condition  and  the  security
situation/political unrest in Libya.  His  application  was  refused  on  11
December 2014 and he was served on the same date with a decision  to  remove
him as an illegal entrant. His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)
Judge Coaster. On 27 April 2015 the  judge  sent  a  decision  allowing  the
claimant's appeal on Article 3 and 8 ECHR grounds. The  two  most  pertinent
paragraphs of the judge's decision are [60] and [61] which state:


         "60. The evidence before me is that the health and medical services
         in Libya are shattered or have collapsed because  of  the  violence
         perpetrated by armed militia who consider themselves above the  law
         and a weak government which is unable to control the militia.  This
         situation is prohibitive to reasonable medical treatment even of  a
         lesser quality than was available  in  the  UK.  As  a  result  the
         appellant would be at  a  real  risk  of  being  unable  to  access
         appropriate medication, dialysis or within 2 to 5 years a liver and
         renal transplant. There was evidence than  an  increase  in  kidney
         stones would increase  the  risk  of  the  appellant's  kidneys  to
         deteriorate more quickly...


         61. In this case there is a real risk that end stage kidney disease
         treatment for the appellant is not practically available at all  in
         the current breakdown of public  services  and  the  indiscriminate
         violence occurring of the  Libyan  state  to  which  there  was  no
         evidence of amelioration in the near to medium term. The  mandatory
         return of the appellant to Libya therefore  engages  Article  3  in
         that the lack of medication and medical services  would  result  in
         inhuman or degrading treatment such  that  the  high  threshold  of
         "exceptional" is met. .."


2. At [66], having made reference to the dismissal by FtT  Judge  Holmes  of
the claimant's earlier appeal (in which Judge Holmes had  found  that  there
was no obvious  reason  why  the  claimant  could  not  access  the  medical
services available in Tripoli or Tunisia), FtT Judge Coaster added:


         "...the difference between  this  [claimant's]  situation  and  the
         other cases referred to above is that  it  is  not  a  question  of
         comparing  the  medical  facilities  in  Libya  with  the   medical
         facilities here and finding them of lesser quality.  There  are  no
         medical facilities and medication available in Libya at the current
         time to treat the [claimant's] condition. To remove  him  to  Libya
         would be inhumane and disproportionate."


3. What happened next is that the SSHD applied for permission to  appeal  on
the grounds that the judge was wrong to allow his appeal on Articles  3  and
8 grounds as to do  so  was  contrary  to  binding  case  law,  specifically
Secretary of State for Home Department v  GS  (India)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40
(hereafter GS (India)), which had been handed down several months earlier.


4. The SSHD's grounds alleged in fine that the judge had allowed the  appeal
on Article 3 and 8 grounds on the basis of  the  claimant's  advanced  renal
disease and what she found to be  unavailability  for  treatment  in  Libya.
They said that "[i]t appears from paragraphs 59 -61, though it is  not  made
clear, that the Judge proceeds on the basis that the Article 3 threshold  is
lowered in health cases, where the home country is  in  a  state  of  'civil
war'". These grounds went on to state that in GS (India):


         "The Court of Appeal dismissed the appeals of 5  people  with  'End
         Stage Kidney Disease' on the basis that the Article 3 threshold  as
         established in the cases of D and N remains too high even for  them
         at this late stage in their conditions. In the present  appeal  the
         appellant is described as having 'Advanced Stage  Kidney  Disease'.
         He is not yet on dialysis and is predicted to need a transplant  in
         2-5  years.  The  facts  of  this  case  simply  cannot  sustain  a
         conclusion that removal would breach Article 3".


5.There then followed a cross-appeal from the claimant contending  that  the
judge erred in failing to consider and determine the  ground  of  appeal  as
regards eligibility for humanitarian protection, specifically Article  15(c)
of the Qualification Directive.


6. At the hearing before us, Mr Richards for the SSHD acknowledged  that  he
was in great difficulty in sustaining the SSHD's  grounds  of  appeal  which
were confined to a challenge to the legal  evaluation  of  the  findings  of
fact made by the judge. The  SSHD's  grounds  had  focused  exclusively,  he
said, on arguing that the judge had  departed  from  binding  principles  of
case law which made clear that even   cases  of   kidney  disease  far  more
advanced than the claimant's could not establish  exceptional  circumstances
sufficient to found a violation of Articles 3 or 8.   Mr  Richards  accepted
that in fact the judge had not sought to allow the appeal on  the  basis  of
the "deathbed" paradigm to  be  applied  in  ill  health  cases  reliant  on
Articles 3 and 8, but had rather allowed it on the basis  of  a  combination
of the claimant's medical circumstances and the parlous state of  civil  war
in Libya and the fact that "the health and medical  services  in  Libya  are
shattered or have collapsed because of the  violence  perpetrated  by  armed
militia who consider themselves above the law and a  weak  government  which
is unable to control the militias" ([60]).  That  was  consistent  with  the
Court of Appeal's analysis in GS(India).   Mr  Reynolds'  skeleton  argument
and short oral submissions were to similar effect.


7. We then asked the parties to address us as regards the claimant's  cross-
appeal, pointing out to Mr Reynolds that at a previous  hearing  before  the
Upper Tribunal on 20 October 2015 the claimant's  then  counsel,  Mr  Hoshi,
had indicated that if the SSHD's appeal was dismissed the claimant  was  not
pursuing his cross-appeal.  In much the same words, Mr  Reynolds  said  that
if we decided to dismiss the SSHD's appeal against the judge's allowance  of
the claimant's appeal on Article 3 and 8 grounds, he would  not  pursue  the
humanitarian protection ground which had been advanced in the  cross  appeal
grounds and in his skeleton argument of May 2016.


The judge's findings of fact
8. Before turning to give our assessment it is important  first  of  all  to
highlight the fact that neither party has sought to  challenge  in  any  way
the findings  of  fact  made  by  the  FtT  judge,  including  his  findings
regarding the country conditions in  Libya.  The  grounds  also  contain  no
challenge based on  the  point  seen  as  significant  by  FtT  Holmes  when
dismissing the claimant's earlier appeal that the claimant seemed, based  on
how he had managed his kidney disease before coming to the UK, to have  been
able to travel from Libya to Tunisia and back for  treatment.  The  complete
lack of any challenge to those findings needs to be borne  in  mind  for  an
understanding of the analysis we now proceed to give.


Secretary of State for the Home Department v Said
9. It is secondly of importance to mention that shortly after we heard  this
appeal the Court of Appeal  has  given  further  guidance  on  health  cases
involving adverse country conditions in Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department v Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442. We gave consideration to  whether  it
was necessary to seek  further  submissions  concerning  this  guidance  but
concluded that it was not.


Analysis


GS and EO and GS (India)
10. Addressing first the SSHD's grounds of appeal,  we  are  satisfied  that
the judge did not materially err in law. The judge's  unchallenged  findings
of fact included  a  finding  that  the  breakdown  of  health  and  medical
services in Libya was caused by human actors namely  armed  militias  and  a
weak government unable  to  control  such  militias  and  as  such  was  the
responsibility of the state. The judge's assessment  also  made  very  clear
that the basis for  allowing  the  appeal  on  Article  3  grounds  was  the
combined effect of the claimant's  ill  health  and  adverse  conditions  in
Libya. It was not the claimant's ill health  on  its  own.  Of  course,  the
judge justified doing so by reference to the Upper Tribunal case of  GS  and
EO (Article 3-health cases) India [2012] UKUT 00897. In that case the  Upper
Tribunal held that whilst the rapidity of decline caused by  the  withdrawal
of medical treatment cannot of itself amount  to  the  kind  of  exceptional
circumstances  that  makes  removal  a  breach  of  Article  3,  there  were
recognised departures in cases concerning  children,  discriminatory  denial
of treatment, absence of  resources  through  civil  war  or  similar  human
agency giving rise to state responsibility.


11. Direct reliance on GS and EO would have been appropriate had  that  case
still being current, but the judge failed to  note  that  it  had  been  the
subject of  Court  of  Appeal  deliberation  in  GS  (India)  which,  whilst
rejecting the appeals brought against the Upper Tribunal decision by GS  and
EO on both Article 3  and  8  grounds,  furnished  its  own  guidance.  That
guidance, which should have been  directly  applied  by  the  FtT  judge  as
binding on him, resolved two matters: firstly that (i) on the basis  of  the
ratio decidendi in N v Secretary of State [2005] 2 AC 296,  [2005]  UKHL  31
(hereafter N), the D v UK [D v UK (1997) 24 EHRR 423] exception is  confined
to deathbed cases ([65]-[66]); and (ii) there may  be  departures  from  the
Article 3 paradigm of the kind  vouchsafed  in  D  v  UK.  As  regards  such
departures, Laws LJ, undertook a detailed analysis of the Strasbourg and  UK
jurisprudence in which he recalled, inter alia, what the European  Court  of
Human Rights had said in 2011  in Sufi and Elmi v UK  app.no.8319/07  [2011]
ECHR 1045 at para  282   regarding   the  dire  humanitarian  conditions  in
Somalia at the time, namely that if they were solely or  even  predominantly
attributable to poverty or to the State's lack of resources to deal  with  a
naturally occurring phenomenon, such as a drought, the test  in  N.  v.  the
United Kingdom may well have been considered  to  be  the  appropriate  one.
Laws, LJ, concluded at [62] of GS (India) that:


         "62. This learning shows that there  may  be  departures  from  the
         Article 3 paradigm other than of the kind vouchsafed  in  D  v  UK.
         These departures are variously justified. But such an  approach  is
         indicated in D itself, at paragraph 49, and in N at paragraph 43. I
         have already cited both passages:


             "49... [G]iven the fundamental importance of Article 3 in  the
             Convention system, the Court must reserve to itself sufficient
             flexibility to address the application of [Article 3] in other
             contexts which might arise."
             "43. The Court does not exclude that there may be  other  very
             exceptional cases where the  humanitarian  considerations  are
             equally compelling."


         In my judgment it is clear that the departures from the  Article  3
         paradigm given in MSS and the other cases to which I have  referred
         do not extend the reach of the departure allowed in D and discussed
         at paragraphs 42 - 45 of N v UK. [N v UK (2008) 47 EHRR  39].   The
         plight of an individual  whose  life  expectancy  may  be  severely
         shortened by his removal or deportation to  his  home  State  is  a
         distinct state of affairs whose treatment under the  Convention  is
         not  qualified  by  the  court's  approach,  for  example,  to  the
         reception conditions for asylum-seekers. The circumstances in which
         a departure from the Article 3 paradigm is justified are  variable;
         the common factor is that there exist very pressing reasons to hold
         the impugned State responsible for the claimant's plight.  But  the
         fact that there are other exceptions unlike D or N does  not  touch
         cases - such as these - where the claimant's appeal is to the  very
         considerations which D and N address".

The high threshold issue
12. Contrary to what  the  SSHD's  grounds  appear  to  assert,  we  see  no
significant difference between the guidance given by the Upper  Tribunal  in
GS and EO and by the Court of Appeal in GS (India). We note that the  SSHD's
grounds sought to rely on the words of the Upper Tribunal in point 2 of  the
headnote and in paragraph[87(7)(a)] that "there  are  recognised  departures
from  the  high   threshold   approach   in   cases   concerning   children,
discriminatory denial of treatment, absence of resources through  civil  war
or similar human agency."  It does  not  seem  to  us,  however,  that  this
wording and its particular reference to "departures from the high  threshold
approach" - can be read as mooting a lower threshold for such cases. We  see
nothing in the decision elsewhere to suggest that the panel meant to  assert
that such cases at a general level justify a lower threshold, only  that  on
a fact-sensitive basis they may justify departure from the approach in  D  v
UK cases. The Upper Tribunal was clearly aware that in all Article  3  cases
the minimum level of severity required to cross the Article 3  threshold  is
dependent  on  a  range  of  circumstances  (see  e.g.  [84]).  Indeed,   at
[85(7)(a)] the UT held (in terms clearly contrary to the portrayal of  their
position in the  SSHD's  grounds  as  regards  the  threshold  issue)  that:
"although not raised in these appeals,  we  anticipate  that  there  may  be
circumstances which enhance an individual's claim that the circumstances  on
return will be "exceptional" and more likely to pass the high  threshold  of
Article 3 to establish a real risk of inhuman or degrading treatment".


13. In any event, even if we are wrong about this,  it  is  clear  that  the
approach applied by the judge in the instant case fell squarely  within  the
scope of departures from the Article 3 paradigm identified  in  GS  (India).
Immediately prior to stating his material reasons for  allowing  the  appeal
on Article 3 grounds the judge specifically referred  to  [85(7)(a)]  of  GS
and EO. (which as we have just noted identifies a need for a high  threshold
of exceptionality). Further in [61] the judge specifically  stated  that  he
was allowing it on the basis that "...the high  threshold  of  'exceptional'
is met".


Relevance of Secretary of State for the Home Department v Said
14. We should add that we have given consideration to whether  our  decision
on this appeal is affected  by  the  recent  Court  of  Appeal  guidance  in
Secretary of State for the Home Department v Said [2016] EWCA  Civ  442.  We
have decided it is not because in Said the Court  of  Appeal  was  concerned
with appeals seeking to resist removal on Article 3 grounds on the basis  of
suggested poverty or deprivation on return which are not the  responsibility
of the receiving country or others in the sense described in para  [282]  of
Sufi and Elmi. In such cases, the Court of Appeal held that "... whether  or
not the feared deprivation is contributed to by  a  medical  condition,  the
person liable to deportation must show circumstances which bring him  within
the approach of the Strasbourg Court in the D and N cases." ([18]). At  [31]
Burnett, LLJ observed in the context of cases relating to Somalia:


         "I entirely accept that some of the observations made in the course
         of the discussion of IDP camps may be taken to suggest  that  if  a
         returning Somali national can show that he  is  likely  to  end  up
         having  to  establish  himself  in  an  IDP  camp,  that  would  be
         sufficient to engage the protection of article 3. Yet such a  stark
         proposition of cause and effect  would  be  inconsistent  with  the
         article  3  jurisprudence  of  the  Strasbourg  Court  and  binding
         authority of the domestic courts. In my judgment  the  position  is
         accurately stated in para 422.  That  draws  a  proper  distinction
         between humanitarian protection and article 3 and  recognises  that
         the individual  circumstances  of  the  person  concerned  must  be
         considered. An appeal to article 3 which suggests that  the  person
         concerned would face impoverished conditions of living  on  removal
         to Somalia should, as the Strasbourg Court indicated  in  Sufi  and
         Elmi at para 292, be viewed by reference to the test in the N case.
         Impoverished conditions which were the  direct  result  of  violent
         activities may be viewed differently as would cases where the  risk
         suggested is of direct violence itself" (emphasis added).


15. In the claimant's case, it is an unchallenged  fact  that  the  relevant
deprivation on return  was  the  responsibility  of  the  receiving  country
(Libya). Clearly the  Court  of  Appeal,  expressly  following  GS  (India),
sought to make clear that so far as Article  3  was  concerned,  ill  health
('medical condition') cases would only be able to succeed on  the  basis  of
exceptional circumstances such as those envisaged in D v UK and N.  However,
cases where there was state responsibility (as in the claimant's case  there
was, through state failure to prevent militias from  destroying  the  health
and medical system) "may be viewed differently".

16. Insofar as the SSHD's grounds took issue with the  judge's  decision  to
allow the appeal notwithstanding that the claimant "is not yet  on  dialysis
and is predicted  to  need  a  transplant  in  2-5  years",  that  was  only
developed in the context of a challenge to the judge's alleged  reliance  in
allowing the appeal on the claimant's 'health case';  whereas,  as  we  have
seen and as acknowledged by Mr Richards, the judge in  fact  relied  on  the
combination of factors to do with the claimant's health and adverse  country
conditions in Libya. The judge does not appear to us  to  have  misdescribed
the claimant's medical condition and,  as  already  noted,  was  herself  at
pains to point out at [60] that the claimant might  not  need  a  liver  and
renal transplant in the next 2-5 years.  The judge's overall assessment  was
within the range of reasonable responses. No point was taken in the  grounds
or by Mr Richards before us, given the judge's clear findings,  that  Art  3
was not breached in this case due to any lack of 'immediacy  or  'imminence'
of any consequences for the claimant on return (on which see JA  and  others
v Netherlands app.no.21459/14 at para 32)".


17. Given that the SSHD's grounds  raise  no  other  point  in  relation  to
Article 3 and that Mr Richards effectively conceded that the SSHD's  grounds
were not made out, we consider we are driven to conclude that the FtT  judge
did not materially err in law.


18. In light of our decision in relation to Article 3, we  see  no  need  to
analyse the judge's decision to also allow the claimant's appeal on  Article
8 grounds, the parties having agreed that if the judge was right on  Article
3, the Article 8 issue was superfluous.

19. To conclude:

The FtT judge did not materially in law in allowing  the  claimant's  appeal
on Article 3 and Article 8 grounds.

The claimant's cross-appeal was not pursued.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed    [pic]

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Date:

