
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11662/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26th August 2015                  |On 3rd September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMET GILGIL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Thirumanby, Montague Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Abebrese promulgated on 4  June  2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 2 January 1996 and is a national of Turkey.

4      On  4  December  2014,  the  respondent   refused   the   appellant's
application for asylum and, on 11 December 2014, the respondent  decided  to
refuse to vary leave to remain in the UK and to remove the appellant by  way
of directions under Section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality
Act 2006.

5     The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Abebrese ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
respondent's decision.

6     Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 7 July 2015, First Tier  Tribunal
Judge Astle gave permission to appeal, stating inter alia:

     "It is arguable that in failing to make proper findings in relation to
    the two detentions claimed in 2010 and the claim that  the  appellant's
    fingerprints were taken, the judge erred in law. As the other  findings
    on the asylum claim may be linked to this, those  points  may  also  be
    arguable. Permission is granted..."

The Hearing

7     For the appellant, Ms Thirumanby relied on the grounds of appeal,  but
before she went further and expanded on those grounds  of  appeal,  Mr  Nath
said that it would be  helpful  if  he  briefly  set  out  the  respondent's
position.

8     Mr Nath conceded that the determination promulgated  on  4  June  2015
contained an error  of  law  because  a  crucial  part  of  the  appellant's
evidence at first instance was his witness statement dated  23  March  2015.
That witness statement was adopted by the appellant in his oral evidence  to
the First Tier, but the Judge makes  no  reference  at  all  to  the  detail
contained within that witness statement in the  decision  promulgated  on  4
June 2015.

Analysis

9     In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

10    The judge's determination promulgated on  4  June  2015  turns  almost
entirely on the question of credibility. The  principal  discussion  of  the
evidence of the appellant is contained in [14] of  the  determination.  [12]
to [16] bears to be an "analysis of the  evidence..."  but  nowhere  in  the
determination is any reference made to the appellant's witness statement  or
the contents of that witness statement. The Judge does not demonstrate  that
account was taken of the evidence presented to the First Tier Tribunal,  nor
does the Judge  adequately  set  out  what  evidence  he  accepts  and  what
evidence he rejects, nor the reasons for either accepting or  rejecting  the
evidence.

Finding of Material Error

11    The failure of the First Tier Tribunal to properly set out  and  weigh
the evidence before it constitutes a material error of law.  The  Judge  has
manifestly made inadequate findings of fact. This error is material,  since,
had the Judge set out a detailed analysis of the evidence and taken  account
of the contents of the appellant's witness statement the outcome could  have
been different. That, in my view, is the correct test to apply.

12    I therefore find that material errors of  law  have  been  established
and the judge's determination cannot stand and must  be  set  aside  in  its
entirety.

Remittal to the First tier Tribunal

13.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    '(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive  a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b) the nature  or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.'

14.   In this case none of the findings of fact are to stand and the  matter
will be a complete re hearing.

15.   I consequently remit the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
before any First-tier Tribunal Judge (IAC) other than  First  Tier  Tribunal
Judge Abebrese.

Decision

16.   The making of the decision of the First-tier tribunal is tainted by  a
material error of law.

17.   I set aside the decision.

18.   I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for determination of new.


Signed      Date 1st September 2015

      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
