
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
aa/11914/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 May 2017                             |On 31 May 2017                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between


                                   I U K H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy of Counsel, Mansfield Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who gives his date of birth  as
    29 October 1978.   The  anonymity  direction  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is continued.

 2. The appellant came to the UK in March 2001 as a student and he extended
    his leave in that capacity until April 2009 since when he has  not  had
    leave.  Applications for further leave as a student and on human rights
    (private  and  family  life  grounds)  were  refused.   Following   his
    detention,  he  claimed  asylum  on  the  basis  of  his  fear  of  the
    authorities who have imputed political opinion to him.  The appellant's
    appeal was heard and allowed in early 2016 but a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal was set aside by the Upper Tribunal and remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal with no findings of fact preserved.  The appeal was
    heard again at the Hatton  Cross  Hearing  Centre  in  January.   In  a
    decision promulgated  on  23  February  2017  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 3. The appellant  now  appeals  with  the  permission  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, on the basis the decision contains a material error  of  law.
    A Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent opposing the appeal  and
    arguing  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   is
    adequately reasoned.

 4. I heard oral submissions from the representatives  as  to  whether  the
    decision is vitiated by material error of law.

 5. Mr Paramjorthy argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to
    address corroborative evidence  provided  by  the  appellant's  current
    partner in two witness statements. The high point of his argument in my
    judgment is the sentence in the middle of paragraph 24 of  the  judge's
    decision at page 8:




         "The information the appellant's current  wife  is  relying  on  is
         based on what the appellant has told her".

 6. Mr Paramjorthy pointed out that is not an accurate description  of  her
    evidence which had gone further than that.

 7. Mr Kandola argued that, in essence, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had
    looked at all the evidence in the round and disbelieved the  claim,  as
    he was entitled to do.  In response

 8. Mr Paramjorthy said that submission did  not  address  his  main  point
    about the appellant's wife's evidence.

 9. Having considered the submissions made I have decided that the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand and I  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal.  My reasons are as follows.

10. I do not find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  a
    material error of law with regard to the treatment of  the  appellant's
    current partner's evidence.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  Judge
    ignored the evidence contained in her witness statements  and  focussed
    solely on oral evidence.  However, in paragraph 11 of his decision  the
    Judge  referred  to  the  appellant's  current  partner  adopting   her
    statements.  It is unarguable that the Judge did not  take  account  of
    that evidence notwithstanding the fact there is no  specific  reference
    to it in the findings section of the decision.

11. In my judgment, the infelicitous wording of one sentence  in  paragraph
    24 is not sufficient to collapse the  entire  edifice  of  the  judge's
    decision.  If any authority were required, which I doubt, it  could  be
    found in Budhathoki (reasons for  decisions)  [2014]  UKUT  341  (IAC).
    This case emphasised the distraction  between  the  necessity  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal to  identify  and  resolve  key  conflicts  in  the
    evidence and to give reasons for preferring one case to another and the
    unhelpfulness of unnecessarily lengthy judgments in which the  Tribunal
    seeks to rehearse every detail or issue raised in the case.  The latter
    is not a proportionate approach. In my judgment, the  point  raised  by
    the appellant and argued by Mr Paramjorthy with his usual  skill  falls
    into the latter category and there is no material error on the part  of
    the First-tier Tribunal in failing to  set  out  the  contents  of  the
    partner's statements.

12. The other point relied on in the grounds and referred to in  the  grant
    of permission is the rogue reference in paragraph 24 to Kabul.   It  is
    an unfortunate drafting error but simply not a material direction.   It
    is quite clear that the Judge had at the front of  his  mind  that  the
    appellant is from Sri Lanka.

13. There are no other points requiring consideration.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision does not contain a material error of  law
and shall stand.

The First-tier Tribunal's anonymity direction is continued.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 12 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 12 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
