

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: aa 11084-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   26.06.2014|
|on    23.06.2014                              |sent out:                    |
|                                              |21.07.2014                   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                           Michael Chukwuka OGUAZU
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Barnaby Hone  (counsel instructed by direct access)
For the respondent: Mr Nigel Bramble


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge SJ Widdup), sitting at Hatton Cross on 3 March, to   an
    appeal by a citizen of Nigeria, born 28  September  1981.  Despite  the
    case reference letters, his application had been made under  article  8
    only, on the basis of his family life with his partner/wife, whose name
    is only given as "Ms Nwosu", a British citizen, and their  son  Teodor,
    born 4 March  2013,  who  is  therefore  a  British  citizen  too.  The
    application, made on 26 March 2013, and no doubt silently acknowledging
    that the appellant could not succeed under the 'new  Rules'  (in  force
    from 9 July 2012), since he had entered  this  country  as  a  visitor,
    specifically asked (at section 3) for "discretionary leave  under  EX.1
    of the 'new Rules', which follows:



        EX.1. This paragraph applies if

        (a) (i)  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
             relationship with a child who-

             (aa) `is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of  18
                 years when the applicant was first  granted  leave  on  the
                 basis that this paragraph applied;

             (bb)    is in the UK;

             (cc)     is  a  British  Citizen  or  has  lived  in   the   UK
                 continuously for at least the 7 years immediately preceding
                 the date of application; and

           (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
             UK; or

        (b)  the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in
             the UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian
             protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles to family
             life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

 2. The decision letter refused the application

      a) under the partner route;

      b) under the parent route; and

      c) under private life

    The only point taken, on the facts or at all, under (a), was  that  the
    appellant had not, according to the Home Office, been living  with  his
    partner in a relationship akin to marriage for at least two  years,  as
    required by paragraph GEN.1.2 of the Rules. EX.1  was  referred  to  as
    applying; but no point was taken on it on the facts. Instead that  part
    of the decision simply went on to refer to what  was  said  to  be  the
    appellant's "... failure to show that you meet those requirements,  and
    therefore your  application  falls  for  refusal  under  [the  relevant
    Rules]".

 3. The factual point taken in the decision letter on route  (b)  was  that
    the appellant didn't have "... sole parental  responsibility  for  your
    child and you are also eligible for  consideration  under  the  partner
    route". The letter went on

       We  have  carefully  considered  whether   EX.1   applies   to   your
       application, however while we acknowledge that you have a genuine and
       subsisting parental relationship with a child, your application falls
       for refusal under the eligibility  requirements  of  the  Immigration
       Rules as set out earlier.  These  are  mandatory  requirements  which
       apply to all appellants, regardless of whether the EX.1 criteria  are
       met. As you have failed to meet those eligibility  requirements,  you
       cannot benefit for the criteria set out at EX.1.

 4. I don't need to deal with route (c),  since  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Rules, to which that applies, is not subject to  EX.1,  on  which  this
    appeal turns. The judge said at paragraph 2

       ... the issue in this appeal is whether  [the  appellant]  meets  the
       requirements of either  the  partner  route  or  appendix  FM  or  is
       entitled to succeed under article 8.

    Mr Hone submitted, that, according to counsel (Miss Julian Norman)  who
    had appeared before the judge, the presenting officer (Mr  Graham)  had
    agreed that the only issue before the judge  was  whether  or  not  the
    appellant had been living with Ms Nwosu for two years (before the  date
    of the application, [as the judge found, though perhaps it should  have
    been the date of the hearing, as this was an  in-country,  not  points-
    based case] .  This  issue  had  been  decided  by  the  judge  in  the
    appellant's favour; so he was entitled to succeed on  that  basis:  the
    judge did not go on to consider article 8 in general.

 5. Mr Hone's alternative argument was that, on  the  judge's  findings  of
    fact, this appellant in any case satisfied the  requirements  of  EX.1.
    In my view, since it is agreed that requirements (aa), (bb) and (cc) of
    that rule are met, the only one where the judge would  have  needed  to
    make a finding, if he did have to  consider  EX.1,  was  (ii):  was  it
    reasonable to expect Teodor to leave the UK?

 6. Mr Bramble's argument on that point was that it would be  possible  for
    this whole family to live in Nigeria, from where  Ms  Nwosu  originally
    came. Mr Hone's reply to that was that there had been  evidence  before
    the judge that  Ms  Nwosu  was  regularly  taking  Teodor  to  hospital
    appointments for an eye problem.: he suggested  that  this  might  also
    amount, for the appellant, to 'insurmountable obstacles to family  life
    with that partner continuing outside the UK' in  terms  of  requirement
    (b); and Sanade  (at paragraph 5 of the judicial  head-note)  suggested
    that it could not be reasonable for them all to  relocate  as  a  unit,
    where either the child or the remaining spouse was  a  citizen  of  the
    European Union.

 7. The Home Office had not considered at all whether or not  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect Teodor to live outside the UK; nor  whether  there
    were insurmountable obstacles to the whole family doing so, and neither
    did the judge, understandably if the issue on the appeal was  presented
    to him as being only whether the appellant and Ms Nwosu had been living
    together for two years at the relevant date.

 8. In my view, there was a clear mistake  of  law  on  the  Rules  in  the
    decision letter, on both the partner and  the  parent  route:  in  both
    cases, as can be seen from the passages set out at 2 -  3.  The  letter
    had treated EX.1, not as an exception to the eligibilty rules, which it
    clearly is from their terms; but as something which failure to meet the
    requirements of those rules meant could not be considered  at  all.  If
    the appellant  had  had  no  statutory  right  of  appeal  against  the
    decision, then he would have been entitled to  have  it  set  aside  on
    judicial review. The  Home  Office  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal did not make this  mistake,  arguing  instead  that  "...  the
    application should have failed on the mandatory  eligibility  criteria,
    unless EX.1 applied".

 9. That is a correct statement of the law under the  Rules:  the  question
    for me is first, whether the judge needed to deal with EX.1, whether or
    not failure to meet its requirements had been put forward as  an  issue
    before him. RM (Kwok On Tong: HC395 para 320) India [2006] UKAIT  00039
    does not deal with a similar point on  its  own  facts,  but  with  the
    question of whether a finding  in  the  appellant's  favour  under  the
    general provisions of the Rules entitled him to succeed on  the  appeal
    without further consideration, where the general  provisions  had  been
    the only issue raised. The older authority  to  which  the  long  title
    refers  may  be  more  in  point,  but  is  not  available,  either  on
    www.bailii.org, or the Tribunal's own web-site.

10. I need to consider the alternatives open to the judge, which in my view
    were either to declare the Home Office decision unlawful, and refer  it
    back for reconsideration by them; or to allow the appeal against it, on
    the issues put before him. There had  been  no  decision  by  the  Home
    Office on the requirements of EX.1, because they wrongly took the  view
    that it could not arise, where the other eligibility requirements  were
    not met; If EX.1 gave a discretion, then arguably it had needed  to  be
    exercised by the Home Office themselves; but it is quite clear from the
    various eligibility paragraphs which refer to it that  it  provides  an
    exception under the Rules, rather than giving a discretion.  It  was  a
    requirement of the Rules, like any other, on which the judge could make
    a decision, if it was in issue before him.

11. In my view, the present case can be  distinguished  from  RM  (Kwok  On
    Tong: HC395 para 320): the decision under appeal  had  not  been  given
    under the 'general provisions', but on what the Home Office saw as  the
    merits of the case under the Rules  applicable  to  it.  If  first  the
    decision-maker, and then the presenting  officer  chose  to  limit  the
    issues as they did, then the judge was entitled  to  allow  the  appeal
    under appendix FM, on the only issue put before him, which was  whether
    the appellant and Ms Nwosu had been living together for two  years,  at
    the relevant time, as he found; though arguably the relevant  date  was
    that of the decision, this would have made  no  difference.  The  judge
    found in the appellant's favour on that point, after full and  critical
    consideration, and that should have been the end of it.

Home Office appeal

                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



