
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11509/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Columbus House, Newport   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 10 August 2015                   |On: 11 September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                    NSNA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr M Chaudhry, Duncan Lewis & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).   Neither  party  invited  me  to
    rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

 2. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Britton in which he dismissed the appeal of NSNA,  a  citizen  of
    Libya, against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse asylum.

 3. The application under appeal was made on 7 August 2014 and was  refused
    by reference to paragraphs  336  and  339M  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    (HC395) on 28 November 2014.  The  Appellant  exercised  his  right  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.   This  is  the  appeal  which  came
    before Judge Britton on 9 April  2015  and  was  dismissed  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection (Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive)
    and human rights (Articles 3 and 8 ECHR) grounds. The Appellant applied
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The  application  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Reid  on  22  June  2015  in  the
    following terms

         "The grounds argue inter alia: the judge  failed  to  give  any  or
         adequate consideration to whether the  Appellant  was  at  risk  of
         indiscriminate violence (Article 15c); the judge failed to consider
         a  material  matter,  namely  the  evidence  of  Dr  Rebwar  Fatah;
         conditions in Libya were now such that AT and  Others  [2014]  UKUT
         318 (IAC) could be departed from and Dr  Fatah's  report  supported
         that argument.

         The judge at [42-43] referred to  both  parties'  submissions,  the
         Appellant's skeleton argument and to AT  and  Others  (albeit  with
         erroneous citation). Dr  Fatah's  report  is  referred  to  in  the
         skeleton argument however I could find no reference at  all  to  Dr
         Fatah's report in the judge's decision. It  is  arguable  that  the
         decision lacks analysis and reasoning  in  respect  of  the  expert
         report, Article 15c and  the  Appellant's  assertion  that  it  was
         appropriate to depart from AT and Others."

 4. At the hearing before me  Mr  Richards  represented  the  Secretary  of
    State. A rule 24 response  had  been  filed  opposing  the  Appellant's
    appeal. Mr Chaudhry represented the Appellant.

Background

 5.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Libya  of  the
    Warshafan tribe born on 23 June 1988. The Appellant left  Libya  on  31
    July 2014 travelling via Tunisia to the United Kingdom where he claimed
    asylum on arrival. He had been  living  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student between from 2003 and had leave  to  remain  in  this  capacity
    until 6 October 2014. Having returned  to  Libya  on  3  June  2014  he
    claimed that his plans to set up a poultry business were interrupted by
    an extortion attempt and believing that he was being targeted and  that
    the country was not safe he came back to the United  Kingdom  to  claim
    international protection. The Appellant  claimed  that  the  degree  of
    indiscriminate violence in Libya was at such a high level that he would
    face a real risk of suffering serious harm solely  on  account  of  his
    presence in Libya.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellant  had  not  established
    that he faced persecution on a  return  to  Libya.  In  particular  the
    Tribunal  did  not  accept  the  Appellant's  account  of  the  claimed
    extortion (see paragraph 39).  The  Tribunal  found  further  that  the
    Appellant did not fall within any of the risk categories identified  in
    AT and Others and therefore that he would not be  at  risk  on  return.
    Finally  the  Tribunal  found  that  the  Appellant  did  not  face  an
    interference in his family life or a disproportionate  interference  in
    his private life on a return to Libya. The finding in respect of family
    in private life is not challenged.

Submissions

 7. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Chaudhry said that the  Appellant  was  a
    genuine student in the United Kingdom who intended to return  to  Libya
    to set up a poultry farming business. He was threatened  by  a  militia
    who were trying to extract money and he refused to give them  anything.
    The militia attacked his farm. There were gunshots. The  basis  of  his
    claim was a specific risk to members of the Warshafan tribe.  They  are
    associated with the former Gaddafi regime. As such the Appellant  comes
    within AT and Others - Article 15(c); risk categories (Libya) CG [2014]
    UKUT 00318 (AIT). The Judge did not however accept that  the  Appellant
    was at risk of indiscriminate violence. The Judge heard the appeal on 9
    April 2015 and dismissed the asylum appeal finding that  the  Appellant
    was not credible. He also made a finding on the indiscriminate violence
    point.   The grounds are comprehensive; the judge  did  not  adequately
    consider the issue of indiscriminate violence. There was a  substantial
    amount of high quality objective evidence yet the judge  just  referred
    to AT and Others and said that this was binding upon him.  However  the
    general security situation had deteriorated since  AT  and  Others  and
    there was objective evidence to this effect. It was not considered.  Mr
    Chaudhry referred to  page  36  of  the  Amnesty  report  referring  to
    internal armed conflict in Libya and the disregard for  civilian  life.
    He also referred to the report from Human Rights Watch. So far  as  the
    report from Dr Fatah is concerned the Judge makes no  reference  to  it
    yet this report is corroborative of the deteriorating situation.

 8. For the Respondent Mr Richards said that he could not  seriously  argue
    that the Judge carried out a close examination of the evidence  in  his
    decision however he does say in his decision that he has considered all
    of the evidence but found that he was bound by AT and  Others.  AT  and
    Others was promulgated in July 2014 and as the  Judge  noted  it  is  a
    voluminous and comprehensive  judgement  running  to  some  141  pages.
    Matters individual  to  the  Appellant  and  risk  categories  are  not
    relevant in judging the risk  of  indiscriminate  violence.  These  are
    persecution points.  It is not an error of law to be bound by a  recent
    country guidance decision as weighty as this one. So far as the  second
    ground is concerned the Judge had the advantage of hearing  and  seeing
    the evidence put before him and he found that the  Appellant's  account
    was a fabrication.

Error of law

 9. The grounds of appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  are  succinct  and  Mr
    Chaudhry did not seek to expand upon them in his oral  submissions.  It
    is  asserted  firstly  that  the  Judge   failed   to   give   adequate
    consideration to whether the Appellant was at  risk  of  indiscriminate
    violence pursuant to Article 15(c)  and  secondly  that  he  failed  to
    properly consider the evidence of  the  expert  Dr  Rebwar  Fatah.  The
    second assertion is said to have a potential effect both on the Judge's
    credibility finding in respect of the Refugee Convention claim and  his
    overall assessment of Article 15(c). In  his  submissions  Mr  Richards
    accepted that he could not argue that the Judge  carried  out  a  close
    examination of the evidence in his decision but  said  that  the  Judge
    nevertheless considered all the evidence before him before  reaching  a
    sustainable decision.

10. In considering the grounds it is firstly clear that Article 15(c) was a
    live issue, if not the prime issue, being  argued  on  the  Appellant's
    behalf. This is clear both from the grounds of appeal to the First-tier
    Tribunal and the skeleton argument submitted at the First-tier Tribunal
    hearing. It is also clear from the skeleton argument  that  in  arguing
    these grounds the Appellant placed significant  weight  on  the  report
    from Dr Rebwar Fatah both in respect of the asylum  and  Article  15(c)
    claims. The  skeleton  argument  also  seeks  to  address  reasons  for
    departing from AT and Others and asserts that the Appellant falls  into
    a  heightened  risk  category   thereby   engaging   the   Elgafagi   v
    Straatssecretaris van Justitie [2009] C-465-07 sliding scale.

11. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Chaudhry submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision makes no mention of the report from Dr  Rebwar  Fatah
    whilst Mr Richards pointed out that the  Judge  does  nevertheless  say
    that he has considered all of the evidence. Both advocates are correct.
    It is perhaps surprising given the specific reference to the report  in
    the skeleton argument that it is  not  specifically  mentioned  in  the
    decision. There is however no reason in my judgment to  doubt  that  in
    considering all of the evidence in the round that the Judge has had due
    regard to this evidence.

12. So far as credibility is concerned, and contrary to  the  assertion  in
    the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal, there is in  my  judgement
    nothing in Dr Fatah's report that could have had a material  effect  on
    the Judge's credibility assessment. Dr Fatah was asked to comment  upon
    the plausibility of the Appellant's claim  to  have  been  targeted  by
    militias because he was running a farm.  At  paragraphs  73-88  of  the
    report this is discussed and the conclusion reached that the  objective
    and other evidence points to instances in western Libya  and  elsewhere
    of  militias  perpetrating  abuses  against   individual's   properties
    including their homes, farms and businesses. This is neutral as to  the
    Appellant's personal credibility merely confirming that such abuses  do
    take place. At paragraphs 39 to  41  of  his  decision  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge gives detailed reasons for finding that the  Appellant's
    account of the attack on his farm was not credible. These findings  are
    not challenged in the grounds of  appeal.  The  fact  there  have  been
    instances where property has been targeted could not  in  my  judgement
    have caused the Judge  to  reach  a  different  conclusion  as  to  the
    credibility of the Appellant's account.

13. Turning to the issue of Article 15(c) the starting point  must  be  the
    country guidance case of AT and Others. This is referred to extensively
    in the Respondent's refusal letter of 28 November 2014  and,  as  noted
    above, the skeleton argument submitted to the First-tier Tribunal seeks
    to distinguish the  Appellant's  appeal  and  to  address  reasons  for
    departing from AT and Others. However it does so not by suggesting that
    there has been any change in the country situation since AT and  Others
    but rather by submitting that the Appellant  falls  into  a  heightened
    risk category identified by AT and Others. Despite the skeleton arguing
    a departure from the country guidance case it is  in  effect  asserting
    that the appeal should be allowed in  accordance  with  the  heightened
    risk categories identified in that country guidance case.  Whereas  the
    first ground of appeal to the Upper Tribunal is based very  clearly  on
    an alleged deterioration in the country situation since AT  and  Others
    this is not the basis upon which the appeal was argued before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

14. So far as the assertion made in the  grounds  of  appeal  is  concerned
    reference is  made  to  Dr  Rebwar  Fatah's  report  and  also  to  the
    "substantial quantity  of  high-quality,  reliable  objective  evidence
    demonstrating a  significant  deterioration  in  conditions  in  Libya"
    submitted to the First-tier Tribunal. The grounds add (at paragraph  9)
    "if permission to appeal is  granted,  the  Appellant  will  produce  a
    schedule of relevant excerpts of this material, which  appears  between
    36 and 162 of the  Appellant's  bundle".  Despite  this  assurance  the
    bundle submitted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  does  not  contain  such  a
    schedule. Dr Fatah's report (dated 26  March  2015)  refers  to  events
    happening in 2014 (i.e. after the hearing of AT and Others) and also to
    events happening prior to 2014 but does not mention AT  and  Others  or
    seek to distinguish the general country situation pertaining  in  March
    2015 from that  pertaining  in  November  2013.  This  is  perhaps  not
    surprising because this was not one of the questions that Dr Fatah  was
    asked to address (see paragraph 40  of  the  report).  The  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal put  forward  an  argument  that  was  not
    advanced to the First-tier Tribunal or addressed in the  expert  report
    but nevertheless suggest that the Judge fell into error for not dealing
    with that argument. In my judgement there is no error of  law  in  this
    respect. The Judge refers to AT and Others, he  confirms  that  he  has
    considered all the material put before him and in my judgement there is
    no reason to doubt that he has done so and reached  a  conclusion  that
    was properly open to him.

15. Finally there is the question of 'risk categories' and the second  part
    of the second ground of appeal to the Upper Tribunal. The issue here is
    whether, if the Judge had properly considered  the  expert  report,  he
    would have reached the conclusion that the  Appellant  being  from  the
    Warshafan tribe would be seen as a former regime  member  or  associate
    and therefore  be  subject  to  persecution  or  serious  harm.  In  my
    judgement this can be dealt  with  briefly.  Firstly  this  is  not  an
    Elgafagi sliding scale issue because it is not an Article 15(c)  issue.
    There is no suggestion in AT and Others or elsewhere that former regime
    members or associates are more likely to be subject  to  indiscriminate
    violence rather the issue is that such persons are more  likely  to  be
    subjected to targeted violence. Secondly and in any event  the  Judge's
    findings are clear. The Appellant's account of being  targeted  is  not
    accepted as credible. His mother father and siblings,  members  of  the
    Warshafan tribe, have remained in or returned to Libya  (see  paragraph
    41 of the decision). The report does not suggest that being a member of
    the Warshafan tribe is of itself a reason to fear persecution. There is
    in my judgement no error of law.

16. My conclusion from all of the above is that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contains no error of law  material  to  the  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal by reference to the Refugee  Convention,  the  Human
    Rights Convention or Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  The
    appeal is dismissed.

Summary

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed:     Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
