

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11859/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On Wednesday 23 September 2015         |                On Friday 25         |
|                                       |September 2015                       |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                   MR S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mr Hodson, Counsel
For the Respondent:          Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a  protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background
   1. The Appellant is a national of Iran.  He was encountered in the UK on
      15 January 2014 and claimed asylum on the same day.  His asylum claim
      was refused by the Respondent on 15 December 2014 and  he  was  given
      notice of removal as an illegal entrant to Iran.  He appealed against
      the Respondent's decision and his  appeal  was  heard  by  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Hands and dismissed in a decision  promulgated  on  26
      February 2015 ("the Decision").  Permission to  appeal  the  Decision
      was granted by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Landes  on  13  April  2015.
      The appeal comes before me to determine whether the Decision contains
      a material error of law.


   2. The basis of the Appellant's asylum claim is as follows.   He started
      to support the Green Movement in 2009 in the aftermath of the Iranian
      elections in that year.  He  attended  a  demonstration  against  the
      Iranian regime on 27 December 2009.  Before 2009,  he  had  not  been
      politically active although his father had but the Appellant does not
      assert any risk on this account. The Appellant  claims  that  he  was
      arrested at the demonstration and detained for 15 days  during  which
      he was beaten and tortured.  He claims to have been hospitalised as a
      result and has produced a report detailing his injuries which I  deal
      with below. The Appellant was released without charge but claims that
      he was detained overnight in 2010 and 2011 when he  was  required  to
      sign with the police.  It is his case that these detentions coincided
      with festivals which gave rise to popular demonstrations and that the
      reason for his detention was  to  prevent  his  attendance  at  these
      demonstrations. He does not claim to have been  mistreated  on  those
      occasions and he was released without charge.

   3. The crux of the Appellant's claim of a current risk relates to events
      in 2013.  In early 2013, the Appellant and his friend engaged in  the
      distribution of leaflets and CDs in the run up to the 2013 elections.
       On 12 December 2013, the Appellant was informed by his friend's wife
      that his friend had been arrested and  that  incriminating  materials
      had been found in their home.  The  Appellant  immediately  left  his
      home and went into hiding.  The Appellant  says  that  his  home  was
      subsequently raided and an arrest warrant was shown  to  his  family.
      He also relies on a summons issued against him  and,  again,  I  will
      refer to this below.  It is the Appellant's case  that  his  friend's
      wife does not know his friend's whereabouts and that  his  friend  is
      assumed to still be in detention or to have  been  killed.   He  also
      says that his family have continued to be harassed on  the  phone  by
      officers who continue to search for him.


   Submissions

   4. The Appellant's grounds run to some 30 paragraphs.  The ground  which
      led to the grant of permission is contained in paragraphs 23  to  27.
      This relates to the treatment of the two overnight detentions in 2010
      and 2011 and the failure to make findings whether those occurred.  It
      is submitted that this failure impacts on the Judge's finding at [24]
      that the Appellant had not shown any political interest between  2009
      and 2013 and the finding at [27] that he is therefore not credible in
      relation to  events  in  2013,  would  not  be  of  interest  to  the
      authorities on that account and would therefore not  be  at  risk  on
      return.  The grant of permission was not however limited.  Mr  Hodson
      focussed on that ground and also the ground relating to  the  Judge's
      treatment of the documents produced, which ground is set out  at  [9]
      to [13] of the grounds and in particular [12] and  [13].   Mr  Hodson
      made clear however that he did not abandon the remaining grounds.


   5. Dealing with the first of those grounds, Mr Hodson submitted that the
      finding that the Appellant was not politically  active  between  2009
      and 2013 was  central  to  the  finding  of  adverse  credibility  in
      relation to the events in 2013 and therefore central to the issue  of
      whether the Appellant would be at risk on return.  He referred me  to
      [23(r)] where  the  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant  had  made  no
      reference to events in 2010 and 2011 in relation to risk and  [23(s)]
      where the Judge found that the Appellant had only  been  detained  on
      one occasion.  Those findings were in spite of the  Judge  noting  at
      [14] that the Appellant said that he had been held overnight  on  two
      occasions  in  2010  and  2011   to   prevent   his   attendance   at
      demonstrations against the regime. The Judge did not make any finding
      that the Appellant's claim in  this  regard  was  not  credible.   Mr
      Hodson submitted that the  fact  that  the  Iranian  authorities  had
      identified the Appellant as a person who should be required to report
      on  those  two  occasions  to   prevent   his   attendance   at   the
      demonstrations  indicated  a  continued  adverse  interest   in   the
      Appellant.  The Appellant did not assert that he  had  been  arrested
      and detained on those two occasions and had  in  fact  corrected  his
      solicitor's assertions that this was so  in  his  witness  statement.
      This showed, Mr Hodson submitted, that the Appellant did not seek  to
      embellish his account and that his claim in  relation  to  these  two
      events was therefore likely to be found credible.


   6. In relation to the second ground, Mr Hodson focussed on  the  Judge's
      treatment of the summons [p23 Appellant's  bundle]  and  the  medical
      report [p26B Appellant's bundle].  Those were dealt with by the Judge
      at [23(f)] and [23(g)] respectively.  The Judge's  findings  in  that
      regard were challenged at [12] and [13] of the grounds  respectively.
      Mr Hodson fairly accepted that he was unable to identify a source for
      the assertion at [12] of the grounds that "the Country evidence shows
      that  the  Iranian  authorities  often  fail  to  follow  their   own
      procedures in judicial matters." Mr Hodson was  not  responsible  for
      the drafting of  the  grounds.   He  referred  me  to  the  US  State
      Department report [A8] but accepted that this  was  in  very  general
      terms and did not in terms state that the authorities did not  follow
      procedures when serving documents.  He  submitted  however  that  the
      Judge had failed to follow the guidance  in  Tanveer  Ahmed  and  had
      failed to consider the document in the round when reaching a  finding
      whether it could be relied upon.  The summons was in form  consistent
      with the description of a summons in the Danish  Immigration  Service
      report [A36].  The fact that some particulars were not completed  did
      not render the document unreliable.


   7. In relation to the medical document, Mr Hodson pointed out  that  the
      document albeit addressed to the Commander of Police  was  consistent
      as to the date  when  the  Appellant  said  that  injuries  had  been
      sustained whilst  he  was  detained  and  the  original  contained  a
      photograph showing those injuries.  The Judge appeared to accept that
      the Appellant had been detained in December 2009 for fifteen days and
      the injuries detailed  in  the  document  must  therefore  have  been
      sustained whilst the Appellant was  detained  at  the  hands  of  the
      authorities.   The  Judge's  findings   amounted   to   impermissible
      speculation.

   8. In response, Mr Jarvis submitted that the only criticism which  could
      be levelled at  the  Decision  was  that  [23]  was  a  very  lengthy
      paragraph and that the mixture  of  facts,  assessment  of  objective
      evidence and findings may have led to some difficulty in  identifying
      the conclusions drawn.   He  submitted  however  that  when  properly
      considered, the Decision included findings which  were  open  to  the
      Judge that the Appellant had only been detained on  one  occasion  in
      2009 and would not be of further interest now.  The Judge referred to
      the country guidance in relation to  Iran  at  [23(l)]  and  properly
      directed herself to the  issue  which  was  whether  the  Appellant's
      profile was such that he would  be  of  individual  interest  to  the
      authorities on return.  Mr Jarvis submitted  that  the  core  of  the
      Appellant's claim to be of  individual  interest  now  was  based  on
      events in 2013 which the Judge had and had been entitled to reject as
      not credible.  Even if the  Judge  failed  to  make  direct  findings
      whether the Appellant had been required to report in  2010  and  2011
      and had been held overnight on those occasions or whether he had been
      mistreated in detention in 2009 (following a  demonstration  attended
      by thousands - [23(h)]), such errors would not be material since  she
      was entitled to find the Appellant not credible in relation to events
      in 2013 and he would not now therefore be at  risk  on  return.   The
      Judge was entitled to reach  that  finding  for  the  reasons  stated
      [23(r)] based on the implausibility  of  the  Appellant  distributing
      material for a group which by that date was active  only  underground
      (according to the objective evidence).


   9. In relation to the documents, the requirement on  the  Judge  was  to
      consider the documents in the round and consider  the  weight  to  be
      attached to those documents.  The Judge was not required  by  Tanveer
      Ahmed to go so far as to find that  a  document  is  a  forgery.   Mr
      Jarvis pointed out that the summons did not say when or  how  it  had
      been  served.   Neither  was  it  of  particular  assistance  to  the
      Appellant's case in any event since it did not give specifics  as  to
      the accusation made.  He pointed out that the Judge had given reasons
      for her finding that the  fact  that  the  summons  did  not  contain
      certain information led to her giving it little  weight  [23(m)]  and
      [23(n)] although he accepted that [23(n)] related to arrest  warrants
      rather than summonses.  In relation to the medical report, Mr  Jarvis
      pointed out that this too did not really say  much  except  that  the
      Appellant had sustained injuries.  Even if those  were  sustained  in
      detention in 2009, the document did not establish that the  Appellant
      would be at risk due to his profile now.

  10. For those reasons, Mr Jarvis submitted that even if there were  minor
      errors in the Judge's fact finding exercise, those were not  material
      since they did not impact on the credibility finding in  relation  to
      the 2013 events.

Error of Law Decision and reasons


  11. Having heard the submissions, I indicated that I reserved my decision
      on error of law.  The  representatives  agreed  that  if  I  found  a
      material error of law, the case should be remitted to the  First-Tier
      Tribunal.  Both representatives agreed that if  I  found  a  material
      error of law the Decision  should  be  set  aside  with  no  findings
      preserved as it  would  be  difficult  to  divorce  the  findings  in
      relation to the individual components of the claim.  Mr Hodson  asked
      that the appeal be remitted to a First-Tier Tribunal in London as the
      Appellant has moved to the London area and a further hearing in North
      Shields would be very inconvenient.


  12. After considering the grounds  of  appeal  and  the  submissions  and
      evidence, I am satisfied that there is an error of law in  particular
      in relation to the first of the grounds above.   Although the crux of
      the Appellant's claim is that the immediate risk arises  from  events
      in 2013, it is his case that he was known to the  authorities  before
      then as an activist from 2009 when he was  detained  and  mistreated.
      That was evident,  he  says,  from  the  fact  that  the  authorities
      required him to report on the eve of two festivals which gave rise to
      mass demonstrations and  that  the  fact  of  holding  him  overnight
      indicated that he continued to be of interest to the  authorities  as
      someone who it was expected would attend those demonstrations  if  he
      could do so.

  13. At [14]  of  the  Decision,  the  Judge  records  the  basis  of  the
      Appellant's claim which includes reference to his claim to have  been
      detained overnight on those two occasions.  However, at [23(s)],  the
      Judge finds as follows:-
           "The Appellant has  only  been  arrested  and  detained  by  the
           authorities on one occasion which was at a time  when  thousands
           were arrested  for  participating  in  demonstrations.   He  was
           released shortly thereafter and was not detained as  those  held
           to  be  responsible,  radical  or   more   involved   with   the
           organisation of such events are reported to have been.  There is
           no indication he remains known to the police for this incident."
           [emphasis added]
      In fairness to the Judge, I accept that the Appellant did not describe
      the two events in 2010 and 2011 as detentions and did not say that  he
      had been arrested.  However, it was incumbent on the Judge to  make  a
      finding in relation to those two events since, as Mr Hodson  submitted
      and I accept, that was material to the issue of whether he remained of
      interest to the authorities after the 2009 incident.


  14. The error is perhaps more apparent  when  one  reaches  [27]  of  the
      Decision where the Judge firstly indicates that  the  Appellant  said
      there were no reporting restrictions placed on him on release  which,
      whilst true to some extent, does not note the requirement  to  report
      in 2010 and 2011 and reach findings in relation to the  relevance  of
      that requirement.  Also at [27] and [28] the Judge finds  that,  even
      if the Appellant was arrested along with thousands of others  at  the
      demonstration in 2009, there is no evidence that this would be  known
      to the authorities thereafter and that his name would  be  linked  to
      that demonstration.  That ignores the Appellant's case  that  he  was
      required to report to avoid his attendance at further  demonstrations
      which at least gives rise to a suggestion  that  his  name  might  be
      linked  by  the  authorities   to   participation   in   an   earlier
      demonstration (if credible).


  15. The lack of any finding in relation to these two events also has  the
      potential to undermine or at least explain the finding at  [24]  that
      the Appellant had not been involved in politics or shown any interest
      for the four years between 2009 and 2013.  That is  directly  related
      to the Judge's finding that the Appellant's claim in relation to  the
      2013 events was not credible.  I  accept  that  further  reasons  are
      given for finding that part of the claim not to be credible at  [27].
      However, I am satisfied that the error in failing to make  a  finding
      in relation to the two events  in  2010  and  2011  is  material.   A
      positive finding in relation to those  events  might  impact  on  the
      credibility finding in relation to the 2013 events.


  16. If the Appellant's only ground had  been  the  second  of  the  above
      grounds, I would not, on that basis alone, have found there to be  an
      error of law.  The Judge  was  entitled  for  the  reasons  given  at
      [23(m)] to have regard to the objective  evidence,  particularly  the
      Danish Immigration Service report referred to above  in  relation  to
      the form of the summons and for those reasons to attach little weight
      to it.  As Mr Jarvis submitted and I accept,  the  summons  does  not
      give detail  of  the  accusation  in  any  event  and  offers  little
      therefore by way of corroboration except perhaps in relation to date.



  17. I also consider it was open to the Judge  to  find  for  the  reasons
      given at [23(g)] that the document in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
      injuries did not assist the Appellant's case.   Even  if  that  shows
      that the Appellant suffered injuries whilst  in  detention  following
      his arrest in 2009, the fact that the document was  prepared  with  a
      view (it appears) to offering him  compensation  for  those  injuries
      does not suggest that the authorities had inflicted the injuries.  If
      that were the case,  one  would  expect  that  the  police  would  be
      prevented from investigating the claim by the regime.  I also  accept
      Mr Jarvis'  submission  that  even  if  the  Appellant's  account  of
      mistreatment in detention in 2009 is accepted, that does not lead  to
      the conclusion that he would remain of interest  to  the  authorities
      following his release.  However, as I indicate above at  [11],  I  do
      not preserve any findings in the Decision including  in  relation  to
      the documents on which the Appellant relies.


  18. Mr Hodson did not abandon the remainder of his grounds but  in  light
      of my finding at [11] above, I do not need to consider those grounds.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did involve the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law.

I set aside the Decision.  I remit the appeal  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
for re-hearing. No findings are preserved.

[pic]

Signed
                           Date 24 September 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith






