
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Appeal Number: AA/11632/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 July 2016                               |On 8 July 2016                |
|Prepared on 6 July 2016                      |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    A. K.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Eritrea who claimed asylum  upon  arrest
      as one who had entered the UK illegally on 23 March 2015. On 4  August
      2015 the Respondent refused the asylum claim, and made a  decision  to
      remove him from the UK.
   2. The Appellant's appeal against the removal decision was  heard  on  30
      March 2016, and it  was  dismissed  on  all  grounds,  in  a  decision
      promulgated on 14 April 2016 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Hands.
   3. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal that decision on 9  May
      2016 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Page on the basis  it  was  arguable
      the Judge's approach to the evidence, and the current country guidance
      decision in MO [2011] UKUT 190 was flawed.
   4. Thus the matter comes before me.


   Error of Law?
   5. Ultimately both parties were agreed that the Judge's approach  to  the
      evidence was flawed for lack  of  adequate  reasoning,  and  that  the
      decision had to be set aside and remade.
   6. The Respondent had  conceded  that  the  Appellant  was  not  just  an
      Eritrean  citizen,  but  that  he  had  been   required   to   perform
      military/national service, that he had done so and was not therefore a
      draft evader, and, that he had left Eritrea illegally. That begged the
      question of primary fact of whether he had been  discharged  from  his
      military/national service, or whether he had deserted from it. In turn
      that begged the secondary question of whether he would as a result  be
      perceived to be a deserter,  or  one  who  had  been  discharged  from
      service upon his return by the Eritrean authorities,  and  what  their
      attitude would be to him as a result. Put  simply  both  parties  were
      agreed that the Judge had not resolved that question of primary  fact,
      and had not properly addressed the secondary question as a result.
   7. To address that question of primary fact the Judge had to address  the
      evidence, which on any view concerned the Appellant's account  of  his
      experiences some years in the past, in the light of the guidance to be
      found in the current country guidance decisions as  to  the  situation
      that prevailed in Eritrea at that time. The relevance  of  the  Danish
      FFM report was on  any  view  limited  to  the  analysis  of  how  the
      Appellant would be perceived now, in the light of the Judge's decision
      as to whether he had told the truth  about  those  past  events.  Even
      then, the parties were entitled to an analysis of why the  content  of
      the Danish FFM was to be preferred over the reports relied upon by the
      Appellant, which together with the current country guidance  decisions
      pointed  to  a  different  attitude  on  the  part  of  the   Eritrean
      authorities. A  Judge  may  of  course  depart  from  current  country
      guidance, but the parties are entitled to a reasoned explanation as to
      why such a step has been taken, particularly in circumstances such  as
      these where different sources, and even the same expert appear to have
      taken different stances at  different  times.  For  example  Professor
      Kibreab's stance when interviewed for the purposes of the  Danish  FFM
      report appears to have quite distinct from his subsequent  stance.  No
      doubt  the  position  will  all  be  a  good  deal  clearer  once  the
      anticipated country guidance decision is published.


  Future conduct of the appeal
   8. Since both parties were agreed that the decision had to be  set  aside
      and remade, the focus of the hearing then turned to the mechanism  for
      doing so. I have in these circumstances considered whether or  not  to
      remit the appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for it to be  reheard,  as
      requested by both parties. In the circumstances of  the  appeal  I  am
      satisfied that this is the correct approach. In circumstances where it
      would  appear  that  the  relevant  evidence  has  not  properly  been
      considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law
      has been to deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for his  case  to
      be properly considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of
      the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover  the  extent  of
      the judicial fact finding exercise is such that having regard  to  the
      over-riding objective, it is appropriate that  the  appeal  should  be
      remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the  Practice
      Statement of 25 September 2012. Having reached that  conclusion,  with
      the agreement of the parties I make the following directions;
     i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside. The appeal  is  remitted
        to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing. No findings of  fact  are
        preserved. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Hands.
    ii) A Tigrinyan interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.
   iii) The Appellant must inform the Tribunal by 5pm on 19 July 2016  what
        (if any) further evidence he seeks to rely upon.
    iv) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at the North
        Shields hearing centre after the  publication  of  the  anticipated
        country guidance decision for Eritrea.
     v) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier  Tribunal
        is preserved.




Decision

   9. The decision promulgated on 14 April 2016 did involve the making of an
      error of law sufficient to require it to be set aside and  the  appeal
      to be reheard. Accordingly the decision upon the appeal is  set  aside
      and the appeal is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  with  the
      following directions;
      i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside. The appeal  is  remitted
         to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing. No findings of  fact  are
         preserved. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Hands.
    ii) A Tigrinyan interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.
   iii) The Appellant must inform the Tribunal by 5pm on 19 July 2016  what
        (if any) further evidence he seeks to rely upon.
    iv) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at the North
        Shields hearing centre after the  publication  of  the  anticipated
        country guidance decision for Eritrea.
     v) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier  Tribunal
        is preserved.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 6 July 2016
