

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11530/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 13 May 2015                       |On 20 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     PD
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    None


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    1. The appellant ('the SSHD') has appealed against a decision of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa dated 24  February  2015.   In  this
       decision Judge Gurung-Thapa dismissed the appeal on asylum and  human
       rights grounds but remitted the appeal to the  SSHD  to  the  limited
       extent that there be a lawful consideration  and  decision  regarding
       the SSHD's s 55 duties.



Relevant background

    2. The background that is relevant to this appeal can be briefly stated.
        The respondent ('Mrs PD')  is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.   She  is
       married and they have a son who was born in December 2002.  Mrs  PD's
       husband has been in the UK since 2005.  Mrs PD did not arrive in  the
       UK with her son until 21 December 2011 and they  have  remained  here
       since that date.  Mr PD was granted limited leave to  remain  outside
       of the Rules on 10 July 2014 for three years.   Mrs  PD  applied  for
       asylum in April 2012 and that was refused on 9 December 2014.

Hearing

    3. Mrs PD attended  the  hearing  and  alongside  her  husband  and  two
       supporters, one of who identified himself as the Pastor of the Church
       that the family attends.  Mrs PD confirmed that she had not  appealed
       to the Upper Tribunal against the dismissal of the asylum appeal  and
       did not wish to do so.

    4. Mr McVeety submitted that the Judge erred in law in remitting  the  s
       55 consideration to the SSHD.

    5. I indicated that I had some sympathy with  the  submission  that  the
       Judge should have dealt with s 55 for herself.  I invited Mrs PD  and
       the Pastor to set out their views on this.  They agreed that the best
       course would be for Judge Gurung-Thapa to consider the s 55 issue  in
       light of all the updated evidence.

Discussion

    6. The Upper Tribunal has recently provided guidance on the approach  to
       be adopted in determining whether or not the SSHD has breached  s  55
       and what should follow  from  this  in  MK  (section  55  -  Tribunal
       options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC).  This makes  it  clear
       that it is not necessary for  the  SSHD's  decision  letter  to  make
       specific reference to the  statutory  guidance.   Judge  Gurung-Thapa
       notes that no reference to the guidance  was  made  in  the  decision
       letter in this case [73] but this does not justify a remittal.  Judge
       Gurung-Thapa also indicates that the son should have  been  consulted
       and his wishes and feelings taken into account  but  it  is  implicit
       from the evidence available that the son's clear wish was  to  remain
       in the UK with both parents.  In my judgment the SSHD's considered  s
       55 and that consideration cannot be said not to be in accordance with
       the law.  In finding otherwise Judge Gurung-Thapa has erred in law.

    7. MK also serves as a reminder that the decision in AJ (India)  v  SSHD
       [2011] EWCA Civ 1191 is authority for the proposition that where  the
       First-tier Tribunal decides that a decision of the Secretary of State
       is not in accordance  with  the  law  on  account  of  a  failure  to
       discharge the first of the s 55 duties the Tribunal is not obliged to
       remit the case to the Secretary of State for a fresh decision.   Even
       if Judge Gurung-Thapa was entitled to  consider  the  s  55  duty  as
       having been breached she should have gone on to consider whether this
       should result in a remittal to the SSHD  or  whether  she  could  and
       should consider the matter herself.  In failing to consider this, the
       Judge has erred in law.

    8. I have considered whether I should remake the  decision  but  I  have
       been persuaded by both Mr McVeety and Mrs PD that this  is  a  matter
       that should benefit from findings of fact regarding s 55 by the First-
       tier Tribunal, as there have been no clear findings.  The  directions
       set out below have been agreed and seek to ensure that  all  relevant
       evidence is available to the Judge when she considers the s 55 issue.

Decision

    9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law only
       in relation to s 55.  I only set aside that part of the decision.

   10. The s 55 issue is remitted to be heard by Judge Gurung-Thapa.

Directions

1. The s 55 issue only shall be  considered  on  the  first  available  date
after 17 August 2015 before Judge Gurung-Thapa.  TE: 2 hrs.

2. There shall be a Bengali interpreter booked for the hearing.

3. Before Friday  10  July  2015  the  appellant  shall  file  and  serve  a
paginated bundle of all relevant documents relied upon to  determine  the  s
55 issue including: witness statements from her son,  herself,  her  husband
and any supporters; independent evidence supporting the submission that  her
son's best interests are to  remain  in  the  UK;  evidence  addressing  her
husband's circumstances in the UK and why it would be unreasonable  for  him
to relocate to Bangladesh.

4. Before Friday 31 July  2015  the  respondent  shall  file  and  serve  an
updated decision / consideration of s 55 in light of the updated evidence.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 15 May 2015
