
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/11529/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th March 2016                   |On 1st June 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                     I A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Turkey born on [ ]  1996,  appeals  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hussain  ("the  Immigration
    Judge") to dismiss his appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  to
    refuse him international protection.   He  was  granted  permission  to
    appeal to this Tribunal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin who  found
    that the judge had arguably not given sufficient reasons for  adversely
    finding against the appellant on his credibility.  Also, Judge  Shimmin
    thought the Immigration Judge may  not  have  engaged  fully  with  the
    country guidance put before him.

Background

2.   The appellant left Turkey on 27 November 2010 and travelled  through  a
    number of other countries, with the help of an agent, on  a  Cyprus  ID
    card.  He arrived  in  the  UK  on  30  November  2010.   However,  the
    respondent says in her decision that the appellant arrived into the  UK
    on 8 February 2013. The appellant made his claim for asylum  on  1  May
    2013.

3.   The application was  considered  but  refused  by  a  letter  dated  26
    November 2014 and the notice of the respondent's  intention  to  remove
    the appellant was given on 10 December 2014.

4.   The respondent's refusal refers  to  the  appellant's  application  for
    asylum and states that the respondent considers that claim, as well  as
    the claim to international  protection  under  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Immigration Rules, are ill-founded. Paragraph 339  of  the  Immigration
    Rules states that for a person to be in need of humanitarian protection
    there have to be "substantial grounds  for  believing"  that  he  would
    suffer a real risk of serious harm".  The appellant also relied on  the
    European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), specifically on Articles  2
    and 3. That application was also refused because it was not  considered
    the appellant had  would  suffer  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  in
    Turkey, nor would he likely to be unlawfully killed.  The appellant was
    informed of his appeal rights.

5.   The appellant appealed  the  refusal  by  notice  of  appeal  dated  29
    December 2015 indicating that the Immigration Judge  had  not  properly
    considered  the  appellant's  own  evidence  or  indeed  the  objective
    evidence.

6.   Directions were sent out for a hearing at Hatton Cross but  the  appeal
    was heard at Richmond Magistrates Court.  The Immigration Judge, having
    taken  into  account  the  appellant's  evidence  and  considered   the
    documents, considered that the appellant's  credibility  was  seriously
    damaged because of his delay in claiming asylum, the fact that  he  had
    gone through a number of safe countries before claiming asylum  in  the
    UK and because much of his evidence was "embellished".

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

7.   The appellant appealed against the dismissal of his appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal to the Upper Tribunal on  29  December  2015.   The
    grounds state that the Immigration  Judge  erred  in  law  because  the
    appellant was a supporter of the BDP Party but was an alleged supporter
    of the PKK, a pro-Kurdish political party.  His brother  Abdullah  gave
    evidence to support his appeal. The Immigration  Judge  is  alleged  to
    have taken "the incorrect approach" to Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 ("Section 8").  The
    short delay between  the  appellant's  arrival  into  the  UK  and  his
    interview was accounted for by the  fact  that  he  needed  to  contact
    solicitors and no adverse credibility  findings  should  have  followed
    from this fact.  The appellant has taken advantage of  his  opportunity
    to claim asylum while in a safe country.   The  Immigration  Judge  had
    allowed the incorrect findings to underpin his  adverse  assessment  of
    credibility.

8.   Secondly, the Immigration Judge  is  alleged  to  have  made  incorrect
    assumptions.  At paragraph 36 of the  decision  the  Immigration  Judge
    observed that the appellant, a young adolescent, had not given adequate
    details of his involvement with the  BDP.   This  criticism  was  wrong
    because the Immigration Judge could not  speculate  to  what  level  of
    understanding a young person, such as the appellant, could be  expected
    to have.  The appellant had given evidence of his  own  BDP  activities
    through his uncle and friends.  The appellant's account was  consistent
    with the objective evidence about the political context in Turkey.  The
    Immigration Judge wrongly relied on his own assumptions,  finding  that
    it was "highly improbable that neither the appellant nor  his  brother,
    who is much older, would be able to reach out to other extended  family
    members of (sic) friends in  their  anonymity...".   No  reasoning  was
    given for this finding.

9.   Finally, there was the failure to  engage  with  the  country  guidance
    material including the case of IK  Turkey  [2004]  UKIAT  00312  and  A
    (Turkey)  [2003]  UKIAT  00034.   Crucially,  family  connections  with
    separatist  organisations  would  represent  heightened  risk   factors
    affecting the safety of the appellant's return.

10.  As I have recorded above, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin  thought
    these grounds were at least arguable.

11.  The respondent provided  the  response  under  Rule  24  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008.  However, the respondent appears not  to
    have been in possession of the relevant decision at the  time  of  this
    response!

12.  At the hearing both parties  were  represented.   Ms  Patyna  submitted
    that  her  clients  had   demonstrated   support   for   a   separatist
    organisation.  He would be perceived to be  a  threat  because  of  the
    possible PKK support.  The appellant had travelled to the UK at the age
    of 16.  Therefore, at the time he gave evidence before the FTT  he  had
    reached 18, having had very limited (five years) of primary  education.
    The appellant's background was of pro-Kurdish support.  The Immigration
    Judge should have carried out a proper assessment of credibility having
    regard to the background case of IK (Turkey) and the case of  A  Turkey
    (references above).  The appellant's ethnicity was enough to put him at
    risk.

13.  Furthermore, the assessment under Section 8 was flawed  and  there  was
    no proper basis upon which the Immigration Judge could have reached the
    conclusion that he had reached. In the circumstances I was  invited  to
    allow the appeal.

14.  In granting permission Judge Shimmin pointed  out  that  the  appellant
    appeared not to have given adequate reasons for his adverse credibility
    findings and in particular his adverse credibility finding  on  Section
    8.  The appellant had arrived in the UK on 8 February 2013 and made his
    claim for asylum in May 2013.  The delay was  therefore  fairly  short.
    The Immigration Judge had rejected suggestions that the delay had  been
    caused by the need to contact solicitors.  The appellant's brother  had
    supported the appellant's account.  Therefore, there were  no  adequate
    reasons for rejecting the brother's evidence  and  nothing  to  suggest
    that the brother was not a credible witness.  The  starting  point  was
    arguably incorrect.  The second submission  was  that  the  Immigration
    Judge has based his decision on speculation and assumption rather  than
    fact.  The appellant was not accepted as  being  a  member  of  a  pro-
    Kurdish organisation.  The appellant had shown his commitment  to  that
    cause by long involvement through an uncle.  The appellant only  needed
    to be involved in such activities to be of interest to the  authorities
    in Turkey.  Paragraph 39 of the Immigration Judge's  decision  revealed
    that the appellant claimed to carry leaflets containing pictures of the
    leader of the PKK.  However, the Immigration Judge did not accept  this
    evidence.  It was argued by Ms  Patyna  that  the  Immigration  Judge's
    rejection of this evidence was based on speculation It would have  been
    highly unlikely that the  appellant  would  have  made  this  up.   The
    appellant had put forward the country guidance evidence which had  been
    wrongly rejected.  It was submitted that there were a  number  of  risk
    factors in this case which should have been accepted by the FTT.

15.  The respondent said by reply that the appellant's brother is due to  be
    returned to Turkey.  I was referred to the documents  (at  X77  in  the
    appellant's bundle) which indicate that  the  appellant's  brother  had
    claimed asylum. It was noted that  the  appellant's  brother  had  been
    subject to a decision to remove him as  an  illegal  entrant.   It  was
    noted that his appeal had been rejected by Immigration Judge Kelly on 3
    August 2012.

16.  At this point Ms Patyna pointed out that  the  appellant's  father  had
    been kidnapped in 2002 because of his "political involvement"  and  the
    same factors had been before the Tribunal in Ali's case.

17.  Mr Diwnycz went back to his submissions,  saying  that  the  Section  8
    point had to be put in its  proper  context.   It  was  not  considered
    determinative of the issues.  However, the respondent did  consider  it
    had been reasonable to refer to it.  There was  also  country  guidance
    material referred to in the refusal (see  for  example  paragraph  33).
    Contrary to the submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  the
    Immigration Judge had engaged with this material in his  decision.   He
    had referred to the case of IK and had dealt with all the evidence.  It
    was accepted, however, that he had not made as extensive a reference to
    country guidance material as he might have done.

18.  Finally, Ms Patyna pointed out that the  wrong  starting  position  had
    been adopted by the Immigration Judge.  I was particularly referred  to
    paragraph 29.  The Immigration Judge appears to have regarded Section 8
    as the starting point.  However, it  was  accepted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that the Immigration Judge had  been  entitled  to  find  the
    account incredible.  Finally, I was invited to re-list the matter for a
    fresh hearing before the FTT.

19.  At the end of the hearing I announced my decision which  was  that  the
    Immigration Judge had made a  credibility  assessment,  which  included
    consideration of the delay and the reasons for that delay  put  forward
    by the appellant.  Having heard  extensive  evidence,  the  Immigration
    Judge had been entitled to reject the appellant's account.  He appeared
    to have given adequate consideration to the country guidance  material,
    although this had not been as extensive as would have  been  desirable.
    Accordingly, the decision was open to the Immigration Judge.

20.  I will later set out my reasons in greater detail having  set  out  the
    issues as I see them to be.

Discussion

21.  Section 8 requires the deciding authority, in this  case  the  IAC,  to
    take into account behaviour of certain types.  This includes  behaviour
    designed or likely to "delay the handling or resolution of the (asylum)
    claim".  It also covers a delay in making a claim before an immigration
    decision (see Section 8(5)).  Section 8 does not require an Immigration
    Judge to give any particular weight to the  behaviour  covered  by  the
    Section.  It does, however, require a judge in certain circumstances to
    "take into account" that behaviour.

22.  The Immigration Judge, with respect, did not  give  clear  reasons  for
    his reliance on  Section  8  in  paragraph  30  of  his  decision.   In
    particular, there appears to be a missing negative in either the  first
    or the fourth sentences.  However, it is possible to make sense of  the
    Immigration Judge's reasons in paragraph 30 for finding that Section  8
    did apply. They  include  the  timing  of  the  appellant's  claim.  In
    essence, the appellant had arrived in the UK on 8 February 2013 but had
    not advanced his asylum claim until 1 May 2013.  As  I  understand  the
    Immigration Judge's reasoning, he did not accept the delay  was  wholly
    down to the respondent, as  was  claimed  by  the  appellant.   As  the
    Immigration Judge rightly pointed out, no evidence had been called from
    the appellant solicitors to confirm the date when they are said to have
    been given instructions and contacted  the  respondent  for  the  first
    time.  The Immigration Judge was entitled to regard this as a  negative
    factor in deciding whether to accept the  appellant's  account  of  the
    reason for the delay.

23.  Furthermore, the Immigration Judge did point out that the  respondent's
    reliance on Section 8 was "not determinative" of the  question  of  his
    credibility and I agree with that observation.  Again, the  Immigration
    Judge could have put matters better in the final sentence of  paragraph
    30, but in substance, he was dealing with a  person  who  had  not  put
    forward a claim at the earliest opportunity but had delayed for  up  to
    three months in advancing his claim.  This was a negative factor as  in
    those three months it would have been open to the appellant to "get his
    story straight" by, for example, comparing notes with his brother.

24.   Therefore,  in  absence  of  any  information  from  the   appellant's
    solicitors the Immigration Judge was entitled to reject the evidence of
    the appellant's brother in this regard which was likely to  be  tainted
    and partisan.

25.  The second ground and the ground for  attacking  the  decision  of  the
    Immigration Judge is that, it is said, the Immigration  Judge  was  not
    entitled to reject the appellant's account for its lack of  detail  and
    conclude that he was not politically active as  he  had  claimed.   The
    Immigration Judge should have had regard to the appellant's  young  age
    (16 when he came to the UK at approximately  18  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing) and concluded that there may have been an adequate explanation
    for the appellant's failure to recount precise details.  It is said, by
    reference to the case of Y v Secretary of State [2006]  EWCA  1223  per
    Keene LJ, that there was a danger the Immigration Judge was bringing to
    bear his own subjective experiences and attitudes rather than  properly
    taking into account all the evidence and  weighing  it  up  as  he  was
    required to do.  Secondly, it is said that the  Immigration  Judge  was
    not entitled to find it incredible that the appellant, who appeared  to
    be confused as to which leaflets he had or had not  distributed,  would
    refer to a PKK leaflet as having a photograph on it.   The  Immigration
    Judge is criticised for commenting on the  appellant  for  an  apparent
    shift of position, where he said that the leaflets he helped  with  may
    have been for the PKK or the BDP.  BDP was  a  party  whose  activities
    overlapped with PKK and it was said that there was  in  either  case  a
    significant risk that the appellant would come to the attention of  the
    authorities.  Furthermore, the  Immigration  Judge  did  not  set  this
    finding against the background material as he should have done.

26.  The Immigration  Judge  had  proper  regard  to  the  totality  of  the
    evidence and did not make assumptions.  He was,  however,  entitled  to
    reach his own view having heard the  appellant  and  his  brother  give
    evidence.  He took account of the fact that the appellant was a Turkish
    Kurd with a family background  of  possible  anti-government  activity.
    The appellant had claimed to be  of  interest  to  the  authorities  by
    virtue of the involvement of family members with  the  PKK  or  similar
    organisations.  However, there were a series of powerful points against
    the appellant including his lack of knowledge of the Kurdish separatist
    movement and Kurdish issues generally.  He was not a child when he came
    before the Immigration Judge and the Immigration Judge was entitled  to
    treat his account with the degree of scepticism with which he did treat
    it.

27.  The final point of attack relates to the alleged failure  on  the  part
    of the Immigration Judge to engage with the country guidance case of IK
    [2004] UKAIT 00312.  I note that  the  Immigration  Judge  specifically
    referred to this case at paragraph 42 of his decision.  The Immigration
    Judge clearly had regard to the fact that returnees on emergency travel
    documents who have a Kurdish background may be taken into  custody  and
    questioned. The Immigration Judge was entitled to conclude that in this
    case such questioning would not "reveal any information" that might  be
    of interest to the authorities.

28.  A decision-maker is required to make an assessment of the risk  factors
    in each case having regard to all the circumstances  of  the  case  set
    against the background material.  In this case it is  said  that  there
    was a material  error  in  not  properly  weighing-up  the  appellant's
    circumstances against the background material.  I find this  submission
    somewhat vague.  The  Immigration  Judge  clearly  had  regard  to  the
    background case law and did not accept  that  the  appellant  had  been
    active in the Kurdish separatist movement as the appellant had claimed.
     The Immigration Judge was entitled to  reach  this  conclusion  having
    rejected the appellant's  evidence  that  the  risk  factors  were  not
    sufficiently grave to put him at risk on return to Turkey.

My conclusions

29.  The Immigration  Judge  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  his
    brother.  But, whatever impression his brother  made,  the  Immigration
    Judge was clearly unimpressed by this appellant's evidence, finding  it
    to be inconsistent and confused.  It is not possible for this  Tribunal
    to  go  behind  clear  findings  of  fact  and  clear  assessments   of
    credibility made  by  the  Immigration  Judge  having  heard  extensive
    evidence.  The Immigration Judge clearly rejected the notion  that  the
    appellant was of interest to the authorities in Turkey and this  was  a
    conclusion he was entitled to come to on the evidence.  It  would  have
    been desirable for the Immigration Judge to pay greater regard  to  the
    objective evidence than he did but I do not find that this criticism of
    the Immigration Judge is of sufficient  significance  to  have  made  a
    difference to the outcome of this appeal.

30.  For these reasons I am unable to  accept  that  there  was  a  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT does not contain any material error  of  law.   This
appeal is therefore dismissed.  The decision of  the  respondent  to  refuse
asylum/human rights protection in the UK stands.

The anonymity direction made by the Immigration Judge continues.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There was no fee award and I make no fee award.


Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

