

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11037/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 1st July 2015                     |On 6th July 2015                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     H A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Parkes promulgated on  the  12th  February  2015  in  which  he
       dismissed the appellants appeal against the  removal  direction  that
       accompanied the refusal of her claim for asylum or any other form  of
       international protection.

    2. The removal direction under challenge named both Ethiopia and Eritrea
       as the countries of destination. This is permissible. In RR  (refugee
       - safe third country) Syria [2010] UKUT 422 (IAC) the  Tribunal  held
       that in an asylum appeal in which the claimant has only  one  country
       of nationality (country A), it is permissible for  the  Secretary  of
       State to propose more than one  country  of  destination  (country  B
       etc): see also JN (Cameroon) [2009] EWCA Civ 643 [23].

    3. The appellant maintained she does not have Ethiopian nationality. The
       core of her claim is that she is a national of Eritrea born in  1994.
       She claimed to have lived in Campo Sudan, Assab with her parents. Her
       father was taken by the government and she removed to  Sudan  by  her
       aunt. In Sudan she was put to work  as  a  sex  slave  by  her  aunt,
       sleeping with policemen. Eventually she and her aunt were imprisoned,
       the appellant for three months and the aunt for two years.  Following
       her release the appellant obtained money to pay an agent and left for
       Italy. She travelled from there  to  France  and  the  UK  where  she
       claimed asylum.

Discussion

    4. The judge considered the evidence made available in  support  of  the
       claim but found the appellant lacked credibility. The core finding is
       at paragraph 22 where the judge finds:

       "22.   To the lower standard I find that the Appellant has not  shown
           that she is either from Eritrea  or  that  she  is  an  Eritrean
           national.  The inconsistencies  in  her  account  undermine  her
           claim to have lived for any significant period in Eritrea or  to
           be a national of that country.  Also I do not accept her account
           of events in Sudan so far as the aunt is concerned or  what  she
           claims she was forced to do.  I find that it  is  probable  that
           the Appellant is a national of Ethiopia and that she is  not  at
           risk in her home country."

    5. The reasons for this conclusion are set-out in the other parts of the
       determination by reference to the  language  used  by  the  Appellant
       which is that of Ethiopia, lack of use of  use  of  the  language  of
       Eritrea, and inconstancies and differences in the evidence. The judge
       clearly considered the evidence with the required degree  of  anxious
       scrutiny and has given adequate reasons for the findings, made  which
       are arguably sustainable.

    6. The grounds of challenge have to be read  against  the  core  finding
       that the appellant is Ethiopian and not Eritrean and has  not  proved
       any past connection with Eritrea.

    7. Ground 1 asserting legal error as the judge failed to make a  finding
       on the risk to the appellant on return to  Eritrea  has  no  arguable
       merit. As the judge found the appellant  is  Ethiopian  this  is  the
       country to which she  is  to  be  returned,  not  Eritrea.  No  legal
       obligation has been made out to show Judge  Parkes  was  required  to
       consider risk on return to a country of which the appellant is not  a
       national on a hypothetical basis.

    8. Grounds 2 asserts legal error in the judge failing to assess the risk
       on return to Ethiopia. The judge does deal with this  issue  when  he
       states the appellant is not at risk in her home country.  This  is  a
       sustainable  finding  for  as  an  Ethiopian  national  returning  to
       Ethiopia neither the country evidence not that provided  directly  by
       the appellant establishes any arguable real risk to her on return.

    9. The case of ST [2011] UKUT 252 has not been shown not  be  applicable
       on the facts as found as the appellant is not an ethic Eritrean.

   10. Ground three claims the  judge  failed  to  give  any  reasoning  for
       finding the appellant is an Ethiopian national in paragraph  22,  but
       adequate reasons are given in other parts of the determination  which
       have not been shown to be susceptible to challenge by  way  of  legal
       error and which are drawn together in the conclusion in paragraph 22.

   11. Ground four asserting inadequate reasoning has no arguable  merit.  A
       reader of  the  determination  is  able  to  understand  the  judge's
       findings and reasoning for all relevant issues.  Such  findings  have
       not been shown  to  be  perverse,  irrational,  or  contrary  to  the
       evidence.

   12. Ground 5 asserting a failure to consider  MO  (Illegal  exit-risk  on
       return) Eritrea [2011] UKUT 190 is factually correct as  it  was  not
       considered. This is not as a result of arguable legal error, however,
       but because the appellant was found to be Ethiopian. The  country  of
       return is therefore Ethiopia and not Eritrea.

   13. Paragraph six challenges the  conclusion  in  relation  to  paragraph
       276ADE of the Immigration Rules but the burden is upon the  appellant
       to prove her ability  to  qualify  for  leave  under  the  Rules.  In
       paragraph 24 the judge finds:

       "24.   The Appellant arrived in the UK at the end of  2013.  She  has
           spent relatively little time in the UK and does not speak  much,
           if any English, there is no evidence that she cannot  return  to
           Ethiopia and there is evidence that she has relatives there. The
           Appellant cannot succeed under Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE
           of the Immigration Rules. There are no compelling  circumstances
           that would justify considering her situation outside  the  rules
           and I decline to do so."

   14. Adequate reasons have been given for why the Appellant fails on  this
       basis.

   15. This is a case in which the core account relied upon was not found to
       be credible and in which the evidence supported a  finding  that  the
       appellant is an Ethiopian national. On the basis of  the  sustainable
       findings no arguable legal error material to the decision to  dismiss
       the appeal has been made out.

Decision

   16. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   17. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 3rd July 2015

