
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11548/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 March 2018                               |On 27 March 2018              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     PO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Fraczyk instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr K Hibbs, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.





Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born on [ ]  1982.   She
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 1 May 2014 as  a  visitor  with  leave
    valid until 7 October 2014.  On 7 October 2014, she claimed asylum.  On
    12 December 2014 the Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  claim
    for asylum and made a decision to remove her to Zimbabwe.

 3.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Judge M M Thomas dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 4. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on
    the basis that the appellant should have been granted an adjournment in
    order to obtain effective legal representation.  In a decision sent  on
    6 December 2016, the Upper Tribunal set aside  the  decision  of  Judge
    Thomas and remitted the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo
    rehearing.

 5. The remitted appeal was heard by Judge Fowell on 30 January 2017.   The
    judge made an adverse credibility finding and did not accept  that  the
    appellant would be at risk on return to  Zimbabwe.   He  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 6. The appellant again sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    challenging the judge's adverse credibility  finding.   Permission  was
    initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal but on 6  September  2017,
    the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Canavan) granted the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal.

 7. On 22 September 2017, the Secretary of State filed a rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

A Preliminary Matter

 8. At the outset of the hearing I raised with both representatives that  I
    had been the Upper Tribunal Judge who had set aside the initial  First-
    tier Tribunal decision of Judge Thomas and remitted the appeal  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  for  a   rehearing.    I   enquired   from   both
    representatives whether they had any objection to me dealing  with  the
    current appeal.  I indicated that if either did  so  object,  then  the
    appeal could be relisted before a different Upper Tribunal Judge.

 9. Mr Fraczyk indicated that he wished to take  instructions  and  consult
    with those instructing him.  Following a short adjournment, Mr  Fraczyk
    indicated that the appellant had no objection to  my  determining  this
    appeal.  On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Hibbs  indicated  that
    the Secretary of State also had no objection.

10. In those circumstances, I considered it appropriate to continue hearing
    the appeal, noting that my previous involvement with the appeal  at  an
    earlier error of law hearing did not involve any consideration  of  the
    evidence or merits of the appellant's appeal but related solely  to  an
    issue of procedural irregularity  arising  from  the  previous  judge's
    failure to grant an adjournment.

Discussion

11. Mr Fraczyk relied upon the three grounds of appeal but, in  particular,
    he placed reliance upon ground 1.

12. Part of the appellant's account was that whilst she was in Zimbabwe she
    had been detained by the police and whilst in detention had been raped.

13. The judge dealt with this at paras  58-60  of  his  determination.   He
    identified a discrepancy between the account given to a medical  expert
    (Dr Buttan)  and  what  was  said  by  the  appellant  in  her  witness
    statement.  The judge said this:

         "58. Secondly, there is the account of  the  rape  itself.   It  is
             described very briefly in the medical report:

                  'She reports being detained, hand cuffed and raped by five
                  men there.  One of them was called 'Rugare'.  Then she was
                  shut off in  a  room.  She  was  subject  to  torture  and
                  interrogation for approximately four hours.  She  reported
                  that she has passed out  and  was  quite  scared  for  her
                  life.'

         59.  This is an extraordinarily bald account. The rape is mentioned
             almost in passing, as indeed it  is  in  the  appellant's  own
             witness statement.   No  further  details  are  given  of  the
             interrogation or the torture in either document.  In fact, the
             appellant does not claim in her witness statemen to have  been
             tortured at all, which makes it very difficult to  accept  any
             aspect of this episode.

         60.  A further and most conspicuous discrepancy  is  that  although
             the appellant mentions in her  witness  statement  that  there
             were four of five men involved, she states that all  bar  one,
             Rugare, had left the room, and so it was just  him  who  raped
             her. It is simply not possible to reconcile an account of rape
             by 4 or 5 men with one of being raped by one person."

14. Then at paras 64-65, the judge reached the following conclusions:

         "64.  Overall,  given  the  failure  to  mention  it  earlier,  the
             conflicting accounts  of  the  circumstances  leading  to  her
             detention by the police and the  major  discrepancies  between
             the appellant's witness statement and the account given to the
             expert, I cannot accept that there is any real likelihood that
             this rape incident occurred.

         65.   This  drastically  affects  my  view   of   the   appellant's
             credibility, and I have to conclude that she is not a credible
             witness as a result.  This view reinforces my  concerns  about
             her account of the events which led her to leave  Zimbabwe  in
             the first  place,  and  I  cannot  accept  that  she  had  any
             political profile at that time.  I do not accept  her  account
             of the ongoing dispute with [BM] at any point."

15. The reference to "BM" in the final sentence at para 65  is  to  a  pro-
    government supporter whom the appellant claimed encountered  her  prior
    to her detention and was the cause of that detention.

16. Mr Fraczyk submitted that the judge had, through no fault of  his  own,
    been wrong to rely upon a discrepancy between the appellant's  evidence
    as given to Dr Buttan and in  her witness statement.  Mr Fraczyk sought
    to rely upon an e-mail from Dr Buttan dated 23 February 2017  in  which
    Dr Buttan sought to correct what he had said  in  his  medical  report.
    There, Dr Buttan said this:

         "I reviewed my notes on PO and  confirmed  that  she  had  reported
         'being handcuffed, driven in an unmarked car and detained  by  five
         men in ZANU-PF Head Quarters, a person name  {R]  started  touching
         her and raped her.   When asked about duration and further  details
         of rape, she reported  that  she  had  passed  out,  she  does  not
         remember exact details and was scared for her life, shocked and had
         panic attacks.  They shut her off in a room  and  interrogated  her
         which lasted for nearly 4 hours'."

17. Mr Fraczyk sought permission to admit  this  new  evidence  under  rule
    15(2A) of the Procedure Rules.  He submitted that it demonstrated  that
    there was, in fact, no  discrepancy  between  the  appellant's  account
    given to Dr Buttan and in her witness statement.  She had  consistently
    said that she had been raped by one person ("R") and had not said  that
    she had been tortured.  Mr Fraczyk submitted that  this  factual  error
    (amounting to an error of law) materially flawed  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility finding.

18. Mr Hibbs did not object to the admission of the new  evidence  from  Dr
    Buttan.  However, he submitted that I should not find  that  the  judge
    erred in law on the basis of it.  There was, he submitted, no  copy  of
    Dr Buttan's notes merely an e-mail from him.  He submitted that without
    a copy  of  Dr  Buttan's  notes,  to  set  aside  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility finding would set a difficult precedent.   He  acknowledged
    that, if a copy of Dr Buttan's notes had been provided supporting  what
    he said, then apart from materiality, he would  not  argue  against  an
    error of law being established.

19. He submitted, however, that even if, on the basis  of  Dr  Buttan's  e-
    mail, the judge's reasoning in para 60 was  flawed,  nevertheless  that
    was not material to his decision.  The judge  would  have  reached  the
    same conclusion in any event.  He relied upon the fact  that  the  vast
    majority of the judge's reasoning was not challenged.  Indeed, Mr Hibbs
    pointed out that in paras 64-65,  the  judge  in  concluding  that  the
    appellant was not a credible witness and rejecting her account of being
    raped, had relied upon other matters, including the  implausibility  of
    the alleged encounter between BM and the appellant  at  a  post  office
    whilst the appellant was seeking a passport (see in particular paras 55-
    57 of the determination).  Further, Mr Hibbs relied upon para 66 of the
    judge's determination in which he  stated  that  "regardless  of  those
    conclusions", he did not accept that the appellant  was  on  a  "wanted
    list" as she had been released by the police and had subsequently  left
    Zimbabwe without being stopped at the airport.  Consequently, she could
    not be on a wanted list and therefore at risk.

20. It was, in my judgment, entirely proper for the parties to accept  that
    the new evidence from Dr Buttan in his e-mail should be  admitted.   In
    my judgment, the criteria in Ladd v Marshall [1954] 3 All ER  745  were
    met.  First, the new evidence could not with reasonable diligence  have
    been obtained prior to the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  as  Dr  Buttan
    only appreciated his mistake after the appeal decision, and the judge's
    reliance upon what Dr Buttan said the appellant had told him during her
    consultation, was produced.  Secondly,  the  new  evidence  is  plainly
    important  to  an  issue,  namely  the  adverse  credibility   finding.
    Thirdly,  the  evidence  is  apparently  credible  emanating   from   a
    Consultant Psychiatrist who has already produced an  expert  report  on
    the appellant.

21. I see the force of Mr Hibbs' submission that  evidence  of  this  sort,
    correcting an earlier expert report, might be  better  presented  in  a
    more formal way.  In addition, it would have been more  helpful  if  Dr
    Buttan had provided a copy of his notes of his consultation rather than
    simply including an extract in his e-mail.  These matters, however, can
    only be relevant  to  the  reliability  and  cogency  of  the  evidence
    presented.  Form cannot trump substance.  Dr Buttan places in quotation
    marks the relevant parts from his notes.  There is no basis  whatsoever
    for concluding that this evidence is unreliable.  Dr Buttan is,  as  is
    clear from the terms of his report and the new evidence,  a  Consultant
    Psychiatrist and is undoubtedly an  "expert".   He  is  a  professional
    person regulated by a professional body,  namely  the  General  Medical
    Council  and   is  required  to  abide  by   appropriate   professional
    standards, including when acting as an expert.  In these circumstances,
    I accept what Dr Buttan sets out in his e-mail.  In my  judgment,  that
    demonstrates that the judge made a  mistake  of  fact  amounting  to  a
    mistake of law.  Albeit through no fault of his own, the  judge  relied
    upon evidence which is clearly demonstrated now to have been  mistaken.
    That evidence was significant to  the  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    credibility.  Applying the approach in E&R v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49  I
    am satisfied that the judge  erred  in  law  when  he  relied  upon  an
    apparent discrepancy in  the  appellant's  evidence  as  given  in  her
    consultation with Dr Buttan and subsequently in her witness  statement.
    In truth, there was no such discrepancy either in relation to how  many
    men she claimed raped her or whether she was, or was not, tortured.

22. That discrepancy was, in my judgment, self-evidently  material  to  the
    judge's adverse finding in respect of whether the  appellant  had  been
    detained and raped.  The judge made specific reference to it in para 64
    of his determination and concluded that:

         "I cannot accept that there is any real likelihood that  this  rape
         incident occurred."

    Immediately following that in para 65 the judge went on to say:

         "...  this  drastically  affects  my  view   of   the   appellant's
         credibility, and I have to conclude that  she  is  not  a  credible
         witness as a result." (my emphasis)

23. Consequently, although the judge gave a number of  other  reasons  that
    led him to doubt the appellant's credibility, I am satisfied  that  the
    "major discrepancies" (which do not exist) materially led him  to  find
    that he did not accept, even on the lower standard, that the  appellant
    had been raped.  That "drastically" affected his overall  view  of  the
    appellant's credibility  which  he  rejected  in  para  65.   That  is,
    perhaps, what might be expected if the judge rejected a central part of
    the appellant's claim namely that she had been detained  and  raped  by
    the police as a result of either her MDC profile or, as was also put to
    the judge, because of her Nigerian name (she has  a  Nigerian  husband)
    and the animosity directed against Nigerians in Zimbabwe at that time.

24. In my judgment, once the  central  plank  in  the  appellant's  account
    (namely her detention and rape) was rejected but on a basis  which  now
    cannot be sustained, I am unpersuaded that the judge would  necessarily
    have reached the same conclusion on the appellant's credibility despite
    finding other aspects of the appellant's account  (which  as  Mr  Hibbs
    submitted were largely not challenged) implausible or led him to  doubt
    the truthfulness of the appellant's account.

25. Mr Hibbs also relied upon para 66 of the judge's decision and submitted
    that, even if the adverse credibility  finding  could  not  stand,  the
    judge would, in any event, have found  against  the  appellant  on  the
    basis that he was not satisfied for other reasons that  she  was  on  a
    "wanted list".  At para 66, the judge said this:

         "66. Regardless of those conclusions, the  obvious  difficulty  for
             the appellant is that she was released by the police, which is
             at odds with the claim to be on a wanted list.   She  was  not
             arrested, or summoned to attend court; she was not required in
             some way to demonstrate her loyalty to Zanu-PF; she was simply
             allowed to leave, both by the police and subsequently  at  the
             airport.  Her claim that in a conversation in her mother  2014
             she was told that she  was  on  a  wanted  list  is  also  not
             credible, and  nothing  had  changed  since  her  leaving  the
             country to warrant this.  I find this too to be invented."

26. In my judgment, it would be wrong to place the weight upon the  judge's
    reasoning in para 66 which Mr Hibbs invited me to do.  First, it  is  a
    single  paragraph  in  a  substantial  section  of  the   determination
    beginning at para 42 and headed "conclusions" setting out  the  judge's
    findings.  The bulk of his findings is, undoubtedly, directed to making
    an adverse credibility finding which cannot stand.  Secondly, and  more
    importantly, part of the judge's reasoning in para 66 is  itself  based
    upon a conclusion that the appellant's claim to be on a wanted list "is
    also not credible".  Para 66, of course, immediately follows para 65 in
    which the judge, having rejected the  appellant's  evidence  concerning
    the rape, states that  "[t]his  drastically  affects  my  view  of  the
    appellant's  credibility".   Given  its  proximity   in   the   judge's
    reasoning,  it  is  difficult  to  exclude  the  possibility  that  his
    conclusion on the appellant's account  of  being  detained  and  raped,
    which in itself affected his view of the appellant's  credibility,  did
    not more generally factor into and influence his reasoning in  para  66
    despite his introductory phrase of "[r]egardless of those  conclusions"
    at the outset of that paragraph.  There is, in my judgment, some  merit
    in Mr Fraczyk's submissions that  the  reasoning  is,  in  effect,  too
    condensed and fails to provide reasons as to why she would  necessarily
    have been on a "wanted list" prior to her departure from Zimbabwe.

27. For these reasons, therefore, I am satisfied that the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  involved  the
    material making of a material error of law.

28. In the light of my conclusion on ground 1, it is  unnecessary  to  deal
    with the appellant's grounds 2 and 3 which Mr  Fraczyk  did  not  press
    before me.

Decision

29. For these reasons, therefore, the First-tier Tribunal materially  erred
    in law in dismissing the appellant's appeal  and  its  decision  cannot
    stand and is set aside.

30. Regrettably, as the appeal has already  been  remitted  on  a  previous
    occasion to the First-tier Tribunal, given the  nature  and  extent  of
    fact-finding required, the appropriate disposal of this  appeal  is  to
    remit it again to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo  rehearing
    before a judge other than Judge M M Thomas and Judge Fowell.




                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                              23, March 2018
