
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11888/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th July 2016                             |On 2nd August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     upper tribunal Deputy judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                     AZ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer

Anonymity

An anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal.  I  direct  that
this should continue. Rule 14  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008.
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, AZ, appeals with permission against the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge McAll) dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's refusal of 12th November 2015, to grant him asylum.

 2. In seeking permission to  appeal  the  FtT's  decision,  the  Appellant
    through his representatives, advanced one ground only; namely  that  he
    had not been given the opportunity to have  a  fair  hearing.  The  FtT
    judge who heard his appeal on 28th April 2016, refused the  Appellant's
    request for an adjournment in order to have his representative  present
    and to allow him time to bring  a  witness  to  the  hearing  and  have
    further documents translated.

Background

 3. The background to this application is as follows.  The Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Iran born 17th April 1984.  He entered the UK in 2008  on  a
    student visa and first applied for asylum on 12th February 2012.   That
    claim was refused by the Respondent on 8th March 2012 and a  subsequent
    appeal against that decision was dismissed.  An onward  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was also dismissed.

 4. On 13th March 2013, the Appellant's then representatives Parker  Rhodes
    Hickmotts wrote to the Respondent with  further  submissions,  claiming
    there was fresh evidence that had not  been  considered  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 5. The Respondent  accepted  the  claim  and  gave  consideration  to  the
    Appellant's fresh submissions.  She  then  issued  a  further  decision
    after looking at the fresh  evidence.   That  decision  is  dated  18th
    August 2015 and in it the Respondent  maintained  her  refusal  of  the
    Appellant's claim to asylum.

 6. The Appellant appealed that decision and the  appeal  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 28th April 2016.  Prior to the hearing  on  28th
    April 2016 a Case Management Review hearing took place  on  11th  April
    2016.  The Appellant was unrepresented at the Case  Management  Review,
    although his representatives Parker Rhodes  Hickmotts,  were  still  on
    record as acting for him.  It is noted  that  at  the  Case  Management
    hearing the Appellant  informed  the  judge,  that  he  was  no  longer
    pursuing his claim to asylum on the basis of his political opinion, but
    was now claiming that he was in fear of return to Iran because  of  his
    conversion to Christianity.  The Appellant informed the  judge  at  the
    Case Management hearing that he had a witness to this claim (the pastor
    of the church in which he had  been  baptised)  and  further  documents
    which needed translating and  which  related  to  his  new  claim.  The
    Appellant was warned that he must bring his witnesses,  and  translated
    versions of the documents relied upon, to  the  full  hearing  on  28th
    April.

 7. At this  point  matters  become  unclear.   Suffice  to  say  that  the
    Appellant  came  to  the  hearing  on  28th  April  2016,   without   a
    representative, without his witness and without  translated  documents.
    He asked for an adjournment, informing the  judge  that  Parker  Rhodes
    Hickmotts had come off record on 19th  April  2016,  but  that  he  had
    secured new representation, Halliday Reeves Law Firm but they had  only
    come on record on 24th April and had written to the Tribunal requesting
    an adjournment in order to have  time  to  take  instructions  get  the
    documents translated and take a statement from the witness.

 8. Judge McAll noted all of this but decided that he should  proceed  with
    the matter, after securing the Respondent's representative's consent to
    dealing with what was a  new  matter,  the  Appellant's  conversion  to
    Christianity.  After hearing evidence and  considering  matters,  Judge
    McAll went on to  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal  finding  that  the
    Appellant's conversion to Christianity was no more than  a  fabrication
    in order to bolster his claim to asylum.

 9. The Appellant appealed that decision stating that he had not been given
    the opportunity of a fair hearing and permission was granted.  Thus the
    matter comes before me.

The UT Hearing/Error of Law

10.  Mr  Hussain  appeared  on  behalf   of   the   Appellant.    Following
    representations from Mr Hussain, I am satisfied that  Judge  McAll  was
    not in possession of all the relevant information,  when  he  made  his
    decision to refuse the Appellant's adjournment.  No criticism  attaches
    to the judge for this but I am  satisfied  that  in  the  interests  of
    fairness, I am obliged to set aside what is a well structured decision.
     My reasons for this are as follows.

11.  Mr  Hussain  submitted  that  Parker  Rhodes  Hickmotts  informed  the
    Appellant that they could  no  longer  act  for  him.  So  far  as  the
    Appellant is concerned he can give no  explanation  for  this.  He  was
    perfectly happy with the way Parker Rhodes  Hickmotts  were  conducting
    his case and was surprised when they informed him that  they  had  come
    off record.  When he  attended  the  Case  Management  Review  hearing,
    Parker Rhodes Hickmotts  were  his  representatives  and  that  is  how
    matters stood. He had given them instructions that he had now converted
    to Christianity and so far as he understood they had matters in hand to
    call his witness and to get  his  documents  translated  for  the  full
    hearing on 26th April 2016.  The pastor from his church was willing  to
    attend that day.

12. Parker Rhodes did not inform the Appellant that they  were  coming  off
    record until 19th April, a week before the full hearing was due to take
    place.

13. The Appellant within two or three  days  of  19th  April,  secured  the
    services of Halliday Reeves.  However they required  time,  firstly  to
    obtain the Appellant's file and to look at the new evidence  which  was
    available.

14. The Appellant turned up at the hearing on 28th April 2016  without  his
    witness, because he was under the impression that an adjournment  would
    be granted.  He was under this impression because to date he  is  still
    unclear why Parker Rhodes came off record.

15. The judge at the hearing on 28th April,  following  representations  by
    the  Presenting  Officer  that  the  Appellant  had  "suddenly  changed
    representatives" formed the view put forward, that  the  Appellant  was
    changing his  representatives  in  order  to  delay  proceedings.   The
    judge's reasoning was understandable  because  that  is  certainly  one
    interpretation that could be made.

16. However, the information before me admits of a different interpretation
    because rather than the Appellant being the driver for  the  change  in
    his representation it seems it was the other way round.  The  Appellant
    therefore found himself in difficulty which as far as he was  concerned
    was not prompted by him and he had further evidence available, which he
    considered or believed his past representatives were dealing with.

17. In these circumstances I am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has  been
    denied the opportunity of submitting that further  additional  evidence
    which may or may not materially affect the outcome of his appeal.  That
    will of course be a matter for the findings of the next Tribunal.

18. In these circumstances I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The matter is remitted to that Tribunal for a fresh  hearing
    to take place and for the decision to be re-made.  The  hearing  should
    be before a judge other than Judge McAll.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  hereby  set  aside  for  legal
error.  The matter is remitted to that Tribunal for a fresh  rehearing  (not
Judge McAll) with no findings being preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     31 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts
