
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11227/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 June 2015                      |On 25 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     TD
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Gray & Co
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal with permission against the decision by Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Kempton dismissing this appeal on asylum and  human
    rights grounds.

 2) The appellant was born in July 1991 and is  a  national  of  DRC.   She
    arrived in the UK in August  2014  and  claimed  asylum  shortly  after
    arrival.  In DRC she  was  a  university  student  studying  commercial
    science.  The event which she claims caused her to leave  DRC  occurred
    when one day she was talking with a group of students at the  front  of
    the college.  They were discussing education and nursery fees  and  the
    lack of employment opportunities.  They  were  overheard.   The  police
    arrived and detained them.  The appellant was questioned  in  detention
    about her father, who disappeared when the appellant was aged 10, after
    the death of President Kabila.  She was ill-treated.   Her  escape  was
    arranged by a police officer who had known her father and  arrangements
    were made for her to leave the country.   The  appellant's  mother  and
    half sister reside in the UK.  The appellant's mother left DRC when the
    appellant was aged 10 and the appellant was brought up by her  maternal
    grandmother.  She claimed as soon as she left the DRC  the  police  had
    been to her grandmother asking about  her  and  her  two  siblings  who
    remain in the DRC.

 3) One of the principal issues in this appeal concerns the  findings  made
    by the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  whether  they  can  be
    sustained.  In summary it seems the judge approached the appeal in  two
    different ways.  Her first  approach  was  to  say  that  even  if  the
    appellant's account of her detention was  accepted,  her  fear  of  the
    authorities was based on a single  incident  which  occurred  when  the
    appellant was "just in the wrong place at the wrong time".   The  judge
    nevertheless observed  that  this  would  be  sufficient  to  give  the
    appellant a profile which would make her of interest to the authorities
    on return.

 4) The judge then went on to examine the credibility  of  the  appellant's
    evidence and to make an  adverse  credibility  finding,  rejecting  the
    appellant's account of the difficulties which she alleged caused her to
    leave DRC.

 5) The first ground of the application for permission to appeal  contended
    that as the judge had found the appellant's  evidence  at  the  hearing
    largely consistent with her answers at her asylum interview, and as the
    judge had accepted that the incident described by the  appellant  would
    be sufficient to give her a profile of  interest  to  the  authorities,
    then under the test of real risk or reasonable  degree  of  likelihood,
    the appeal should have been allowed.

 6) The second ground is that the judge did not properly consider the human
    rights issues in the appeal and, in particular, failed to make a proper
    decision under Article 8.

 7) In granting permission to appeal the judge considered that both grounds
    were arguable.  It was pointed out in  the  grant  of  permission  that
    there were two paragraphs numbered 42.  The first  one  was  where  the
    judge stated that if the appellant's account was accepted she would now
    have a profile of interest to the authorities.  This first paragraph 42
    appeared to contain some positive credibility findings, although  there
    was some doubt about this in view of the qualified language used.   The
    second paragraph 42  appeared  to  contain  some  negative  credibility
    findings, again with some doubt arising from the language used.

Submissions

 8) At the hearing before me, Mr Winter, for the appellant, said  that  the
    point was a narrow one.  In paragraphs 21 to 42  of  the  decision  the
    judge seemed to accept what the  appellant  said.   There  was  then  a
    second paragraph numbered 42.  In the  first  paragraph  42  the  judge
    accepted that the appellant has a profile making her of interest to the
    authorities on return.  In  the  later  paragraphs  the  judge  reached
    different findings and dismissed the appeal.   The  judge  appeared  to
    have failed to reconcile these conflicting findings.

 9) It was pointed out to Mr Winter that according  to  a  rule  24  notice
    submitted on behalf of the respondent, in the first  paragraph  42  the
    judge's use of the words "at best" showed the judge was setting out the
    position if she was to take the appellant's case at  its  highest.   In
    the subsequent paragraphs the judge went on to  make  reasoned  adverse
    credibility findings.

10) Mr Winter responded that in the first paragraph 42, when  read  fairly,
    the judge was not taking the case at its highest.  The judge  found  at
    paragraph 21 that the appellant's position was consistent.   The  judge
    had regard to the record of the asylum interview and, at paragraph  23,
    found that the appellant's account had not altered.  In the  subsequent
    paragraphs, 30-34, the judge made further comments on the evidence  and
    at paragraph 30 the judge  again  found  this  to  be  consistent.   At
    paragraph 39 the judge referred to the country guideline cases  and  at
    paragraphs 40-41 the country information, particularly in  relation  to
    the risk on return.  It was unclear how the findings then made  at  the
    first paragraph 42 could be reconciled with the  remaining  paragraphs.
    Again at paragraph 44, in finding that the appellant's account was  not
    credible, the judge nevertheless repeated that the appellant  had  been
    consistent throughout her claim.

11) Mr Winter submitted  that  if  there  were  two  ways  of  reading  the
    decision, then regard should be had to the standard of  proof  and  the
    benefit of the doubt should be given to the appellant.  It was the more
    favourable reading of the decision  which  should  be  taken.   If  the
    findings made were unclear then this supported the appellant's position
    that there was an error of law arising from the  conflicting  findings.
    The appeal should be remitted for rehearing for clear  findings  to  be
    made.

12) For the respondent  Mrs  O'Brien  submitted  that  the  two  paragraphs
    numbered 42 were clearly the result  of  a  typing  error.   The  first
    paragraph 42 was superfluous to the  decision.   In  the  decision  the
    judge gave a clear critique of the evidence.  Although  there  were  no
    major  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence  there  was  no   independent
    verification.  The judge accepted that there were problems  in  general
    in the DRC but it was not accepted that this appellant was arrested and
    detained in the circumstances she claimed.  The judge did  not  require
    corroboration but was entitled to question why supporting evidence  was
    not available.  Up to  paragraph  42  the  judge  was  laying  out  the
    evidence.   In  the  first  paragraph  42  the  judge's  findings  were
    qualified by words such as "however" and "at best".   There  were  also
    multiple references to the word "if".  The judge then  found  that  the
    appellant had had no problems in DRC.  It was unbelievable that she had
    been helped by the church and by a benevolent police officer.

13) With regard to Article 8 it was not clear how a sustainable  Article  8
    case would arise.  The appellant had been in the UK for  only  a  short
    time - just over 6 months at the date of decision.

14) In response Mr Winter said that he was not pursing the Article 8 point.

Discussion

15) I accept Mrs O'Brien's point that the two paragraphs numbered 42 amount
    to no more than a typing error and as  such  this  is  of  no  material
    significance.  It is unfortunate that the two paragraphs 42  appear  to
    be the hinge on which the whole decision turns but this is no more than
    a coincidence arising from the faulty numbering.

16) The respondent's position is that the first paragraph  42  is  no  more
    than an assessment by the judge of what the appellant's position  would
    be if the case was taken at its highest.  There is some merit  in  this
    argument, for the reasons expressed very ably by  Mrs  O'Brien  in  her
    submission.  There is one observation in paragraph 42,  however,  which
    gives pause for thought.  This is the acknowledgement by the judge that
    if the incident described by the appellant had occurred, then she would
    on return have a profile of interest to  the  authorities.   Given  the
    country information set out by  the  judge  at  paragraphs  40-41,  the
    existence of this profile might be sufficient to put the  appellant  at
    risk on return.

17) With this in mind, it was crucial for the judge then to  give  adequate
    and valid reasons for rejecting  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    evidence.  The  judge  found  no  significant  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's evidence.  There were, however, other factors which weighed
    against the appellant.  The strongest of these was the judge's  finding
    that the appellant had lived "peaceably" in the DRC since 2001 and  had
    not been harassed in this period for details of  her  father's  or  her
    mother's whereabouts.  This is a matter the judge was entitled to  take
    into account.  The judge then states that she considers  it  "unlikely"
    that the appellant would  have  been  assisted  to  leave  DRC  by  the
    Catholic Church.  She comments that the appellant was  not  a  Catholic
    and there was no country information indicating that this was something
    which regularly would be done.   The  judge  also  states  that  it  is
    "unlikely" that a police officer  would  recall  being  helped  by  the
    appellant's father and want to help her in return.  In relation to  the
    event described by the appellant as leading to her detention, the judge
    states:  "The more I consider her account, the more I consider that  it
    is more likely that this event did not occur."

18) This last finding is somewhat puzzling given that at paragraph  37  the
    judge appears to accept, as it appears to have  been  accepted  in  the
    refusal letter, that the authorities arrest people in DRC who speak out
    against the government.  The judge then  further  states  in  the  same
    paragraph:

         "However, she is a university student who  explained  that  in  her
         classes discussions about  current  affairs  issues  were  promoted
         within the confines of the university walls and  those  discussions
         often spilled out into the time after class in public  areas  where
         anyone could overhear.  It was clear that she and her  friends  had
         genuine concerns for certain situations in the DRC and did not hold
         back in voicing those concerns in a  public  place.    She  assumes
         that plain clothes police were in the area and overheard.  She said
         that such persons can also be within the university itself."

19) Further, at paragraph 41 the judge stated:

         "Security  personnel  sometimes  arrested  and  detained  perceived
         opponents and critics of the  government,  occasionally  under  the
         pretext of state security.  According to page 9, the law  prohibits
         insulting the head of  state,  malicious  and  public  slander  and
         language  presumed  to  threaten  national  security.   Freedom  of
         assembly was sometimes restricted."

20) Considering the judge's summary of the relevant country information, it
    does seem surprising that she should  then  conclude  that  the  events
    giving rise to the appellant's supposed detention were  not  likely  to
    have taken place.  Given the lack of significant inconsistencies in the
    appellant's  evidence  together  with  the  content  of   the   country
    information, it is not at all clear on what reasoning the  judge  based
    this finding.

21) The judge commented on  the  lack  of  evidence  from  the  appellant's
    grandmother or siblings in DRC or from the appellant's  mother  in  the
    UK, who ought to have been in a position to  give  evidence  about  any
    involvement in politics  by  the  appellant's  father.   I  accept  Mrs
    O'Brien's submission that the judge was entitled to draw  attention  to
    these apparent omissions from the evidence.  Nevertheless, I think that
    Mr Winter made a strong point in stating that up to the first paragraph
    42 the judge appeared to accept the appellant's account but then in the
    paragraphs beginning with the second paragraph 42 up  to  paragraph  44
    the judge rejected this account on the basis of reasons which appear to
    conflict with the judge's earlier reasoning.

22) In my view it is not  only  conflicting  reasons  which  give  rise  to
    concern about the judge's findings but a lack of reasoning  in  respect
    of some of those findings, particularly in the second paragraph 42.

23) On this basis, I do not consider  that  the  judge's  findings  can  be
    sustained.  The conflicting reasoning and the lack of reasoning  amount
    to an error of law such that the decision should be set aside.  In view
    of the extent of fact finding required,  I  consider  that  the  proper
    course is that sought Mr Winter,  namely  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be re-made at a
    hearing before a different judge, with no findings preserved.

Conclusions

24) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

25) I set aside the decision.

26) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a further hearing
    before a different judge  for  the  decision  to  be  re-made  with  no
    findings by the original judge preserved.

Anonymity

27) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for  anonymity.   As  the
    appeal is to be remitted and reheard, I consider  that  such  an  order
    should be made at least until  the  First-tier  Tribunal  re-makes  the
    decision.  Accordingly, I make an order in the following terms.  Unless
    a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst others, all
    parties.  Any failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
