
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11890/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3rd May 2016                          |On 18th May 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                FAKIR HAMAIMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott of Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. We shall continue to refer to the parties as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal, this matter having reached the Upper Tribunal  following
    the grant of permissions to appeal to both the Secretary of  State  and
    the appellant.

Background

 2. This appeal first came before the Upper Tribunal on 1st  February  2016
    when permission had been granted to the respondent  to  appeal  against
    the human rights element of the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal J S Law in  which  he  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection grounds but allowed it on human rights grounds.
     At the first hearing in the Upper Tribunal  representatives  indicated
    that the appellant had also  submitted  an  application  for  leave  to
    appeal against the First-tier Judge's decision to  dismiss  the  asylum
    and humanitarian protection claims  but  this  appeared  to  have  been
    overlooked by the Tribunal.  The Upper Tribunal hearing was, therefore,
    adjourned  in  order  that  the  appellant's   application   could   be
    considered.  Permission was granted to the appellant  on  2nd  February
    2016.

 3. The matter therefore came before  us  on  the  basis  that  there  were
    arguable  errors  of  law  in  respect  of  the  asylum,   humanitarian
    protection and human rights decisions.

Grounds and submissions

 4. The grounds of application by the respondent contend that the  approach
    to  the  Article   8   assessment   is   flawed   because   "compelling
    circumstances" not recognised by the Immigration  Rules  had  not  been
    identified before the judge proceeded to consider human  rights  issues
    outside those Rules.   In  particular  the  First-tier  Judge  had  not
    identified circumstances which would lead  to  an  unjustifiably  harsh
    outcome, an approach which was endorsed by the Court of Appeal in Singh
    [2015] EWCA Civ 74.  The grounds  further  contend  that  the  Tribunal
    failed to consider the statutorily relevant considerations set  out  in
    Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended) when assessing the proportionality of  the  Article  8  claim.
    Weight should not have been given to a private life established when  a
    person's immigration status was precarious or unlawful.  Permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis  of  this  latter
    aspect of the grounds.

 5. As to the appellant's grounds of application these take issue with  the
    judge's  reliance  upon  reasons  given  in  an  earlier  decision   of
    Designated Judge Coates which had been predicated upon the rejection of
    the appellant's  Iraqi  nationality  when  such  nationality  had  been
    accepted at the hearing before Judge Law.  Further it  is  argued  that
    the judge failed to engage with the substance  of  expert  reports  put
    before him, particularly that of  Dr  Alan  George,  covering  relevant
    matters relating  to  family  support,  kidnapping,  general  violence,
    adequacy of protection and internal flight.

 6. Permission was granted to  the  appellant  because  it  was  considered
    arguable that the decision, notably in paragraphs  22  and  23,  showed
    that Judge Law had reached his conclusions about credibility because of
    the findings of Designated  Judge  Coates  but  without  conducting  an
    analysis of his own and overlooking the fact that the earlier  decision
    had been based upon an adverse finding of nationality  when  Judge  Law
    accepted that the  appellant  was  an  Iraqi  national.   It  was  also
    considered arguable that the judge had failed to have proper regard  to
    the expert evidence.

 7. At the hearing before us Mr Draycott contended that  the  human  rights
    decision should stand.  He submitted that the factual background to the
    appellant's claims was relevant: the appellant had left  Iraq  when  he
    was 6 years of age but did not arrive in the United  Kingdom  until  he
    was 13.  There was no evidence that  the  appellant  had  contact  with
    anyone in Iraq.  Additionally, the appellant's  application  to  remain
    was made in time during the period of concessionary  leave  granted  to
    him.  He emphasised that, at the date of hearing before the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the appellant was only two months away from having spent  six
    years' discretionary leave in this country which, with reference to the
    respondent's policy, would have  given  an  entitlement  to  indefinite
    leave to remain. The appellant now spoke fluent English and was working
    as a paid apprentice even if currently off sick.  Mr Draycott suggested
    that the judge had shown, in paragraphs 14 and 20, that he was aware of
    the precariousness of the appellant's position and  also  had  shown  a
    grasp of evidence relevant to the factors set out in Section 117B.   He
    asserted that there was enough in the decision to enable the  judge  to
    reach a favourable conclusion on human rights issues.

 8. Mr McVeety submitted that the reference to precariousness had not  been
    built into the judge's proportionality  decision.   He  also  commented
    that the judge had failed to consider the  application  of  the  Rules,
    particularly private life under paragraph 276ADE.  The judge had worked
    on the erroneous assumption that the Rules did not apply.

Error on a point of law

 9. After considering the matter for a few moments,  we  decided  that  the
    decision showed the errors on points of law identified in  the  grounds
    and that, in view of the need to re-hear the appeal on all  issues,  it
    would be appropriate to remit it for hearing afresh before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  sitting  at  Stoke.   In  reaching  that  conclusion  we
    satisfied ourselves that the provisions  of  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the
    Practice Statements of the Senior President  of  Tribunals  dated  25th
    September 2012 had application.  The reasons for  our  conclusions  now
    follow.

10. The decision to reject the asylum and humanitarian protection  decision
    was reached by Judge  Law  after  placing  reliance  upon  the  earlier
    decision of  Designated  Judge  Coates  applying  Devaseelan  guidance.
    However, that approach was flawed because the First-tier Judge  appears
    to have overlooked the fact that Designated Judge  Coates  reached  his
    adverse credibility findings on a  different  evidential  basis  namely
    that the appellant had not shown that he was from Iraq.  Yet Judge  Law
    found (paragraph 31) that the appellant is  an  Iraqi  national.   That
    conclusion also contradicts the finding of the judge  at  paragraph  22
    that he had "heard nothing that would challenge  the  decision  of  the
    previous judge".

11. Additionally, whilst Judge Law was clearly aware of the expert evidence
    from both Dr George and Julia Guest he appears to have  overlooked  the
    fact (paragraph 30) that Dr George's report had not been  submitted  at
    the earlier hearing before Designated Judge  Coates.   So,  whilst  the
    decision of the Designated Judge Coates  was  a  start  point,  it  was
    incumbent upon Judge Law to give detailed consideration to Dr  George's
    report before placing reliance on the  earlier  decision  in  order  to
    reach his adverse credibility findings.  This was evidently not done as
    there is no detailed reference to expert evidence in any  part  of  the
    findings of the judge from  paragraph  20  onwards.   The  decision  in
    relation to the asylum and  humanitarian  protection  claims  therefore
    contains material errors on points of law.

12. As to the submission by Mr Draycott that the human rights decision  can
    stand we conclude that this, also, is flawed.   The  approach  to  such
    claims, as recommended by the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA
    Civ 387, was not followed  by  the  judge  in  order  to  identify  any
    compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently   recognised   under   the
    Immigration Rules to justify a grant of leave to  remain.   The  proper
    approach is always to first identify the  substantive  content  of  the
    relevant Immigration  Rules  to  see  if  a  claimant  satisfies  those
    conditions and to assess the force of the public interest expressed  in
    the Rules.  The judge failed to  consider  whether,  for  example,  the
    provisions  of  paragraph  276ADE  might   apply   to   the   appellant
    particularly under sub-paragraph (vi) on the basis that there would  be
    significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration  into  Iraq  if
    required to leave the UK.

13. We do not agree  with  Mr  Draycott's  contention  that,  although  not
    referred to specifically, the judge considered the factors set  out  in
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  Although, in that respect,  Mr  Draycott
    places reliance upon  the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Dube
    (Ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC), the decision does not show that
    the judge had, actually, applied the relevant factors in  Section  117B
    before  reaching  his   decision   on   human   rights   issues.    The
    precariousness of the appellant's position is not addressed.   On  this
    basis the human rights decision also shows an error on a point of  law.



Notice of Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows errors on points  of  law
    such that it should be re-made.  It is appropriate,  having  regard  to
    the Practice Statements of the Senior President of  Tribunals  of  25th
    September 2012 at paragraph 7.2, that the appeal should be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh. That is because of the need
    for the evidence to be heard again and fresh findings reached upon it.

Anonymity

15. Anonymity was not  requested  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  nor  was  a
    direction made by the First-tier Tribunal. We do not consider  that  an
    anonymity direction is appropriate.

DIRECTIONS

 1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Stoke  for
    hearing afresh on a date to be specified by the Resident Judge.

 2. The hearing should not take place before Judge J S  Law  or  Designated
    Judge Coates.

 3. The time estimate for the hearing is three hours.

 4. No interpreter will be required for the hearing unless  representatives
    indicate to the contrary.


Signed                              Date 18th May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garrett
