
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/11394/2015
                                                               AA/11397/2015
                                                               AA/11401/2015
                                                               AA/11403/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 November 2016                   |On 29 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                     VR
                                     KO
                                     RO
                                     RO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms M Knorr, Counsel, instructed by Southwark Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




    Background

 1. The first appellant in this case, Ms VR, is a citizen  of  Nigeria  and
    the second to fourth appellants are her children, two daughters  and  a
    son, who are minors.  The appellants appealed against a decision,  made
    by the respondent on 7 August 2013, to refuse to grant  asylum.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 25 July 2016 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Herlihy  dismissed  the  appellants'  appeal  on  asylum  grounds,   on
    humanitarian protection grounds and under the Immigration Rules.  Judge
    Herlihy allowed the appellants' appeal on human rights  grounds,  under
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

 2. I refer to my Decision and Reasons, appended to this decision, heard at
    Field House on 5 October 2016 and promulgated on 20 October  2016.   In
    that  decision  I  dismissed  the  respondent's  appeal  against  Judge
    Herlihy's Article 8 decision for the reasons set out.  I also set aside
    Judge Herlihy's decision in  relation  to  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds Article 3.

    The Hearing

 3. That decision comes before me to  be  remade.   At  the  hearing  on  9
    November Ms Knorr confirmed the position, as set out on 5 October 2016,
    that the first appellant is not fit to give evidence  for  the  reasons
    set out in the second expert report of Dr Susan Fairweather, consultant
    psychiatrist.   In  her  second  report  dated  28  September  2016  Dr
    Fairweather confirmed at paragraph 7.6.1 that although in her report of
    17 June 2016 she was of the view that the first appellant  was  fit  to
    give evidence, in light of her most recent assessment she changed  this
    opinion and for the reasons set out believed that the appellant was not
    fit to give evidence.  Mr Tarlow confirmed at the outset  that  he  was
    not seeking  to  challenge  this  assessment.   Although  therefore  Dr
    Fairweather had helpfully  attended  the  Upper  Tribunal,  both  on  5
    October 2016 and 9 November 2016, it was not  necessary  to  hear  oral
    evidence.

 4. The hearing proceeded by way of submissions only and these are set  out
    in full in the Record  of  Proceedings.  The  documentation  before  me
    included the respondent's bundle in the  usual  form,  the  appellant's
    consolidated bundle, together with additional  case  law  and  guidance
    relied on and a skeleton argument.  I considered all the  evidence  and
    information before me even if not referred to  specifically  below.  At
    the end of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give.

    Preliminary Issue

 5. The respondent in the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  dated  5
    August 2016 had argued that the second to fourth appellants,  three  of
    the first appellant's four children, did not have rights of  appeal  as
    there had been no rejection of their claim, for the purposes of Section
    82 of the 2002 Act as amended by the Immigration Act  2014.However,  Mr
    Tarlow indicated at the outset of the hearing that the second to fourth
    appellants did have a right of appeal under Section 82 of the 2002 Act.



 6. On 28 October 2014 the first appellant and her three  children  claimed
    asylum.  I  note  that  the  first  appellant's  screening  and  asylum
    interview specifically indicates that the first appellant was  claiming
    not only on her own behalf but also for her children.  For example,  at
    question 4.2 of the screening interview, the appellant  when  asked  to
    briefly explain why she could not return to her home  country  referred
    to her own circumcision and that if she returned "my two daughters will
    be circumcised".

 7. Additionally in the screening interview (continuation  sheet  A12)  the
    first appellant when asked if there was anything further she wanted  to
    add referred to the fact that she had come to the UK  "around  thirteen
    years ago" for "sex work" and that she did not  "want  my  children  to
    suffer like I did.  I have  been  through  horrible  things".   In  the
    substantive asylum interview the appellant again, including at question
    155, indicated that she feared for  her  daughters  "because  they  are
    going to be cut".  Additionally she indicated that "my boy  because  of
    his special language he will be labelled and  ostracised".   The  first
    appellant went on to provide further details in relation  to  what  she
    alleged were difficulties for her children on return to Nigeria.

 8. I note on 19 November 2014, prior to that substantive asylum  interview
    the appellant's solicitors wrote to the respondent  in  response  to  a
    Section 120 notice.  This letter indicated that the first appellant and
    her then three children (the fourth child, who it is  not  disputed  is
    not an appellant, was not yet born at this stage) relied on a number of
    additional grounds in relation to 'risks on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds', The letter set out, inter alia, the risk  of  Female  Genital
    Mutilation (FGM) to the first appellant's two daughters and the risk to
    her son in relation  to  his  developmental  delay.   In  addition  the
    appellant's  representatives  then  submitted  further  representations
    following the interview detailing the asylum and human  rights  grounds
    for each of the four appellants.

 9. I note and it was not disputed  by  Mr  Tarlow  that  the  respondent's
    decision refusing the asylum  and  human  rights  claim  addressed  the
    claims in relation to all of the appellants.

10. Whilst the respondent at the error of law hearing initially  sought  to
    rely on the fact that notices were  issued  to  the  second  to  fourth
    appellants stating that they did not have a right  of  appeal  as  they
    were dependants,  Mr  Tarlow  did  not  dispute  before  me  that  each
    appellant had made an asylum and human  rights  claim  which  had  been
    refused and therefore had a statutory appeal under Section  82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.

11. Despite these notices the four appellants all lodged grounds of  appeal
    which were accepted.  Mr Tarlow did not dispute the argument that  this
    situation was analogous to that in Abiyat & Ors (rights of appeal) Iran
    [2011] UKUT 00314 (IAC), a decision of the Vice President, Mr Ockelton.
     Although that was in relation to the rights of appeal under Section 83
    of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  there  are
    parallels to the amended Section 82.

12. I accept the argument that the jurisdiction  does  not  come  from  the
    notices themselves but rather  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  in
    actuality refused protection claims that had  been  made  by  all  four
    appellants.

    The Respondent's Case

13. The refusal addressed to  the  first  appellant  dated  7  August  2015
    accepted that the appellants are Nigerian  nationals.   The  respondent
    detailed that the appellant had travelled to the  UK  from  Nigeria  by
    plane, using false documents on an unknown date  in  2000.   The  first
    appellant then returned  to  Nigeria  using  false  documents.   On  19
    February 2007 the first appellant was granted a visa to enter to the UK
    valid until 19 August 2007.  On 13 August 2007 she was  issued  with  a
    visit visa valid until 13 August 2009.   The  first  appellant  arrived
    again in the UK on 8 November 2007 before returning  to  Nigeria  after
    approximately  three  months.   In  April  2008  the  first   appellant
    travelled to the UK again flying to Gatwick Airport on  a  valid  visit
    visa.  On 10 December 2009 the first appellant  applied  for  leave  to
    remain as a dependent spouse.  This  was  rejected  with  no  right  of
    appeal on 30 March 2010.  On 30 March 2010 the first appellant  applied
    for leave to remain as a dependent spouse again which was refused  with
    no right of appeal on 30  March  2011.   On  2  April  2012  the  first
    appellant applied for leave to remain under the family and private life
    Rule which was again refused with no right of appeal on 13  June  2013.
    On 28 October 2014 the first appellant attended an appointment to raise
    an asylum claim.  On 15 April 2015 a referral was made to the  National
    Referral Mechanism in  order  for  a  competent  authority  to  make  a
    decision as to whether the first appellant was a victim of trafficking.

    The Competent Authority Decision

14. The decision was dated 17 July 2015 although I accept that it  was  not
    received by the appellant or her representatives  at  that  time.   The
    conclusive grounds decision accepted that there were reasonable grounds
    to believe that the appellant was a potential  victim  of  trafficking.
    Following on from the reasonable grounds decision of 15  April  2015  a
    conclusive grounds decision was made and it  was  considered  that  the
    appellant's   account   was   internally   consistent   but    remained
    uncorroborated.

15. However, the decision went on to consider that the first appellant  did
    not recall either when she arrived or the year she returned to  Nigeria
    and there was no supporting evidence of her entry or departure from the
    UK before  26  April  2007.   It  was  therefore  considered  that  the
    appellant had provided insufficient evidence to support  her  claim  to
    the required standard of proof that she was recruited by  deception  or
    that force was used and that she worked to pay her debt off.   Although
    the first appellant had claimed that she was held against her will  and
    forced to work as a prostitute after arriving in the UK to pay off  the
    cost of her journey to the UK it was  not  considered  that  there  was
    sufficient evidence to support this claim.

16. It was acknowledged that the first appellant continued to  be  provided
    with help in the UK as to her mental health and wellbeing  in  relation
    to the deaths of her sister and mother and the traumatic  circumstances
    in Nigeria.  However, none of the medical letters or notes referred  to
    her being a victim of sexual exploitation in the UK.  It was  therefore
    considered that there was insufficient evidence to support her claim to
    the required standard and a negative decision was made.

    Protection Claim Refusal

17. In the reasons for refusal it was considered that the first appellant's
    claim that her daughters would be at risk of FGM and that her son would
    be accused of witchcraft was accepted  as  potentially  falling  within
    membership of a particular social group.

18. The respondent  relied  on  the  Conclusive  Grounds  decision  of  the
    Competent Authority dated 17 July 2015 and shared the  conclusion  that
    the first appellant was not a victim of trafficking and  rejected  this
    allegation.  The respondent further  did  not  accept  that  the  first
    appellant had been subjected to female genital mutilation as  a  child.
    The respondent noted that the appellant had provided different  details
    in the visa applications in relation to her  circumstances  in  Nigeria
    and it was considered that she had provided an inconsistent account.

19. The respondent also considered that the first appellant arrived in  the
    UK for the last time in 2008 but did not claim asylum until 5  November
    2014 and had made  a  number  of  immigration  applications.   However,
    despite the fact that her daughter was born in 2008 and her son in 2011
    she did not claim asylum until 2015 and it was  considered  that  there
    was no reasonable explanation for this delay.  The respondent  was  not
    satisfied that the general credibility of the first appellant had  been
    established.  It was not accepted therefore that she had been a  victim
    of trafficking, nor that her daughters were at risk  of  FGM.   It  was
    further not accepted that her son would be accused  of  witchcraft  and
    the  respondent  noted  that  there  was  no   adequate   evidence   to
    substantiate this claim.

    The Law

20. To qualify for international protection, the appellants must  meet  the
    requirements of the 2006 Regulations and the provisions set out in  the
    Immigration Rules as amended, both of which implement Council Directive
    2004/83/EC (the Directive) on minimum standards for  the  qualification
    and status of third country nationals or stateless persons, as refugees
    or as persons who otherwise  need  international  protection,  and  the
    content of the protection granted.  Paragraphs 339I to 339N set out the
    conditions attached to the assessment of  applications,  which  I  have
    applied to this case.

    The Burden and Standard of Proof

21. In coming to a decision I  must  consider  firstly  the  Home  Office's
    decision to refuse the appellants asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    and secondly whether such a refusal would  lead  to  a  breach  of  the
    European Convention of Human Rights Articles 2 or 3.  I will take  each
    part in turn.

22. The burden of proof is on the appellants to establish their case.   The
    standard of proof is not a high one.  It is lower than the normal civil
    standard.  The appellants must show there is a real risk of:

    (a)  being persecuted for one of the five grounds set out in  the  1951
         Refugee  Convention  and  defined  in  Regulation  6  of  the  2006
         Regulations.  A refugee is defined as any person  who  owing  to  a
         well-founded fear of persecution for  reasons  of  race,  religion,
         nationality, membership of a particular social group, or  political
         opinion, is outside of  the  country  of  his  nationality  and  is
         unable, or owing to such fear unwilling, to avail  herself  of  the
         protection of that country; or

    (b)  suffering serious harm if returned to their country, as defined in
         paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules; or

    (c)  being subjected to torture,  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or
         punishment under Article 3 of the 1951 Human Rights  Convention  or
         being treated in such a way as  would  breach  Article  2  of  that
         Convention which protects the right to life.

    The Appellants' Case and Findings of Fact

23. The first appellant was born on 11 July 1973 and  is  from  the  Yoruba
    tribe.  She is from Lagos Island in Nigeria.  She had a brother  and  a
    sister, her brother living in South Africa and she has  indicated  that
    her sister died in 2011; her father died in 2003 and  her  mother  also
    died in 2011.

24. It is the appellant's case that when she was aged  10  or  11  she  was
    subjected to FGM.  Although this was not accepted  by  the  respondent,
    the first appellant provided evidence  including  medical  evidence  in
    relation to FGM.  The latter was in  the  form  of  a  letter  from  Dr
    Comfort Momoh of Guy's and St Thomas' NHS  Trust  dated  8  July  2016,
    which confirmed that the first appellant had been examined  on  1  July
    and that the lower part of the right  labia  majora  appeared  missing,
    consistent with FGM type 2a (World Health  Organisation  classification
    2016).  Mr Tarlow acknowledged this evidence which, although  it  post-
    dated the refusal letter, he  did  not  dispute.   I  accept  that  the
    appellant has been a victim of FGM.  I  have  considered  this  in  the
    round.

25. As noted above, one of the respondent's  main  concerns  was  that  the
    details provided in the visa  applications  for  the  first  appellant,
    including that she was a managing director in Nigeria and that she  had
    a husband and child there, were inconsistent with her  claim  that  she
    had been forced to work as a prostitute in Nigeria.  However, the first
    appellant has consistently claimed  that  following  FGM  she  suffered
    sexual abuse and that she moved to another area of Lagos  and  resorted
    to supporting herself through prostitution to survive.

26. It was the appellant's case that in around 2000/2001 whilst working  as
    a prostitute she was given the "opportunity" to go to London where  she
    was told she could stop being a prostitute and  could  get  a  job  and
    continue her  education.   She  was  told  that  her  travel  would  be
    arranged.  The appellant arrived in the UK with two other  girls  where
    they were forced to work as prostitutes.  The first appellant has given
    a number of, what I  find  to  be,  relatively  consistent  details  in
    relation to her experiences in being trafficked to the UK and forced to
    work as a prostitute.

27. I note that Mr Tarlow, although he relied on the  refusal  letter,  did
    not seek to make any adverse credibility submissions in relation to the
    first appellant, other than maintaining that the appellant had  delayed
    in making her asylum claim.

28. Although I accept that the details on her visa application clearly  did
    not match her account, I am satisfied that this is entirely  consistent
    with an individual being trafficked to the UK who would evidently  have
    no control over the manner of that travel or what was said in  relation
    to her alleged intention in making the journey to the UK.

29. In taking account of all of the evidence I  have  considered  that  the
    first appellant is a vulnerable witness in accordance  with  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 and although I accept that  she
    was not physically or  mentally  fit  to  give  evidence  before  me  I
    nevertheless must be guided by the Presidential guidance when assessing
    the first appellant's evidence, including that being  aware  that  some
    forms of disability cause or result in impaired  memory  and  that  the
    order and manner in which evidence is given may be affected by  mental,
    psychological or emotional trauma or disability (paragraph 10.3).

30. There was no challenge by  Mr  Tarlow  to  the  very  detailed  medical
    evidence that was before me, including from Dr Fairweather in the  form
    of her two reports.   In  her  first  report  dated  17  June  2016  Dr
    Fairweather confirmed  that  the  first  appellant  is  suffering  from
    complex posttraumatic stress disorder with  associated  panic  attacks,
    consequent to multiple traumatic events and major depressive  disorder.
    It was Dr Fairweather's expert opinion that as a result of the multiple
    traumas that the first appellant has suffered  she  is  in  a  "chronic
    traumatised state".

31. Although  the  conclusive  grounds  decision  drew  adverse  inference,
    including from  the  first  appellant's  failure  to  recall  when  she
    actually arrived in the UK and when she returned  to  Nigeria,  I  have
    taken  into  consideration  the  medical  evidence  together  with  the
    consistent reports from  the  professionals  involved  with  the  first
    appellant including: Peter Horrocks, a social  worker  who  provided  a
    report dated 15 June 2016; Dr Masoud from the Community  Mental  Health
    team, who had provided a review dated 29 December 2015; Dr Kenyon,  who
    in a letter dated 14 March 2012 referred to the first appellant's  loss
    of her mother having "stirred up thoughts about traumatic incidents  in
    her past in Nigeria, relating to events which she had not thought about
    for a long time"; the report of Carol Bloomer, Community Mental  Health
    Nurse dated 15 August 2012 in which it was recorded that the  appellant
    had stated she had come to the UK "around twelve years ago".  The first
    appellant had provided some details in relation  to  her  circumstances
    and the first appellant had spoken of a "difficult childhood in Nigeria
    where she witness violence and was herself a  victim  of  violence  and
    abuse"; Dr Parmar in a letter dated 21 October 2014 indicated that  the
    first appellant presented with a history of depressive episodes.

32. Although the appellant's recall of dates in  relation  to  her  initial
    trafficking from Nigeria and her return there  is  not  clear  and  the
    appellant  did  not  make  a  full  disclosure  to  all   the   medical
    professional who were working with her over the years,  I  accept  that
    there is a clear pattern that the appellant  was  in  difficulties  and
    clearly attributed those difficulties, in her dealings with  healthcare
    and  other  professionals,  to  her  traumatic  past.   Dr  Fairweather
    confirmed that the  first  appellant's  avoidance  of  the  issues  and
    failure to disclose specific information in relation  to  exactly  what
    had happened to her at an earlier stage is entirely consistent with her
    mental health consequent to  those  experiences.   Mr  Tarlow  did  not
    dispute and I  accept  Dr  Fairweather's  explanation  that  there  are
    significant barriers to full disclosure and  that  further  disclosures
    are likely particularly in relation to the first appellant's experience
    of forced prostitution.

33. Dr Fairweather went on to state that  the  first  appellant's  specific
    psychological presentation and symptoms were highly consistent with her
    claimed history.  It was Dr Fairweather's impression that her  clinical
    presentation was consistent with her stated history of  trauma  over  a
    period of time.  I have taken into consideration that  Dr  Fairweather,
    in her detailed and comprehensive reports, also specifically considered
    whether Ms Roberts had been feigning or exaggerating  her  account  and
    symptoms.  However, Dr Fairweather was of the professional opinion that
    it would have been "virtually impossible" for the  first  appellant  to
    fabricate this kind of presentation over time, especially her level  of
    distress, anxiety with panic attacks and depressed mood.

34. Dr Fairweather was of the view that the most likely cause of the  first
    appellant's psychiatric disorders  was  the  significant  interpersonal
    traumas she has described including FGM, her beatings, rape, the  death
    of an acquaintance and her forced prostitution, followed by the  sudden
    death of her mother, sister and her current situation in  the  UK.   Dr
    Fairweather was candid that she  could  not  definitely  attribute  the
    exact cause of the trauma leading to her specific Post Traumatic Stress
    Disorder (PTSD) although Dr Fairweather "would not expect to  see  this
    presentation in  someone  who  had  not  experienced  multiple  serious
    traumas".  Dr Fairweather also specifically considered  that  the  PTSD
    symptoms could not be explained by factors  such  as  "migration  to  a
    foreign country, poverty or the death of her mother  and  sister  alone
    (although I believe those deaths could contribute to her trauma)".

35. Dr Fairweather noted that particular aspects of the  first  appellant's
    symptoms were highly consistent with  suffering  sexual  trauma,  these
    included the first appellant's description of struggling with a  sexual
    relationship, her need to wear a bra during sex and  her  avoidance  of
    lying down.  This related to the trigger of lying down both to enforced
    FGM and  prostitution.   In  Dr  Fairweather's  clinical  experience  a
    description of a trigger of this kind gives "high clinical plausibility
    to the traumatic experiences she has described".  Dr  Fairweather  went
    on to state that in her professional clinical opinion it  was  not  one
    that would  be  readily  understood  or  identified  unless  the  first
    appellant had  actually  experienced  traumas  such  as  the  ones  she
    described and that it would be difficult to know this specific  trigger
    and develop a way to avoid it.  Dr Fairweather went on to conclude that
    being involved in consensual sex work would not cause these symptoms.

36. I have also taken into account in the round that the first  appellant's
    account of her history is plausible according  to  the  country  expert
    report of Ms Ariyo.  I note that Ms Ariyo detailed her  experience  and
    work in relation to a number of issues including human trafficking.  Ms
    Ariyo considered and reviewed the first appellant's account of her life
    in Nigeria, the effects of FGM  and  her  life  after  this  experience
    together with her further experiences of rape and prostitution.

37. Ms Ariyo provided background country information references to  support
    her expert opinion that the first appellant's account was plausible  in
    light of the expert's knowledge of Nigeria.

38. Although the respondent relied heavily on the  first  appellant  having
    made a very late claim for asylum at the same  time  I  note  that  the
    respondent accepted that the first appellant had made a genuine  effort
    to substantiate her claim and that all material factors at her disposal
    had been submitted.  The first appellant has maintained in her detailed
    witness statement, which is supported by the various  reports  provided
    in support of her appeal, that she did not fully understand the grounds
    on which she could qualify for asylum.

39. This is dealt with in some considerable detail in the first appellant's
    witness statement dated 14 June 2016.  This  included  that  the  first
    appellant had heard of asylum and had heard of people being returned to
    Nigeria and she did not realise that asylum  was  an  option  for  her.
    Initially she had been in a long-term relationship and  was  trying  to
    get on with her life and regularise her leave.  It was  not  until  her
    children were slightly older and she was pregnant again that she  began
    to become more depressed and concerned about the fate of her children.

40. At this point, initially she felt that her grounds for claiming  asylum
    were that her children would be at risk of rape and abuse if they  were
    returned to Nigeria.  Although she knew about  FGM  her  mind  was  not
    focused on this.   It  was  not  until  she  attended  a  talk  at  her
    daughter's school in relation to FGM and that this was against the  law
    that the first appellant began to take  advice  and  realise  that  she
    could apply for asylum including in  relation  to  her  fears  for  her
    daughters.

41. I accept in the context of everything that has occurred  to  the  first
    appellant including that she has been subjected to  FGM  and  that  the
    medical and other reports are supportive of the first appellant  having
    been subject to significant trauma, that it is credible that she  might
    not have applied for asylum earlier than she did.  I  have  also  taken
    into consideration in assessing the appellant's actions that she  is  a
    vulnerable adult.

42. I note that the respondent accepted that the first appellant's  account
    of undergoing FGM and her consequent fear of her  daughters  undergoing
    FGM  was  consistent,  although  this  was  rejected  because  it   was
    unsubstantiated.  As noted above, the first appellant has now  provided
    evidence that she has been subject to FGM and this was not disputed  by
    Mr Tarlow.

43. I have also taken into consideration that the first appellant's account
    of the traumatic circumstances surrounding this circumcision  had  been
    detailed and consistent and, as  set  out  by  Ms  Ariyo,  her  account
    accords with the background country information in relation to cultural
    considerations amongst Yoruba people.  The first appellant continues to
    receive support from an FGM prevention and support service in the UK.

44. The appellants are from the Yoruba tribe and it is  not  disputed  that
    neither of the first appellant's daughters has undergone FGM.  In light
    of the fact that I accept that the first appellant  suffered  traumatic
    FGM as described I am satisfied that there is  a  real  risk  that  her
    female children would also be subject to FGM by their  extended  family
    and this fear is supported by the information before me including by Ms
    Ariyo in her expert report.

45. In addition, ongoing concerns in relation to FGM are  set  out  in  the
    respondent's most recent  Country  Information  and  Guidance  Nigeria:
    Women fearing gender-based harm or violence dated  August  2016.   This
    report confirms the prevalence of prevalence of FGM in  Nigeria,  which
    continues to be high in some areas of the country and  that  19,900,000
    of girls and women had undergone  FGM  in  Nigeria.   The  report  also
    refers to a 2012 report which confirms that of the six  largest  ethnic
    groups five of them including Yoruba practise FGM.

46. I am satisfied that if the appellants return to the  first  appellant's
    home area the female children would face a real risk of FGM because the
    family will insist on this and  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  first
    appellant would be in a position to stop it, particularly in  light  of
    her vulnerability and mental health difficulties  (and,  as  indicated,
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision on Article 8 - which  included
    findings that the first appellant is a vulnerable person with a  mental
    health condition and that the situation, where is currently in  the  UK
    having great difficulty in coping with the care of her children,  would
    be significantly worsened  on  return  to  Nigeria  -  stands).   I  am
    satisfied to the lower standard that the evidence establishes that  the
    first appellant would not be in a position to protect her children from
    FGM.

47. I accept that given the wealth of medical and other evidence  that  the
    first appellant would return to the  family  home  (and  her  surviving
    family there) if forced to return to Nigeria.  I  accept  her  evidence
    that she would have nowhere else to go.  This is  consistent  with  her
    accounts of previously having had to resort to prostitution and  ending
    up being trafficked from Nigeria.  In these circumstances,  with  three
    young children, given her multiple mental health difficulties, and  her
    concerns in relation to her son, I am satisfied that she  would  return
    to the family home.  However, given the appellant's history in  Nigeria
    including her previous recourse to prostitution I am not satisfied that
    the appellant would receive any material  assistance  from  her  family
    which might prevent descent into destitution.

48. Therefore I am satisfied that the female children would be at  risk  in
    their home area.

49. In relation to trafficking although I accept that  the  respondent  did
    not recognise the first appellant as a victim of  trafficking  (despite
    accepting that the first appellant's claims were  consistent  with  the
    country information) I am not satisfied that any of  the  discrepancies
    in the first appellant's account are material, particularly  given  her
    well  recorded  mental  health  difficulties.   Her  account  of  being
    trafficked was essentially rejected due to lack of supporting  evidence
    in relation  to  the  appellant's  initial  entry  and  the  fact  that
    reference to sexual exploitation was not explicitly made in the various
    medical notes which were recorded during the first appellant's  various
    contacts with medical professionals in  the  years  prior  to  claiming
    asylum.

50. However, I do not attach any adverse inference to the lack of record of
    the first appellant's own entry to the UK because, as  I  am  satisfied
    that it is entirely plausible  that  this  might  have  been  something
    directed by her traffickers and not within  her  control  or  even  her
    knowledge.  This will have been further compounded  by  her  subsequent
    mental health difficulties which I accept have blurred her recall.   In
    addition, I do not attach any adverse inference to the  fact  that  the
    appellant's references to her difficulties have emerged in her  medical
    records in a piecemeal fashion.  I  accept  the  reports  including  Dr
    Fairweather's view that this is entirely  consistent  with  the  trauma
    that she has experienced.

51. For example, I note that the first appellant's GP does not  record  the
    fact that she has undergone FGM despite the fact that there is accepted
    medical evidence now that this is the case.  I also note, as  indicated
    by Dr Masoud, that her children  have  been  present  at  some  of  the
    appointments and this may have been a barrier to full disclosure of her
    difficulties.  Indeed, Dr Masoud  specifically  stated  in  the  letter
    dated 4 January 2016  that  at  that  appointment  Ms  Robert  did  not
    elaborate much on her past history, was tearful  and  stated  that  she
    "did not wish to speak in front of her eldest daughter  who  she  said,
    understood everything".

52. As already noted, the medical records do refer to  unspecified  traumas
    in the past which I  am  satisfied  is  entirely  consistent  with  the
    appellant's account of having been a victim of sexual violence.   I  do
    not on all the evidence  considered  in  the  round,  which  is  highly
    supportive of the appellant's account, draw any adverse inference  from
    the way in which her account has emerged and I attach particular weight
    to Dr Fairweather's report.

53. The fact that some of the details have been  vague,  in  particular  in
    relation to when she was trafficked and when precisely she returned  to
    Nigeria is in fact supportive of her account rather than the  opposite,
    given the extent of the trauma that the appellant has suffered.

54. I accept therefore that the first appellant is a victim of  trafficking
    as well as of FGM and sexual violence and that  her  account  of  being
    recruited by her traffickers to escape a life of prostitution  with  no
    family support was consistent with recruitment methods  of  traffickers
    including as set out by Ms Ariyo in her report.  I find  the  appellant
    to be credible in the core of her account  (and  in  finding  that  the
    appellant is a victim of trafficking I have considered the guidance  in
    MS (Trafficking - Tribunal's Powers - Art. 4 ECHR) Pakistan [2016] UKUT
    00226 (IAC).

    Risk on Return

55. In relation to the  appellants'  risk  on  return  I  have  taken  into
    consideration that a  significant  time  has  passed  since  the  first
    appellant was trafficked to the UK and that she was in  a  position  to
    return to Nigeria without being retrafficked.  I  have  considered  the
    relevant guidance including HD (Trafficked women) Nigeria  (CG)  [2016]
    UKUT 00454.

56. I am satisfied that the evidence establishes that the  first  appellant
    is extremely vulnerable because of her history of  sexual  exploitation
    and  sexual  violence  together  with   her   current   mental   health
    difficulties and that she is at risk of returning  to  prostitution  in
    Nigeria.  I have attached weight to the report of Peter Horrocks and Dr
    Fairweather.  In particular, I accept  that  the  first  appellant  has
    turned to prostitution before when unable to survive and that on return
    she would face the 'overwhelming need' to provide for her children  and
    ensure their health.

57. Although I am not satisfied that  it  has  been  established  that  the
    appellant would be retrafficked, including as she  was  able  to  avoid
    this fate when she returned to Nigeria, I am satisfied that it would be
    a breach of Article 3 and amount to inhumane and degrading treatment if
    the first appellant were in effect forced by  circumstances  back  into
    prostitution  in  Nigeria,  which  I  am  satisfied  there  is  a  real
    possibility would be the case.

58. I am not satisfied that there is sufficiency of protection against  FGM
    for the minor female appellants.  Whilst I accept that  the  background
    country information shows that  FGM  is  an  offence  in  a  number  of
    Nigerian states, there is no effective protection in circumstances such
    as the appellants' and I rely on the background country information and
    Ms Ariyo's report.

59. It is not  suggested  by  the  respondent  that  the  appellants  could
    internally relocate within Nigeria.   I  attach  weight  to  the  first
    appellant's consistent confirmation that she would not  and  could  not
    relocate as she would have no choice but to return to the  family  home
    for accommodation.  I am not satisfied therefore that she could  safely
    relocate as she would be at risk of sexual violence and exploitation in
    Nigeria.

60. Further, in the alternative if I am wrong in relation to the safety  of
    relocation I am satisfied that it would be unduly harsh to require  the
    first appellant to relocate with her children,  the  second  to  fourth
    appellants, given their particular circumstances including  the  mental
    health and extreme vulnerability  of  the  first  appellant,  her  well
    founded fears for her female children and the developmental  delays  of
    her son (albeit that these issues have not manifested at school).

61. In making this decision generally, I  have  taken  into  account  as  a
    primary consideration the best interests  of  all  of  the  appellant's
    children.  In conclusion, I am satisfied that internal relocation, away
    from the risks that face the female minor appellants, would not  be  in
    their best interests given the risks to the family as a whole.  Again I
    have attached weight to the report of Peter Horrocks in relation to the
    very significant negative impact of return to Nigeria  on  all  of  the
    children in light particularly of  the  extreme  vulnerability  of  the
    first appellant and her history of experiencing  both  trafficking  and
    sexual violence in Nigeria.

62. However I am not satisfied that it has been established,  even  to  the
    lower standard that the first appellant's  son,  the  third  appellant,
    would be at risk on return  by  virtue  of  his  claimed  developmental
    delays alone (he has been diagnosed with sensory needs and is  awaiting
    screening for possible  autism/Attention  Deficit  Disorder).   It  was
    conceded by Ms Knorr  that  the  view  of  the  school  (who  have  not
    identified any concerns) did not accord with that of the  appellant  in
    relation to the presentation of her son.

63. I have considered Mr Knorr's comprehensive submissions  including  that
    the threshold for persecution is lower for children.  It was  submitted
    that discrimination, risk of witchcraft accusations and  the  inability
    to enjoy community life in Nigeria would amount to persecution for  the
    third appellant, particularly in light of his young age.   Whilst  that
    might be the case, I note that the report of Peter Horrocks  identifies
    the difficulties for the third appellant in  terms  of  disruption  and
    possible long term consequences in his future  development  needs,  and
    that the likely decline in his mother's mental health  will  impact  on
    him significantly.  Mr Ariyo was of the view that the  third  appellant
    was at risk of being identified as a witch 'if he  displays  noticeable
    signs of behavioural issues or special educational needs'  (Appellant's
    Bundle C95).  I  accept  that  the  first  appellant  has  concerns  in
    relation to her  son  at  home  and  that  these  are  currently  being
    investigated.  However, given that he is not currently presenting  with
    such behavioural difficulties in the public  environment  that  is  his
    school, I am not satisfied to the  lower  standard  that  it  has  been
    demonstrated that he would  display  noticeable  signs  of  behavioural
    issues/special education needs and therefore I am  not  satisfied  that
    the family would even encounter discrimination on return, on account of
    the third appellant.

64. I am satisfied that the second and third  appellants  are  entitled  to
    refugee protection by female children in a society that  practices  FGM
    or in the alternative if I am  wrong  in  relation  to  the  Convention
    reason I  am  satisfied  that  their  claims  succeed  in  relation  to
    humanitarian protection.  I am satisfied that the first appellant is at
    risk of treatment amounting to persecution by virtue of her  membership
    of a particular social group as the  victim  of  sexual  violence  with
    mental health vulnerabilities who is at risk  of  serious  harm/inhuman
    treatment on account of destitution and forced prostitution.

65. In relation to the appellants' Article 3 claim in relation to the first
    appellant's suicide risk I have taken into consideration the very  high
    bar in mental or physical illness cases; N  v  UK  [2008]  47  EHRR  39
    applied.

66. In J v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA  Civ  629
    or ERD 359 Lord Justice  Dyson  set  out  the  relevant  principles  in
    assessing the risk of treatment contrary to Article  3  in  a  "foreign
    case" where the fear of harm arises from a risk of  suicide  or  mental
    deterioration after removal.  These principles  can  be  summarised  as
    follows:

 i) Consideration must be given to the severity of the treatment/harm which
    the appellant would suffer if removed.

ii) A causal link must exist between the removal and the treatment feared.

iii) The threshold of  severity  is  particularly  high  in  foreign  cases,
    especially where the ill-treatment results from a  naturally  occurring
    illness.

iv) An Article 3 claim can in principle succeed  following  Bensaid,  in  a
    case where the risk of harm arises from suicide or self-harm.

 v) Whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving state is
    objectively well-founded as a relevant factor.

vi) It is important whether the removing and/or  the  receiving  state  has
    effective mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide.

67. In the case of Y & Z v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2009] EWCA Civ 362 a breach of Article 3 can still be  made  out  even
    where there was no objective risk of ill-treatment.  The issue in  such
    cases is  not  whether  there  are  in  theory  psychiatric  facilities
    available,  but  whether  these  are  accessible  in  practice  to  the
    individual applicant.

68. The first appellant suffers from well documented serious mental  health
    difficulties, which have considerably worsened over time  but  which  I
    accept are as a result of her traumatic past. I accept Dr Fairweather's
    professional clinical opinion that it is very important for  the  first
    appellant to have a safe and  stable  social  situation  including  the
    resolution of her immigration status.  It is Dr Fairweather's prognosis
    that the first appellant's condition would be significantly worse  even
    if treatment were available if returned to Nigeria because of the first
    appellant's genuinely held fears and that  she  is  likely  to  have  a
    mental health crisis on return.

69. Although I accept that there is some mental health  services  provision
    in Nigeria, I am not satisfied  that  the  level  of  intensive  mental
    health, social and educational support that would be required from  the
    outset, including at the airport, would  be  accessible  to  the  first
    appellant in Nigeria including because of a lack of such infrastructure
    in Nigeria and I rely on the AFRUCA expert report dated  17  June  2016
    provided for the first appellant from Ms Ariyo.

70. Dr Fairweather has consistently  confirmed  in  both  of  her  clinical
    reports in relation to  the  first  appellant  that  she  would  become
    suicidal if she received a negative determination.  The prediction made
    by Dr Fairweather prior to the first appeal was substantially made  out
    and Dr Fairweather reports that  the  first  appellant's  suicide  risk
    significantly increased following a negative decision after the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the stress of participating in those proceedings.   I
    am satisfied therefore, despite the very high threshold, that it  would
    be satisfied on the particular facts in this case and  that  the  first
    appellant's case also succeeds under Article 3 in  relation  to  mental
    health risk and the risk of suicide.  I am further satisfied that  such
    a risk  would  also  expose  the  second  to  fourth  appellants  to  a
    concomitant  risk  of  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment  given  their
    particular circumstances, including the psychological harm and distress
    in witnessing their mother's extreme ill  health,  the  fear  of  their
    extended family and the limited support services which therefore  would
    be available to the children in these circumstances.

    Conclusion

71. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  [other  than  in  relation  to
    Article 8] is set aside.  I substitute a decision allowing  the  first,
    second and fourth appellants' appeals on asylum grounds.

72.  The  third  (minor  male)  appellant  is  entitled   to   humanitarian
    protection.

73. The appellants' appeals succeed under Article 3 human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeals are allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


                                  APPENDIX

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/11394/2015
                                                               AA/11397/2015
                                                               AA/11401/2015
                                                               AA/11403/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 October 2016                    |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                     VR
                                     KO
                                     RO
                                     RO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms M Knorr, Counsel, instructed by Southwark Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Both parties in this  case  had  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Therefore  both  parties  are  appellants  and  respondents.
    However, I refer to the parties as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal where Ms R and her children were the appellants.




    Background

74. The first appellant is Ms VR, a citizen of Nigeria, and the  second  to
    fourth appellants are her three children, two daughters and a son,  who
    are minors.  The appellants appealed against the decision to refuse  to
    grant asylum made by the respondent on 7 August 2013.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 25 July 2016, Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Herlihy
    dismissed the appellants' appeal on  asylum  grounds,  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds and under  the  Immigration  Rules.   Judge  Herlihy
    allowed the appellants' appeal on human rights grounds under Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules.

75. I deal with both appeals separately below.

Asylum and Humanitarian Protection Appeal

76. The appellants appealed on the following grounds:

    Ground 1

77. The first ground argued that the judge failed to consider  evidence  in
    the round when making credibility findings,  failed  to  properly  take
    into account the medical and country  expert  evidence  in  considering
    credibility contrary to the guidance in Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ
    367 and failed to comply with the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2
    of 2010, Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and  Sensitive  Appellant  Guidance
    ('vulnerable witness guidance').

78. It was argued that the judge failed to take into  account  the  medical
    evidence that the first appellant's delay in disclosure was  consistent
    with her mental health  problems  and  that  the  first  appellant  has
    various  specific  symptoms  consistent  with  her  account  of  sexual
    violence.  The expert report by Dr Fairweather explained that the first
    appellant's avoidance and  failure  to  disclose  specific  information
    about her past was highly consistent with her mental health  consequent
    to her experiences.

79. It was argued  that  it  was  also  well-established  that  victims  of
    trafficking and sexual violence may make delayed  disclosure  and  that
    the judge had also failed to  take  into  account  the  country  expert
    report in assessing credibility and gave no reasons for  rejecting  the
    report of Ms Ariyo which had found that the first  appellant's  history
    was plausible when  considered  against  country  conditions.   It  was
    claimed that the judge failed to acknowledge or take into account  that
    the first appellant provided a consistent account of her history in her
    witness statements, to the Home Office and to numerous professionals.

80. I am not satisfied that the judge gave adequate reasons  for  rejecting
    the appellant's evidence as  she  did  particularly  in  light  of  the
    medical and other evidence before the judge in relation to  victims  of
    trafficking and sexual violence.




    Ground 2

81. It was argued that the judge failed to  give  sustainable  reasons  for
    rejecting aspects of Dr Fairweather's report; Y & Z (Sri Lanka) v  SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 362; [2009]  HRLR  22  relied  on.  The  judge  wrongly
    indicated  that  the  report  fails  to  disclose  the  length  of  the
    consultation with the appellant and incorrectly stated that  the  judge
    failed to address the question of whether the first appellant's  mental
    health problems could have arisen from other  matters  aside  from  her
    claimed traumatic experiences.

82. It was also stated that it was unclear what the judge  meant  when  she
    found that Dr Fairweather had provided no evidential basis for her view
    that the first appellant's prognosis was worse  in  Nigeria  even  with
    treatment.  It was argued that she did.

83. It was submitted that the judge was wrong to conclude that there was  a
    clear disparity between Dr Fairweather's  findings  and  those  in  the
    medical records or that Dr Fairweather had failed  to  give  sufficient
    consideration to factors identified by other health professionals.

84. I accept that the findings indicate that the judge was "cherry-picking"
    the evidence including in his approach to Dr Masoud's letter at [66] of
    the determination (Y & Z (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ  362  HRLR
    22).

    Ground 3

85. It was further argued that it was unreasonable of the judge to rely  on
    medical records in making adverse credibility findings  and  the  judge
    had relied heavily on the medical records in making adverse credibility
    findings.  However, I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  failed  to  make
    adequate findings in relation to the parts of the medical records which
    it  was  suggested  support  the  first  appellant's  account  of  past
    persecution and which referred to her past traumas in addition to those
    that have been accepted by the judge.

    Ground 4

86. It was argued that it was unreasonable for  the  judge  to  reject  the
    first appellant's credibility because the first appellant had failed to
    produce evidence from the father of her children and from  her  friends
    and it  was  argued  that  the  first  appellant  had  not  been  in  a
    relationship with the father of her children for over  five  years  and
    this had been an abusive relationship.  The first  appellant  had  also
    made clear that she had not told her former partner about  her  history
    of trafficking and it is unclear in the circumstances  what  the  judge
    believed he could have said that was relevant to her claim.

87. In relation to friends it was argued that there was  no  evidence  that
    there were any friends who had knowledge  of  events  material  to  the
    first  appellant's  claim  and  considering   the   first   appellant's
    vulnerability and the medical evidence there was no  basis  to  suggest
    that she might have shared matters with friends.

    Ground 5

88. It was argued that the judge made a material error in failing  to  make
    findings on the risk to the first  appellant  of  prostitution  and  of
    further exploitation on return to Nigeria and the judge  did  not  make
    any findings on some material aspects of the first appellant's history,
    in particular that she had worked as a prostitute in Nigeria  prior  to
    being trafficked in the UK and that she had had  sex  in  exchange  for
    money to support her children while in the UK.

89. It was also argued that it was  the  view  of  the  Independent  Social
    Worker, Peter Horrocks, and Dr Fairweather that there was a  real  risk
    that the first appellant would be forced by her circumstances to return
    to prostitution, which would be persecutory, particularly  in  view  of
    her history and vulnerability and would be  seriously  harmful  to  her
    children.  It was stated that a finding that the first appellant  would
    be forced into prostitution would amount to serious harm such that  the
    first appellant would be entitled to  refugee  status  or  humanitarian
    protection

90. I am satisfied that the lack of adequate findings in  relation  to  the
    first appellant's history and her circumstances on  return  to  Nigeria
    was a material error.

    Ground 6

91. It was argued that the judge failed to take account of relevant matters
    in dismissing the risk of Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) to the  first
    appellant's daughters.  In particular,  the  judge  accepted  that  the
    first appellant had been subjected to FGM but it was  argued  that  the
    judge failed to give proper weight to this  fact  and  that  the  first
    appellant  came  from  a  tribal  group  (Yoruba)  that   traditionally
    practises FGM, that it was apparent that it was practised in the  first
    appellant's family and that as a result the children would be at risk.

92. It was noted that the judge dismissed the risk of FGM  relying  on  the
    lack of reference by the first appellant to FGM in the medical  records
    and the first appellant's failure to refer to a fear of FGM in previous
    applications.  I am not satisfied that such a  finding  is  sustainable
    particularly in light of the fact that the judge accepted, as a  matter
    of fact, that the first appellant had been subjected to FGM.

93. In addition it was argued that the evidence indicated  that  the  first
    appellant would take her children back to her family in Nigeria because
    she would have nowhere else to go and as such the findings on  internal
    relocation are not relevant as the first appellant would not relocate.

    Ground 7

94. Ground 7 argued that the judge failed to  take  into  account  relevant
    matters  when  considering  internal  relocation,  in  particular  that
    although the judge  found  that  the  children  cannot  be  removed  in
    accordance with Article 8 due to the first  appellant's  mental  health
    problems, vulnerability and difficulty caring  for  the  children,  the
    judge failed to  take  these  matters  into  account  when  considering
    internal  relocation.   The  expert  evidence  including   from   Peter
    Horrocks, which was accepted by the judge at [77],  strongly  suggested
    that the first appellant would be extremely  vulnerable  if  forced  to
    relocate alone with her children and that she would be unable  to  meet
    their basic needs and would be likely to return to prostitution  in  an
    attempt to avoid destitution.

95. Dr Fairweather and Ms Ariyo were of a similar view.  Whilst  the  judge
    states that the first appellant could work in Nigeria because  she  has
    worked there before, it was argued that the judge fails  to  take  into
    account the expert evidence as to the first appellant's fitness to work
    and her ability to do so  with  four  children,  or  the  opportunities
    available or that the first appellant ended up working as a  prostitute
    in Nigeria when she tried to support herself when she did  not  have  a
    family.  It was also argued that the judge failed to take into  account
    the children's best interests when finding that they could relocate.

96. Again I am not satisfied that the judge provided  adequate  reasons  in
    relation to internal relocation particularly in light of the fact  that
    the judge finds, at [81] that the family cannot  be  removed  in  large
    part due to the first appellant's vulnerabilities including her  mental
    health condition and that the judge found that 'the situation can  only
    be significantly worsened on return to Nigeria'.

    Ground 8

97. Finally it was argued that there were errors in the judge's  assessment
    of the first appellant's Article 3 claim based  on  mental  health  and
    suicide risk.  It was argued that the judge  was  wrong  to  find  that
    Article 3 would not be breached as it was argued  that  the  errors  in
    relation to the approach to Dr Fairweather's report fatally  undermined
    the judge's conclusions.

98. It was also not reasonable to rely on  the  first  appellant's  current
    suicide risk to find that contrary to medical evidence  she  would  not
    present a risk on return to Nigeria when clearly Dr Fairweather was  of
    the expert opinion that the risk of suicide was deemed to be far higher
    than her current risk.

    Error of Law

99. Mr Bramble conceded at  the  outset  of  the  appeal  that  there  were
    material errors in the judge's approach.  For  the  cumulative  reasons
    outlined in the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal I am  satisfied
    that this is the case.  Whilst individually a  number  of  the  grounds
    could be said to be no more than a disagreement with  the  findings  of
    Judge Herlihy, taken as a whole and in light of the judge's approach to
    the expert evidence together with the judge's  findings  in  particular
    when dismissing the risk of FGM and the risk  of  the  first  appellant
    being forced into prostitution/further exploitation on  return,   I  am
    satisfied that there was a lack of  adequate  reasons  given  for  both
    rejecting Dr Fairweather's report and a failure to make findings on key
    issues.

    Conclusion

100. I am therefore satisfied that there is a material error of law  in  the
    judge's decision on the appellants' asylum, humanitarian protection and
    Article 3 appeals such  that  the  decision  must  be  set  aside.   No
    findings are preserved.

Remaking the Decision

101. It was agreed that the decision would be remade in the  Upper  Tribunal
    before a single judge.  I was initially minded to remake  the  decision
    at the hearing.   However,  Mr  Bramble  indicated  that  although  the
    Tribunal had issued directions in respect of  the  respondent's  appeal
    against the Article 8 decision, no directions had been  issued  on  the
    subsequent grant of permission on the appellants' appeal and this grant
    had only been made less than a week prior to  the  hearing  before  me.
    There was some force in Mr Bramble's argument that he had not therefore
    prepared the appeal for remaking on the day.  Ms  Knorr  conceded  that
    unfairness could arise if we proceeded.  The appeal will  therefore  be
    remade at a reconvened hearing before  a  single  judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal and I refer the parties to the directions at the conclusion of
    this decision.

    Human Rights Appeal

102. This was the appeal of the Secretary of State.  The Secretary of  State
    appealed on the following grounds:

    Ground 1

103. It was argued that there was a material error of law  in  allowing  the
    appeals of the second, third and fourth appellants as the Secretary  of
    State noted  that  these  had  been  allowed  "in  effect  because  the
    appellant and her younger children are able to piggyback on the  rights
    of the appellant's  eldest  child".   It  was  argued  that  the  three
    children do not have a right of appeal as they have had no rejection of
    a human rights claim, for the purpose of Section 82 of the 2002 Act  as
    amended by the Immigration Act 2014.  Only the first  appellant  has  a
    right of appeal.  It was argued that  this  error  was  material  given
    grounds 2 and 4.

    Ground 2

104. The second ground was that the judge made a material error of  fact  in
    that at [82] the judge found that the first  appellant  had  "disclosed
    sufficiently compelling and compassionate circumstances which justified
    the respondent in a grant of discretionary leave to her eldest daughter
    who has resided continuously in the UK for over seven years".  However,
    the respondent had not granted  any  leave  to  the  first  appellant's
    eldest daughter and it was argued that this was material.

    Ground 3

105. The judge had found at paragraph [71] that  there  were  no  compelling
    circumstances that would warrant a grant of  leave  outside  the  Rules
    before going on to consider the matter outside of the Rules,  which  it
    was argued was contrary to SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

    Ground 4

106. The judge failed to make a finding on a material matter  as  the  judge
    failed to give reasons as to why the first appellant's eldest  daughter
    met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.  It was argued that this  was
    an error because the second appellant did not have a right of appeal in
    her own right and the assessment of the appeal should only have  looked
    at the question of  the  first  appellant  through  the  Rules  and  if
    appropriate outside them.

107. It was argued that if that was not an error the judge made  no  finding
    as to whether it was reasonable for the eldest daughter  to  return  to
    Nigeria.  The judge set out the best interests assessments before  then
    looking at the public interest issues and  then  identified  the  seven
    years' residence as a significant factor before moving on  to  consider
    proportionality.  However, there was no reason given  for  the  judge's
    finding that it was disproportionate to  remove  the  eldest  daughter.
    Given that there were no reasons given why it would be unreasonable for
    the eldest daughter to return to Nigeria the finding that she meets the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE was manifestly unreasoned.

108. It was also argued that the proportionality assessment  was  inadequate
    for other reasons as the judge failed to weigh  the  first  appellant's
    failure under the Rules into the equation and failed to  identify  what
    weight had been given to public interest and why  the  public  interest
    was outweighed by other factors.

    Findings

    Ground 1

109. On 19 November 2014 prior to the  first  appellant's  asylum  interview
    and in response to a Section 120 notice the appellants' solicitor wrote
    to the respondent confirming that all appellants  were  raising  asylum
    and human rights grounds.

110. Whilst the notices issued to the second, third  and  fourth  appellants
    stated that they did not have a right of appeal it was argued that this
    was incorrect.  Each had made an asylum and human rights claim that had
    been refused by the respondent and therefore had a statutory  right  of
    appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002.

111. It was noted that the Tribunal accepted their appeals, apart from  that
    of Husnu, who was a dependant having been  born  after  the  claim  was
    made.  It was  noted  that  the  respondent  raised  no  issue  to  the
    jurisdictional point before the First-tier Tribunal.

112. Ms Knorr provided  no  authority  to  support  her  argument  that  the
    raising of asylum and human rights grounds in itself founded a right of
    appeal.  However, I am of the view that I need not  decide  this  issue
    given that I am satisfied that even if the  second,  third  and  fourth
    appellants had no valid right of appeal any error  made  by  the  judge
    would not be material.

113. The legal framework for consideration  of  the  children's  claims  and
    those of their parents has been  further  clarified  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MA  (Pakistan)  v  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

114. The provisions are as follows:

         "276ADE(1)    The requirements to be met by an applicant for  leave
                      to remain on the grounds of private life  in  the  UK
                      are that at the date of application, the applicant:

                      (i)  does not fall  for  refusal  under  any  of  the
                           grounds in Section S-LTR.1.2. to S-LTR.2.3. and S-
                           LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.4. in Appendix FM; and

                      (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain
                           on the grounds of private life in the UK; and

                           [...]

                      (iv) is under the age  of  18  years  and  has  lived
                           continuously in the UK for at least  seven  years
                           (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  it
                           would not be reasonable to expect  the  applicant
                           to leave the UK; or

                           [...]

                      (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged  18  years
                           or above, has lived continuously in  the  UK  for
                           less than twenty years (discounting any period of
                           imprisonment) but there would be very significant
                           obstacles to the applicant's integration into the
                           country to which he would have to go if  required
                           to leave the UK.

         276ADE(2)     Sub-paragraph (1)(vi) does not apply, and may not  be
                      relied upon, in circumstances in which it is proposed
                      to return a person to a  third  country  pursuant  to
                      Schedule 3 to the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment
                      of Claimants, etc) Act 2004.

                      [...]

         276A0    For the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1) the requirement to
                      make a valid application  will  not  apply  when  the
                      Article 8 claim is raised:

                      (i)  as part of an asylum claim,  or  as  part  of  a
                           further submission  in  person  after  an  asylum
                           claim has been refused;

                      (ii) where a migrant is in immigration detention.   A
                           migrant  in  immigration   detention   or   their
                           representative must  submit  any  application  or
                           claim raising Article 8 to a  prison  officer,  a
                           prisoner  custody  officer,  a  detainee  custody
                           officer or a member of Home Office staff  at  the
                           migrant's place of detention; or

                      (iii)    in an appeal (subject to the consent of  the
                           Secretary of State where applicable).

                           [...]

         GEN.1.9. In this Appendix:

                      (a)  the requirement to make a valid application will
                           not apply when the Article 8 claim is raised:

                           (i)  as part of an asylum claim, or as part of  a
                               further submission in person after an asylum
                               claim has been refused;

                           (ii) where a migrant is in immigration detention.
                                A migrant in immigration detention or their
                               representative must submit  any  application
                               or claim  raising  Article  8  to  a  prison
                               officer,  a  prisoner  custody  officer,   a
                               detainee custody officer or a member of Home
                               Office  staff  at  the  migrant's  place  of
                               detention; or

                           (iii)    in an appeal (subject to the consent  of
                               the Secretary of  State  where  applicable);
                               and

                               [...]

         R-LTRPT.1.1.  The requirements to  be  met  for  limited  leave  to
                      remain as a parent are -

                      (a)  the applicant and the child must be in the UK;

                      (b)  the applicant must have made a valid application
                           for limited or indefinite leave to  remain  as  a
                           parent or partner; and

                           [...]

                      (d)

                           (i)  the applicant  must  not  fall  for  refusal
                               under S-LTR: Suitability  leave  to  remain;
                               and

                           (ii) the  applicant  meets  the  requirements  of
                               paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2-2.4. and E-LTRPT.3.1-
                               3.2.; and

                           (iii)    paragraph EX.1. applies.

                               [...]

         EX.1.    This paragraph applies if

                      (a)

                           (i)  the applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting
                               parental relationship with a child who -

                               (aa) is under the age of 18  years,  or  was
                                   under the  age  of  18  years  when  the
                                   applicant was first granted leave on the
                                   basis that this paragraph applied;

                               (bb) is in the UK;

                               (cc) is a British citizen or  has  lived  in
                                   the UK continuously  for  at  least  the
                                   seven years  immediately  preceding  the
                                   date of application; and

                           (ii) it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
                               child to leave the UK;

                               [...]

         D-LTRPT.1.2.  If the applicant meets the requirements in  paragraph
                      R-LTRPT.1.1.(a), (b) and (d)  for  limited  leave  to
                      remain as a parent they  will  be  granted  leave  to
                      remain for a  period  not  exceeding  30  months  and
                      subject to a condition of no recourse to public funds
                      unless the Secretary  of  State  considers  that  the
                      person should not be subject to such a condition, and
                      they will be eligible to apply for settlement after a
                      continuous period of at least 120  months  with  such
                      leave, with limited leave as a parent under paragraph
                      D-LTRPT.1.1., or in the UK with entry clearance as  a
                      parent under paragraph D-ECPT.1.1.

                      [...]

         Section R-LTRC: Requirements for leave to remain as a child

         R-LTRC.1.1.   The requirements to be met for leave to remain  as  a
                      child are that -

                      (a)  the applicant must be in the UK;

                      (b)  the applicant must have made a valid application
                           for leave to remain as a child; and either

                      (c)

                           (i)  the applicant  must  not  fall  for  refusal
                               under any of the grounds in  Section  S-LTR:
                               Suitability - leave to remain; and

                           [...]

                      (d)

                           (i)  the applicant  must  not  fall  for  refusal
                               under any of the grounds in  Section  S-LTR:
                               Suitability - leave to remain; and

                           (ii) the  applicant  meets  the  requirements  of
                               paragraphs E-LTRC.1.2. - 1.6.; and

                           (iii)    a parent of the applicant has been or is
                               at the same  time  being  granted  leave  to
                               remain under  paragraph  D-LTRP.1.2.  or  D-
                               LTRPT.1.2. or  indefinite  leave  to  remain
                               under this  Appendix  (except  as  an  adult
                               dependent relative).

         Section E-LTRC: Eligibility for leave to remain as a child

         E-LTRC.1.1.   To qualify for limited leave to remain as a child all
                      of the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRC.1.2. to 2.4.
                      must   be   met   (except    where    paragraph    R-
                      LTRC.1.1.(d)(ii) applies).

         Relationship requirements

         E-LTRC.1.2.   The applicant must be under the age of 18 at the date
                      of application or when first granted leave as a child
                      under this route.

         E-LTRC.1.3.   The applicant must not  be  married  or  in  a  civil
                      partnership.

         E-LTRC.1.4.   The applicant must not  have  formed  an  independent
                      family unit.

         E-LTRC.1.5.   The applicant must  not  be  leading  an  independent
                      life.

         E-LTRC.1.6.   One of the applicant's parents (referred to  in  this
                      Section as the 'applicant's parent') must be  in  the
                      UK and have leave to enter or  remain  or  indefinite
                      leave to remain, or is at the same time being granted
                      leave to remain or indefinite leave to remain,  under
                      this  Appendix  (except   as   an   adult   dependent
                      relative), and

                      (a)  the applicant's parent's partner under  Appendix
                           FM is also a parent of the applicant; or

                      (b)  the applicant's parent has had and continues  to
                           have  sole   responsibility   for   the   child's
                           upbringing or the applicant normally  lives  with
                           this parent and not their other parent; or

                      (c)  there are serious and compelling family or other
                           considerations which make exclusion of the  child
                           undesirable and suitable arrangements  have  been
                           made for the child's care."

115. The Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  makes  provision  for
    specific factors to  be  considered  in  public  interest  cases.   The
    relevant provisions are as follows:

         "117A    Application of this Part

                (1)    This Part  applies  where  a  court  or  Tribunal  is
                    required to determine whether a decision made under  the
                    Immigration Acts -

                    (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for  private
                        and family life under Article 8, and

                    (b)    as a result would be unlawful under Section 6  of
                        the Human Rights Act 1998.

                (2)    In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the
                    court or Tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

                    (a)    in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in
                        Section 117B, and

                    (b)    in cases concerning the  deportation  of  foreign
                        criminals, to the considerations listed in  Section
                        117C.

                (3)    In subSection (2),  'the  public  interest  question'
                    means the question of whether  an  interference  with  a
                    person's right to respect for private and family life is
                    justified under Article 8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
                cases

                [...]

                (6)    In the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                    deportation, the public interest does  not  require  the
                    person's removal where -

                    (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental
                        relationship with a qualifying child, and

                    (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                        leave the United Kingdom.

         [...]

         117D Interpretation of this Part

                (1)    In this Part -

                    'Article 8' means Article 8 of the  European  Convention
                    on Human Rights;

                    'qualifying child' means a person who is under  the  age
                    of 18 and who -

                    (a)    is a British citizen, or

                    (b)    has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous
                        period of seven years or more;

                    'qualifying partner' mean a partner who -

                    (a)    is a British citizen, or

                    (b)    who is settled in the United Kingdom (within  the
                        meaning of the Immigration Act 1971 -  see  Section
                        33(2A) of that Act)."

116. MA (Pakistan) confirmed that applications may be  brought  by  children
    under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules  or  by  parents
    under Appendix FM  or  outside  the  Rules  relying  on  Section  117B.
    Regardless of which route is used the  legal  test  is  whether  it  is
    reasonable to remove a child who has been in the UK for seven years (MA
    (Pakistan) applied).  MA  (Pakistan)  also  indicates  that  where  the
    requirements of Section 117B are satisfied no separate public  interest
    assessment is required (as set out by the Tribunal  in  Treebhawon  and
    others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 (IAC)).

117. MA (Pakistan) further confirmed that when  considering  whether  it  is
    reasonable to expect a child  to  leave  the  UK  all  factors  can  be
    considered  including  public  interest  considerations  such  as   the
    parents' conduct but that strong reasons  are  needed  for  removing  a
    child who has been here for seven years  and  very  significant  weight
    must be given to the length of residence.  The best  interests  of  the
    child will always be relevant.

118. Even if the judge erred therefore in attributing appeal rights  to  the
    first appellant's  children,  such  is  immaterial  as  the  judge  was
    required to assess, as she did, the position of  the  whole  family  in
    particular the children, against the relevant legislative framework set
    out above.

         Ground 2

119. I am satisfied that the decision, read as a whole,  does  not  indicate
    that the judge was proceeding on the  basis  that  the  respondent  had
    already granted leave to remain to the second appellant.  Although  the
    judge's wording at paragraph [82] that:

         "I find that the appellant has  disclosed  sufficiently  compelling
         and compassionate circumstances which justified the respondent in a
         grant of discretionary leave to her eldest daughter who has resided
         continuously in the United Kingdom for over seven years"

    could be clearer, this followed detailed consideration by the judge  at
    paragraphs [72] through to [82].  The judge considered whether  or  not
    it would be reasonable for the second appellant to leave the UK and the
    judge properly directed  herself  in  relation  to  giving  significant
    weight to seven years residence and "when applying  the  reasonableness
    test" [at paragraph [74] of Judge Herlihy's decision].  I am  satisfied
    that the judge would not have conducted the assessment in the  way  she
    did if she were of the view that the second  appellant  already  had  a
    grant of leave to remain.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  any  error  was
    disclosed in ground 2.

    Ground 3

120. Mr Bramble outlined that the judge was incorrect to go on  to  consider
    the case outside the Immigration Rules when  the  judge  had  found  at
    paragraph [71] that "there are no compelling circumstances in the  case
    that would warrant a grant of leave outside the Rules".  However, it is
    clear from what follows  that  the  judge  was  considering  the  first
    appellant.  The judge was bound to consider the  circumstances  of  the
    first  appellant's  eldest  child  and  whether  or  not  it  would  be
    reasonable for her to leave the UK.  Any error  that  the  judge  might
    have made in stating that there were "no  compelling  circumstances  in
    the case" was not material given the  judge's  subsequent  findings  in
    relation to the first  appellant's  eldest  child  and  the  consequent
    findings including of the circumstances the family would find itself in
    if returned to Nigeria, given in particular the  vulnerability  of  the
    first appellant.  There is no error disclosed in the judge's approach.

    Ground 4

121. It was argued that in the alternative the  judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons why it was unreasonable  for  the  appellant's  eldest
    child to return to Nigeria.  Mr Bramble's arguments were not forcefully
    made.  I am satisfied that the judge provided adequate reasons  why  it
    would not be reasonable for the second appellant to leave the  UK.   At
    [77] the judge considered the second  appellant's  best  interests  and
    accepted the report of the Independent Social Worker,  Peter  Horrocks,
    who found that the second  appellant's  best  interests  were  weighted
    towards remaining in the UK in light of her integration,  the  presence
    of her father here and the support offered to the first  appellant  and
    the family in general in  the  UK  which  would  not  be  available  in
    Nigeria.

122. The judge at [81] of her decision found that the first appellant was  a
    vulnerable person with a mental health condition,  presently  receiving
    support from external agencies and having great  difficulty  in  coping
    with the care of her children.  She went on to find that this can  only
    be significantly worsened on return to Nigeria where she would not have
    the support of her mother or sister whom the judge accepted  had  died.
    Although the judge went on to find that the first  appellant  may  have
    the help of her former partner if she were to be removed with the first
    appellant and her four children, this was by no means  certain  in  the
    judge's findings.

123. Mr Bramble argued that the grounds cumulatively disclosed an error  and
    that the judge had accepted  that  the  first  appellant's  immigration
    history was not an edifying one.  He argued that the  approach  applied
    was incorrect.  This cannot be the case.  Although the judge might have
    set out more clearly that it was the reasonableness test that was being
    considered, it is clear from her findings read as a whole that that  is
    what is being considered from paragraphs [72] onwards of the  decision.
    The judge quite properly took into account  the  appellant's  appalling
    immigration history and all that weighed against  the  first  appellant
    including the public interest in removal, an approach approved  by  the
    Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) (above).

124. I am satisfied that the judge considered all the  relevant  factors  in
    the respondent's favour and I note that the respondent did not  provide
    any submission  in  relation  to  what  factors  might  not  have  been
    considered by the judge in favour of the public interest.

125. It is clear that in finding that removal would be disproportionate  the
    judge was satisfied it also would have been unreasonable for the second
    appellant to leave the UK (and the judge had properly directed  herself
    as to the appropriate tests at [72] to [74].

126. Although Ms Knorr indicated that there were further  grounds  on  which
    the appellant had relied before the First-tier Tribunal which were  not
    considered by Judge Herlihy in relation to Article  8  which  were  not
    accepted I do not need to consider these grounds as I am satisfied that
    there  are  no  material  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's  Article  8
    consideration and the decision, on Article 8 only, must stand.




    Conclusion

127. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to allow the  appellants'
    appeal under Article 8 does not disclose any material error of law  and
    shall stand.  The appeal by the Secretary of State in  this  regard  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decisions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in  relation  to  Article  8  shall
stand.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation  to  the
appellants' asylum, humanitarian protection and Article  3  appeal  contains
an error of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal  and  is  set
aside.

The decision on the appeal (other than Article 8)  will  be  remade  by  the
Upper Tribunal on 9th November 2016.



                                 Directions

    The appellants are to file and serve a consolidated bundle of  evidence
    so that it is received no later than 2 November 2016. The bundle is  to
    separately tabulate: (i) the evidence relied upon before the First-tier
    Tribunal; and, (ii) the additional evidence that it is  now  sought  to
    rely upon before the Upper  Tribunal  including  any  further  evidence
    relied on by the appellants in relation to  the  issues  cited  at  the
    error of law hearing, namely:

 i) the fact that  Dr  Fairweather  has  made  a  referral  for  the  first
    appellant's daughter to be confirmed as a young carer; and

ii) that, contrary to previous evidence,  the  school  has  indicated  that
    there are potentially issues with the first appellant's son.

    The  appellant's  representative  to  file  and  serve  a  consolidated
    skeleton argument in relation to the issues to be heard de novo.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 20 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 20 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

