

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11048/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 14 April 2015                     |On 24 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                     TM
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V Lingajothy, Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Preliminary

 1. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction in relation to  the
    appellant because of the nature of the case.  I consider it appropriate
    to make a similar order in the  Upper  Tribunal  under  Procedure  Rule
    14(1) to prohibit the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to
    lead members of the public to identify the appellant.  To  give  effect
    to this order the appellant is to be referred to as TM

Background

 2. The appellant was born on 11 October 1990  and  is  a  citizen  of  Sri
    Lanka.  She last arrived in the UK on 15 September 2013.   She  entered
    illegally, using a false French passport.  Her asylum claim is recorded
    as having been made on 15 October  2013  when  she  attended  the  Home
    Office  in  Croydon  for  a  screening  interview.   The  Home   Office
    interviewed the appellant about the details of her asylum claim  on  26
    November 2013 and a negative decision was reached two days  later.  The
    reasons for refusal were set out in a detailed letter dated 28 November
    2013.  On the  basis  of  that  decision,  on  29  November  2013,  the
    Secretary of State issued a notice of immigration  decision  (which  is
    headed: Notice to remove an Illegal  Entrant  ...  Asylum/Human  Rights
    Claim Refused).  It is against that decision that the appeal  has  been
    brought under s.82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

 3. The appellant previously held leave to enter the UK  as  a  student  in
    August 2011 and that leave expired on 21 January 2013.   The  appellant
    says she left the UK and returned  to  Sri  Lanka  shortly  before  the
    expiry of that leave, although  she  has  previously  stated  that  she
    returned in September 2012.

The appeal process

 4. On 18 July 2014, First-tier Tribunal Judge Petherbridge  dismissed  the
    appeal.  On 2 February 2015 I found that  the  determination  of  Judge
    Petherbridge contained an error on a point of law that required  it  to
    be set aside.  A copy of that decision is annexed for convenience.

 5. This decision and reasons statement relates to the issues considered at
    the resumed hearing that occurred on 14 April 2015.

The appellant's claim

 6. Although the appellant's claim is much more detailed that  the  summary
    that follows, the salient issues in this appeal are as follow.

 7. The appellant explains that at the end of the civil war  she,  together
    with other LTTE fighters, had surrendered.  She had been  interred  and
    then released on a rehabilitation scheme.  After a year  she  absconded
    from that scheme.  She came to the UK to study.   At  the  end  of  her
    course, early in 2013, she decided to return to Sri Lanka  because  she
    understood from her parents that it would be safe for her to do so  and
    because they had arranged for her to marry.

 8. The appellant says she is a refugee because she has a well-founded fear
    of persecution because of her political opinions.  She claims  to  have
    been a member of the LTTE in the past and that upon her return  to  Sri
    Lanka in January 2013 she  was  arrested  and  detained.   During  that
    detention she says she was tortured, including by being  raped  by  her
    custodians.

 9. The appellant has provided two  medical  reports  to  substantiate  her
    claim to have been tortured.  One is a report by Dr K  Balasubramaniam,
    a consultant psychiatrist, who diagnosed her with  moderate  to  severe
    PTSD.  The other is a  report  from  Dr  Yacoub,  currently  a  general
    practitioner.  He found the appellant's scars to be  typical  of  being
    burned by a hot metal rod and cigarette burns.  He used the descriptor,
    typical of, as used in the Istanbul Protocol.

The respondent's case

10. The following summary highlights the key concern  raised  by  the  Home
    Office.  The reasons for refusal letter is much  more  detailed  and  I
    have had full regard to it.

11. The Home Office does not believe any part of  the  appellant's  account
    because of inconsistencies and discrepancies in her account.

12. In addition, the Home Office is  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant's
    account of the rehabilitation scheme  and  arrest  at  the  airport  on
    return is  consistent  with  the  background  country  information  and
    country guideline cases of the Upper Tribunal.  The  Home  Office  also
    rely on the fact that the appellant travelled on a false  passport  and
    did not claim asylum immediately  as  other  factors  that  damage  her
    credibility.

13. Because these factors undermine the appellant's credibility,  the  Home
    Office also disputes the medical evidence provided.

Relevant legal provisions

14. To succeed in her appeal, the appellant must show that  she  meets  the
    criteria set out in the Qualification Directive (2004/83/EC).  This has
    been transposed into UK law through part 11 of  the  immigration  rules
    and various statutory instruments.

15. It is for her to prove her case but the standard of proof is reduced to
    take account  of  the  difficulties  refugee  will  have  in  obtaining
    evidence.  For this reason, the standard of proof is described as being
    a reasonable likelihood or real risk.

My findings

16. I begin by examining the evidence as to whether it is reasonably likely
    that the appellant was tortured in Sri Lanka.

17. The medical report  of  Dr  Yacoub  confirms  that  the  appellant  has
    physical scars that are typical of having been burned by hot metal bars
    and cigarettes. He uses the descriptor, "typical of" as set out in  the
    paragraph 187 of the Istanbul Protocol.  It means that  the  appearance
    of  the  appellant's  scars  is  usually  associated  with  the  trauma
    described although there could be other possible causes.  The  Istanbul
    Protocol only has one higher level  of  description,  "diagnostic  of",
    which permits of no other possible cause.

18. Dr Yacoub's qualifications and experience are  not  disputed  and  this
    means I should give significant weight to  his  assessment.   The  Home
    Office does, however, question whether Dr Yacoub was able  to  rely  on
    the appellant's account of how  her  injuries  were  inflicted.  It  is
    evident from the accounts given by the  appellant  at  different  times
    during the asylum process that  she  has  not  always  given  the  same
    explanation of how she was injured. This was also  evident  during  the
    hearing  when  the  appellant  only  mentioned  having  been  burnt  by
    cigarettes and made no mention of  being  burnt  by  metal  rods.  When
    pressed by me, the appellant explained that she was  trying  to  forget
    her torture and therefore would not always mention everything.

19. The appellant's mental state  is  corroborated  by  the  other  medical
    report.  It  is  a  psychiatric  report  in  which  Dr  Balasubramaniam
    diagnosed  the  appellant  as  having  moderate  to  severe  PTSD.  The
    appellant continues to receive treatment in the form of medication  and
    has, since December 2014, received  talking  therapies.  The  fact  the
    appellant continues to receive treatment is a  strong  indication  that
    the diagnosis remains accurate and reliable.

20. Some of the well known consequences of moderate to severe PTSD are  set
    out by Dr Balasubramaniam and include difficulties the appellant has in
    remembering events.  I am aware that although  the  appellant  has  not
    given consistent accounts of how she was tortured, she  has  not  given
    any accounts which are contrary to the  physical  evidence  or  to  the
    background country information.  I am aware that when  the  appellant's
    disparate accounts are pulled together they paint a coherent picture of
    serious ill treatment.

21. In light of  the  physical  and  psychiatric  medical  evidence,  I  am
    satisfied that it is reasonably likely that the appellant was  tortured
    in Sri Lanka, such torture including being burned by a  hot  metal  rod
    and by cigarettes.

22.  There  is  one  element  of  the  appellant's  account  that  is   not
    corroborated by the medical evidence directly. This is the  appellant's
    account of having been  raped.  She  believed  this  to  have  happened
    because she was forced to take drugs that made her unconscious and when
    she awoke she saw blood stains on her  legs.  The  appellant  has  been
    unable to give all these facts in one go,  something  the  Home  Office
    argues must undermine her truthfulness.  However,  as  I  have  already
    indicated, the evidence of the appellant's mental  health  provides  an
    alternative  explanation  for  the  differences,  and   I   find   that
    explanation to be reasonable and reliable.

23. In light of the fact that  sexual  violence  was  used  against  female
    detainees in Sri Lanka, and taking  account  of  the  fact  that  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant was otherwise tortured,  I  find  that  it
    must also be reasonably likely that she was raped as claimed  and  this
    is further evidence of the serious harm she has suffered.

24. The next issue relates to timing. I need to consider when  her  torture
    is likely to have occurred.  This is a relevant factor in assessing the
    level of risk the appellant might face on return to Sri Lanka.

25. I remind myself of the low standard of proof that applies in an  asylum
    appeal.  I have already found that the appellant was  tortured  and  am
    concerned here with when that torture occurred.  Nothing indicates that
    the tortured happened before the appellant first  came  to  the  UK  in
    2011.

26. Although the appellant has given a relatively detailed account  of  how
    she became a member of the LTTE and what happened when she  surrendered
    in May 2009, at no point has  she  ever  described  being  ill  treated
    (other than by the simple fact she was detained) prior to her return to
    Sri Lanka in 2013.  This is  consistent  with  the  background  country
    information.  She describes how she entered a rehabilitation programme,
    again  consistent  with  the  country  guidance,  and  remained   under
    supervision for about a year after release from detention.

27. The appellant describes how her parents made arrangements  for  her  to
    travel to the UK in 2011 because they were worried  about  her  safety.
    However, despite those concerns, the appellant clearly  did  not  think
    there was a real risk to her life or freedoms when she returned to  Sri
    Lanka in January 2013.  She told me during the hearing that her parents
    had advised her it was safe for her to return and had made arrangements
    for her to marry.  This evidence indicates that the appellant  and  her
    parents were cautious about the situation in Sri Lanka in 2011  but  by
    2013 were under  the  impression  that  any  real  concerns  no  longer
    persisted.  This again indicates that the appellant did not have a well
    founded fear of persecution at that time, which would  imply  that  she
    had not faced torture.

28. The appellant has only ever claimed that  she  was  tortured  when  she
    returned to Sri Lanka in January 2013.  This is  consistent  throughout
    her accounts, although there is a small discrepancy as to  whether  she
    returned to Sri Lanka in September 2012 or  January  2013.   Given  her
    mental health state, I do not take that discrepancy to be  significant.
    Her immigration history indicates that she had leave to  enter  the  UK
    until January 2013 and it is reasonable to find that she  left  the  UK
    shortly before it expired.  This is common practice.

29. Mr Kandola submitted that the appellant's account of being arrested  at
    the airport was not consistent with the Upper Tribunal's findings in GJ
    and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  319
    (IAC).

30. The appellant's account  moves  away  from  the  norm  -  those  former
    soldiers  who  completed  the  rehabilitation  programme  -  when   she
    describes how, after a year,  she  absconded  from  the  rehabilitation
    programme.  Bearing in mind the guidance provided by the Upper Tribunal
    in GJ  and  others,  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities would have kept a record of her  failure  to  complete  the
    rehabilitation programme.  Although not dealt with specifically  in  GJ
    and others, it is a natural extension of the Upper Tribunal's  findings
    that the appellant's failure  to  co-operate  with  the  rehabilitation
    programme and her subsequent return from the UK after 17  months  would
    be factors that attracted the attention of the authorities, which would
    include airport security, on her return in January 2013.   Whether  the
    appellant was formally on a watch list or stop list will never be known
    as that would be confidential information.

31. Taking all these considerations into account, and reminding myself that
    I have found that the appellant was tortured, I can only conclude  that
    she was tortured only after she returned to Sri Lanka in January 2013.

32. The penultimate question is what evidence is there to indicate that the
    appellant was tortured because of her political opinions.  In light  of
    the findings I have just made, and bearing in  mind  the  comments  the
    Upper Tribunal made in GJ and others to the effect that all Tamils from
    the north of Sri Lanka (a group that includes the appellant)  would  be
    considered to have had some link  to  the  LTTE  at  some  time,  I  am
    satisfied it is reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant  was  tortured
    either because it was known that she had been a soldier for the LTTE or
    because she was suspected of having such a role.   The  fact  that  the
    appellant has always stated that she served in the LTTE  up  until  she
    surrendered in 2009 supports this finding.

33. The final question is whether the appellant continues to  have  a  well
    founded  fear  of  persecution  in  Sri  Lanka.  Mr   Kandola   rightly
    acknowledged that were I to find that the appellant had  been  tortured
    on return to Sri Lanka in  January  2013,  then,  because  the  country
    situation in Sri Lanka has not materially changed since that  time,  by
    application of paragraph 339K of  the  immigration  rules  (transposing
    Article  4(4)  of  the  Qualification  Directive   (2004/83/EC)),   the
    appellant is a refugee.

34. Before concluding, I add a few  final  comments.   I  have  taken  into
    consideration the arguments presented in the reasons for refusal letter
    and during the hearing by Mr Kandola as to why the appellant should not
    be believed.  However, those submissions are wholly based on  the  fact
    that the appellant is not a good historian.  As I have  indicated,  the
    appellant's failure to give a fully coherent account  is  explained  by
    her mental health condition.  In addition, I take account of  the  fact
    that the disparate accounts when combined hang together and give a good
    picture of what the appellant experienced.  This is not  a  case  where
    the accounts do not point in the same direction.

35. I have also taken into account the appellant's failure to claim  asylum
    whilst here between 2011 and 2013.  I am satisfied that  the  appellant
    fled Sri Lanka at that time to escape potential difficulties  but  that
    at that time she did not have a well founded fear of persecution.  That
    level of fear was only reached because of the events she endured on her
    return in 2013.

36. Having found that the appellant is a refugee, I must find that  she  is
    not entitled to humanitarian protection (as it  is  mutually  exclusive
    from refugee protection).  By analogy,  the  appellant  succeeds  under
    Article 3 ECHR.

Decision

The appellant is a refugee and her appeal is allowed on that basis.






                               Signed   Date 23 April 2015


                               John McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
ANNEX: My decision of 2 February 2014

                     DECISION ON ERROR ON A POINT OF LAW

 1. As I announced at the end of the  hearing,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Petherbridge  that  was
    promulgated on 18 July 2014 contains an error on a point of law and has
    to be set aside.  My reasons are as follow.

 2. I am satisfied, having  heard  from  both  representatives  and  having
    regard to the determination that  Judge  Petherbridge  failed  to  give
    adequate consideration  to  the  medical  evidence  relied  on  by  the
    appellant.   The  appellant  had  provided  two  medical  reports,  one
    providing a psychiatric assessment and the other an assessment  of  her
    physical condition, including scarring.

 3. With regard to the psychiatric report, it is evident that at  no  point
    in his determination  does  Judge  Petherbridge  consider  whether  the
    appellant's mental state might explain either in full, in part  of  not
    at all, her failure to disclose all at once the details of the incident
    of sexual violence that is at the heart of her asylum claim.  There  is
    substantial authority to indicate that a  person  who  has  been  raped
    might have genuine difficulty in disclosing the details  on  the  first
    opportunity and that further details might be given at later dates.  In
    such circumstances the giving of a disjointed account might  not  carry
    as much weight as it would otherwise  when  assessing  credibility  and
    this fact undermines the adverse credibility  findings  made  by  Judge
    Petherbridge as he did not consider all of the evidence.

 4. With regard to the other medical report, it is clear that  the  medical
    examiner was familiar with and applied the Istanbul Protocol and  found
    that the scarring on the appellant was "typical of"  the  incidents  as
    described by the appellant.  This is the second highest of the Istanbul
    Protocol classification.  Judge Petherbridge did  not  give  sufficient
    reasons for going behind this  assessment  of  a  medical  professional
    because in paragraph 76 of  his  determination  he  suggests  that  the
    medical professional had not explained the  possibility  of  the  scars
    having been inflicted by other  causes  when  the  application  of  the
    Istanbul Protocol means that is precisely what the doctor has  in  fact
    done.

 5. The failure to properly understand and consider  the  medical  evidence
    undermines the reliability of Judge Petherbridge's adverse  credibility
    findings.  As that is the basis on which he dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal, his determination  must  be  set  aside.   I  agreed  with  the
    representatives that this is a case where it will be appropriate for me
    to retain the appeal because it is unclear whether the  appellant  will
    be called to give  further  evidence  and  I  have  consented  to  that
    approach.

Decision

The appellant's  appeal  is  allowed  because  the  determination  of  Judge
Petherbridge contains an error on a point of law.

His determination is set aside and will be remade in the Upper Tribunal.


