
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA112192014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4th May 2016                           |On 26th May 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             emad abas r garrafa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Filkin of Counsel instructed by Switalskis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Robson made following a hearing at Bradford on 27th January 2015.



Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Libya born on 22nd June  1995.   He  first
    arrived in the UK on 29th June 2013 in order to study.   He  came  over
    again on 1st May 2014 for three weeks and returned for a third time  on
    12th June 2014 when he made a claim for asylum.

 3. The judge rejected the appellant's account of  the  background  to  the
    claim, finding him not to be a credible  witness.   He  said  that  the
    claimant had fabricated a story in order to remain in the  UK  and  was
    not at risk of  persecutory  ill-treatment  on  return.   There  is  no
    challenge to his conclusions on the asylum claim.

 4. He took into account the current Foreign and Commonwealth Office advice
    which is against all travel to Libya due to "the ongoing  fighting  and
    great instability throughout the country".  He was also referred to the
    UNHCR position  on  returns  to  Libya,  which  is  that  if  the  1951
    Convention criteria do not apply in the individual case it still  might
    meet the criteria for complementary forms of protection.  He noted that
    the situation had deteriorated in Libya  and  there  were  no  enforced
    returns there at present and he concluded that the situation in Tripoli
    and indeed Libya generally was not  safe.  He  allowed  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

The Grounds of Application

 5. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred by allowing the appeal on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds without stating what the individual risk to the  claimant  was.
    The basis for granting humanitarian protection was clearly  because  of
    the situation in Tripoli  and  Libya  in  general  but  the  judge  had
    misunderstood  the  advice  of  travelling  to  Libya.   There  was  no
    suggestion that Libyan nationals could not voluntarily go there.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Fisher on  13th  March  2015.
    Judge Fisher said that it was  arguable  that  in  departing  from  the
    country guidance (AT and Others (Article 15c - risk  categories)  Libya
    CG [2014] UKUT 318) the judge had  attached  excessive  weight  to  the
    general situation  in  the  country  and  insufficient  weight  to  the
    individual risk to the claimant.

 7. The claimant  served  a  Rule  24  response,  and  made  the  following
    arguments.

 8. There was clear evidence before the judge that the situation  in  Libya
    had materially changed since the promulgation of AT, not least that the
    proposed point of return in AT, Tripoli Airport, closed  in  July  2014
    and was destroyed a month later in ongoing fighting.   There  was  also
    further evidence of periodic air strikes on other airports in Libya and
    the FCO's assessment of generalised risk.

 9. So far as the grant of humanitarian protection is  concerned  the  risk
    need only appertain  to  those  points  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    proposes the returnee will pass through  in  an  enforced  return,  and
    subsequently as he travels to a place of  reasonable  safety.   If  the
    returnee cannot reach  the  place  of  reasonable  internal  relocation
    without facing a real risk of serious harm he is entitled to a grant of
    humanitarian protection.

10. Furthermore the threshold of risk under Article 15(c) is slightly lower
    than that of  other  types  of  international  protection  due  to  the
    generalised nature of  the  risk  as  per  AMM  and  Others  (conflict;
    humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445.

11. Article 15(c) risk is assessed based on the  situation  of  generalised
    violence and whilst personal characteristics may make one more or  less
    vulnerable to living in a war zone, the personal characteristics of the
    claimant would not allow him to obviate or avoid the risk  of  violence
    along the route of return.  Indeed the Secretary of State is unable  to
    propose a safe point of return relying on making decisions in principle
    pending emergence of a safe route which is an unlawful approach.

12. Finally, the Presenting Officer at  the  hearing  made  it  clear  that
    returns were suspended due to  "fighting  and  instability".   On  that
    basis the Tribunal asked itself the correct question which is  whether,
    leaving technical obstacles aside, a hypothetical  enforced  return  at
    the time of consideration would expose the returnee to a real  risk  of
    serious harm.  If it would then the proposed returnee  is  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection.

Consideration of whether there is a material error of law

13. Unfortunately there is a real lack of clarity in this determination.

14. First there was a very large bundle of background evidence  before  the
    judge in relation to the  present  situation  in  Libya  which  is  not
    analysed.

15. Second, it is not clear whether the judge was allowing  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds  because  of  the  situation  in  Libya
    generally, and if so what the basis of the evidence for that conclusion
    was, given that there has been a  relatively  recent  country  guidance
    case which held that the situation in Libya does not presently  require
    a grant of  humanitarian  protection.  Alternatively,  whether  he  was
    allowing the appeal on the basis that  there  was  no  safe  method  of
    return.  Plainly it  is  highly  significant  that  since  the  country
    guidance case was heard the main airport  through  which  returns  were
    being effected has been bombed and is not operational, but  it  is  far
    from clear from the judge's reasoning whether that was  the  basis  for
    his decision.

Resumed Hearing

16. The sole issue at the resumed hearing  was  whether  the  appellant  is
    entitled to humanitarian protection under the  Qualification  Directive
    because either, the situation in Libya amounts  to  an  armed  conflict
    that raises a risk of serious harm,  the  appellant  arguing  that  the
    country guidance case of AT & Others (Article 15c; risk categories  CG)
    [2014] UKUT 318  should  be  departed  from,  or  alternatively  he  is
    entitled to humanitarian protection  because  there  is  real  risk  of
    serious harm at the point of return.

Submissions

17. Mr Diwnycz stated that, while he accepted that  there  were  no  direct
    flights between the UK and Tripoli,  and  that  the  FCO  continues  to
    advise against all travel to Libya, there were flights from Istanbul to
    the Tripoli Military Airport, and from Monastir and  Kabul,  but  aside
    from that he could not advance any argument other than to rely  on  the
    reasons for refusal letter and the IDIs.  He was hampered by  the  fact
    that he did not have a complete file but confirmed that he did not seek
    an adjournment at least in part because of the inordinate  delay  which
    it has taken in getting this matter back before the Tribunal.

Mr Filkin's Submissions

18. Mr Filkin acknowledged that the Tribunal  in  AT  &  Others,  heard  in
    November 2013 and promulgated in July 2014 concluded that the risk from
    indiscriminate violence was not so high as  to  engage  Article  15(c).
    However that was on the basis that there were flights from  the  UK  to
    Tripoli Airport and, on the evidence at that time,  a  finding  that  a
    returnee from the UK would be in need of protection on the  grounds  of
    risk at the airport was not warranted. He submitted that it  should  no
    longer be followed.

19. Because this has not been set as a country guidance case to  reconsider
    that issue and, because I am satisfied that  the  appeal  ought  to  be
    allowed on the grounds of risk along the route  of  return,  I  am  not
    going to reach  a  decision  as  to  whether  the  situation  in  Libya
    everywhere amounts to an armed conflict raising a risk of serious  harm
    at the present time.

20. Mr Filkin, in reliance on JI v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 279 argued that the
    Secretary of State was not entitled to refuse to be drawn on the detail
    of how the appellant could be returned.  She was not entitled to  state
    that when the return was enforced it  would  be  done  safely  and  not
    entitled to refuse to engage with the issue of what an enforced  return
    would look like.

21. At paragraph 113 of JI the Court of Appeal said:

      i) "The question here is whether, in the determination of the  primary
         issue whether the appellant would be at risk on return to Ethiopia,
         SIAC has wrongfully delegated the determination  of  part  of  that
         question to the Secretary of State.  I am satisfied that it has and
         that if it had asked itself whether at the time of its decision the
         appellant could be safely returned, the only  possible  answer  was
         that he could not.   Accordingly,  I  uphold  the  appeal  on  this
         point."

    In MS (Ivory Coast) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 133 the Court held:

         "The appellant was entitled to have determined whether removal from
         the UK with an outstanding contact application would breach Section
         6 of the Human Rights Act  1998.   That  question  was  capable  of
         resolution one way or the other.  What was not appropriate  was  to
         leave her in this country in limbo with temporary admission and the
         promise not to  remove  until  her  contact  application  had  been
         concluded.  Temporary admission is, as we have explained, a  status
         given to someone liable to be detained  pending  removal.   If  the
         appellant had a valid human rights claim she is not  liable  to  be
         detained pending removal.  And if she has  not,  she  ought  to  be
         removed.  If she is entitled to discretionary leave to  remain  she
         ought to have it for the  period  the  Secretary  of  State  thinks
         appropriate, together with the advantages that it conveys;  and  if
         not she ought not to.

         On the point of principle the AIT should have decided  whether  the
         appellant's removal on the facts as they were when they  heard  the
         appeal i.e. with her outstanding application for contact  with  her
         children, would have violated Article 8 of the ECHR  and  thus  put
         the Secretary of State in breach of Section 6 of the  Human  Rights
         Act 1998 if he removed her.  It was not open to the AIT to rely  on
         the  Secretary  of  State's  assurance  or  undertaking  that   the
         appellant would not be removed until her  contact  application  had
         been resolved.  Nor was it appropriate to  speculate  upon  whether
         there might be a violation of Article 8 on different facts at  some
         point in the future.  Had the AIT decided the Article  8  point  in
         the appellant's favour she should have been  granted  discretionary
         leave to remain as envisaged in the  API  of  January  2006.   This
         could have been for quite a short period, whatever was regarded  as
         sufficient to cover the outstanding contact application.  It  would
         have been open to the appellant later to apply for the period to be
         extended should the circumstances so warrant.  It was open  to  the
         AIT under Section 87(1) of the 2002 Act, if it allowed the  appeal,
         itself  to  fix  the  period  of  discretionary  leave  to  remain.
         Alternatively,  it  could  have  remitted  that  question  to   the
         Secretary of State."

22. He also relied on HH (Somalia) [2010] EWCA Civ 426 where  at  paragraph
    58 the court rejected the Secretary of State's argument that the appeal
    under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
    was against the decision in principle to remove the appellant from  the
    UK and it was only when actual removal  directions  were  set  that  an
    issue could arise in law about the point or route of return because  it
    was only then that it was known where the appellant was to be  returned
    to.

23. The court held:

         "We do not accept Ms Laing's "strong argument."  Dealing only  with
         the arguments raised in this case and leaving aside those raised in
         the case of J, we consider that, in any case in  which  it  can  be
         shown either directly or by implication what route  and  method  of
         return is envisaged, the AIT is required by  law  to  consider  and
         determine any challenge to the safety  of  that  route  or  method.
         That conclusion is consistent with AG & GH; it is  consistent  with
         past established practice and, as we  will  later  explain,  it  is
         consistent  with  the  requirements  of   the   Qualification   and
         Procedures Directive.

         It appears to us  that  the  intention  of  the  Qualification  and
         Procedures Directives is to  require  a  member  state  to  make  a
         decision on entitlement within a reasonable time of the application
         and to allow the issues raised in it to be subject  to  an  appeal.
         We do not consider that  the  fact  that  an  appeal  from  removal
         directions is by way  of  judicial  review  rather  then  statutory
         appeal is of itself an insuperable objection.  But we do think that
         in a case in which the appellant raises a  cogent  argument  within
         his statutory appeal that there may not be a safe route of  return,
         the Secretary of State must address that  question  and  the  issue
         must  be  considered  as  part  of  the  decision  on  entitlement.
         Postponement of such consideration until the Secretary of State  is
         in a position to set safe removal directions would  effectively  be
         to postpone the decision until the cessation provisions  have  come
         into play."

24. Mr Filkin  accepted  the  distinction  made  in  HH  (Somalia)  between
    circumstances where a returnee cannot  be  returned  due  to  technical
    obstacles, where the risk does not arise, and where evidence  indicates
    that a return could put the returnee at risk of  serious  harm.   Where
    there is an identified issue of  risk  the  appellant  is  entitled  to
    international protection pending the emergence of a safe route.

25. Mr Filkin referred me to the background evidence.  The appellant  comes
    from Zwara which is in an area to the west of Tripoli controlled by the
    Libyan National Army.  Tripoli itself was invaded by Libya Dawn in July
    2014, an organisation itself called a terrorist group, for  example  by
    the Government of the USA,  and  has  been  associated  with  Islamists
    including Ansar al-Sharia.  Fighting in and  around  Tripoli  continues
    including air strikes by other Libya factions such as Libya Dignity and
    foreign powers such as the UAE and Egypt.  The previous Government, the
    House of Representatives now governs in exile from Tobruk  and  intends
    to retake Tripoli.

26. So far as the proposal that the appellant should travel  overland  from
    Tunisia is concerned, the very recent evidence from February and  March
    2016 not only established how hazardous a journey  this  could  be  but
    also that the situation is deteriorating, not least with the  expansion
    of Islamic State in that area.  One of the most  telling  documents  is
    the mapping of the security and armed groups associated with  Operation
    Dignity  and  Libya  Dawn  as  at  2014,  which  illustrates  the  huge
    complexity of the different armies, brigades and militias operating  in
    the region. Benghazi, to the east, is partially controlled by Ansar Al-
    Sharia and contested both by Libya  Dignity  and  Islamic  State  which
    itself now controls significant territory  in  Libya.   From  there  it
    carried out military operations against  other  factions  and  launches
    terrorist attacks against  Libyans  and  foreigners  in  Libya  and  in
    neighbouring countries including Tunisia.

27. IS terrorises the civilians present in  territory  which  it  controls,
    territory which now includes Sabratha,  west  of  Tripoli.   Mr  Filkin
    relied on a report from the UN Security  Council  dated  25th  February
    2016 reporting on the expansion of IS.  It  said  that  the  group  had
    managed to consolidate its grip on Sirte and its surroundings.

28. Approximately 10% of the current  population  of  Libya  is  internally
    displaced due to the fighting and a further 1,000,000 Libyans  live  in
    Tunisia out of a pre-2011 population of approximately 6,000,000.

Findings and Conclusions

29. I accept Mr Filkin's argument  that  the  Secretary  of  State  is  not
    entitled to refuse to engage with an assessment  of  the  risk  at  the
    point of return, and indeed Mr Diwnycz  did  not  seek  to  argue  that
    matters relating to safety along the route of return were not a part of
    the decision on entitlement.

30. It is clear from the Qualification Directive that a grant of status  is
    not required where there are "mere technical obstacles" to return.   In
    HH the Court of Appeal said:

         "In  our  view  these  are  probably  confined  to   administrative
         difficulties such  as  documentation;  they  may  include  physical
         difficulties such as the lack of return  flights;  but  the  phrase
         does not readily signify a requirement to ignore risks to  life  or
         limb once the returnee is back in the country of origin,  not  only
         because it does not say so -  it  speaks  only  of  return  to  the
         country of origin - but because to do so would  be  to  permit  the
         very thing that the Directive is designed to  prevent,  refoulement
         to a situation of real danger.  Our view is that the mere fact that
         technical obstacles are excluded from  consideration  suggest  that
         issues of safety during return are to be considered."

31. The fact that the border between Libya and Tunisia is closed from  time
    to time, and that there are no flights from Europe to Libya  in  itself
    does not require a grant of humanitarian protection.  However the  fact
    that the border is closed due to security concerns is  itself  evidence
    that there are such security concerns and therefore evidence of risk.

32. The airports identified in AT & Others as possible points of return are
    destroyed or closed.  The fact that no foreign carriers have flown into
    Libya since January  2015  is  evidence  of  their  assessment  of  the
    potential danger. Of course  the  fact  that  people  return  to  Libya
    voluntarily is also evidence that the risk of return may not, in  their
    assessment at least, be as significant as that assessed by the  foreign
    carriers.  Having said that, no evidence whatsoever was put  before  me
    at the hearing by the respondent that people  are  returning  to  Libya
    voluntarily. It was simply  said  that  a  Libyan  carrier  is  running
    commercial flights from non-European destinations.  The  suspension  of
    escorted returns to Libya is therefore not conclusive evidence that the
    appellant should be entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection, but
    is certainly factual evidence in his favour.

33. The FCO advice is aimed  at  British  citizens,  who  are  arguably  at
    greater risk of say kidnap by groups such as IS, but who are no more or
    less at risk of  indiscriminate  terrorist  attack.   It  is  therefore
    significant that the advice itself  refers  to  "ongoing  fighting  and
    greater instability" and a suspension of  escorted  returns  until  the
    situation in Tripoli improves and the airport re-opens.

34. The unchallenged evidence is that, whether the appellant travels by air
    to Tripoli, or overland from Tunisia, he would  be  travelling  through
    hostile areas controlled by groups other than those who are  in  charge
    of his home town of Zwara.  The Secretary of State did not point to any
    information whatsoever to  counter  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  Mr
    Filkin. Indeed, having heard his submissions Mr Diwnycz  said  that  he
    had been very even-handed and that the Secretary  of  State  could  not
    advance anything to rebut it.

35. The appeal is allowed on the basis that the appellant  has  established
    to the required standard that indiscriminate violence exists along  the
    putative routes of return and accordingly is entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection.

Notice of Decision

36. The original judge erred in law and his decision is set aside.   It  is
    re-made as follows.  The appellant's  appeal  is  dismissed  on  asylum
    grounds.  His appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]



Signed                              Date 25 May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
