
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11646/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th September 2015                |On 17th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     t t
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Davis of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Youngerwood promulgated on 22nd April 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male Turkish citizen  born  20th  October  1985  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 11th July 2014 and claimed  asylum  on
    19th July 2014.  The claim  was  based  upon  the  Appellant's  Kurdish
    ethnicity.  He claimed to be a member of the Democratic People's  Party
    (DEHAP).  He claimed that he had been  detained  and  tortured  by  the
    Turkish authorities on four occasions and accused of membership of  the
    PKK.

 3. He was released from his last detention having  agreed  to  work  as  a
    police informant against the PKK.  He was not given any  specific  time
    to report back to the police, and fled Turkey on 5th July 2014.

 4. In addition to his asylum claim the Appellant relied upon Articles 2, 3
    and 8 of the  1950  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  (the  1950
    Convention).  His Article 8 claim was based upon his family  life  with
    his wife who is a British citizen, and his two step-sons who  are  also
    British citizens.

 5. The application was refused on 24th November 2014, and the Respondent's
    reasons for refusal are contained in a letter of that date.

 6. In brief summary the Respondent accepted  the  Appellant's  nationality
    and identity but did not accept that he had been a  member  of  Kurdish
    political parties in Turkey, nor was  it  accepted  that  he  had  been
    detained and tortured by the Turkish authorities.

 7. The Respondent concluded that the Appellant would not  be  at  risk  if
    returned to Turkey and therefore he  was  not  entitled  to  asylum  or
    humanitarian protection, and his removal from this  country  would  not
    breach Articles 2 or 3 of the 1950 Convention.

 8. In relation to Article 8 it  was  not  accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    relationship with his wife is genuine  and  subsisting,  therefore  the
    Respondent considered that the requirements of  Appendix  FM  were  not
    satisfied.  The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant  satisfied
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE in relation to his private life.

 9. The Appellant's appeal was heard by Judge Youngerwood  (the  judge)  on
    1st April 2015.  After hearing evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  his
    wife, the judge did not accept that the Appellant had made  a  credible
    claim, and did not accept that he would  be  at  risk  if  returned  to
    Turkey.  Therefore his appeal was  dismissed  in  relation  to  asylum,
    humanitarian protection, and Articles 2 and 3 of the 1950 Convention.

10. The judge decided that he could not consider section EX.1  of  Appendix
    FM, because the Appellant had not made a valid application for leave to
    remain as required by R-LTRP1.1(b) of Appendix FM.

11. Therefore the judge considered Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules
    and found that there  would  be  no  breach,  on  the  basis  that  the
    relationship between the Appellant and his family in the United Kingdom
    could be maintained by the family visiting him in  Turkey.   The  judge
    noted that there had been a previous appeal  involving  the  Appellant,
    following refusal of his application for a visit  visa,  and  that  the
    judge who heard that previous appeal made a finding that the  Appellant
    and his  wife  were  married  and  in  a  genuine  relationship.   This
    conflicted with the contention in the Respondent's reasons for  refusal
    letter dated 24th November 2014 that there was no genuine relationship,
    and at the hearing  before  the  judge  the  Respondent  conceded  that
    following the principles in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 the Appellant
    did have a genuine family life, with his wife  and  step-children,  and
    the judge made a finding to this effect.

12. The  dismissal  of  the  appeal  caused  the  Appellant  to  apply  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  There was no challenge  to
    findings made by the judge that the Appellant would not be at  risk  on
    return nor was there any challenge to the findings made as to Article 8
    outside the Immigration Rules.

13. The Appellant challenged the judge's finding that he could not consider
    EX.1 because the Appellant had not made a valid application  for  leave
    to remain.  It was accepted that the Appellant had  not  made  such  an
    application, but pointed out that the judge had not taken into  account
    GEN1.9(a)(i)  which  states  that  the  requirement  to  make  a  valid
    application will not apply when the Article 8 claim is raised  as  part
    of an asylum claim, or as part of a further submission in person  after
    an asylum claim has been refused.

14. It was contended that the Appellant had made an Article 8 claim as part
    of his asylum claim and therefore the judge had erred materially.

15. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Astle who found it arguable that the judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account GEN.1.9 of Appendix FM.  Following the grant of permission  the
    Respondent issued a response  pursuant  to  rule  24  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  It was accepted that the  judge
    was correct under the Devaseelan principles  to  find  that  there  was
    genuine family life between the Appellant, his wife and  step-children.
    It was accepted that the judge had failed to consider EX.1, but it  was
    contended this was not a material error, as any  such  application  was
    unmeritorious and bound to have failed, as  the  Appellant  was  simply
    trying to remain in the United Kingdom without having  to  satisfy  the
    financial requirements of Appendix FM.

16. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that the decision should be set aside and re-made.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Error of Law

17. I firstly heard submissions from Mr Davis who relied upon his  skeleton
    argument dated 3rd September 2015.  Mr Davis  argued  that  it  was  in
    effect conceded by the Respondent that the judge had erred  in  law  in
    failing to  consider  EX.1,  and  it  was  clear  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred, by failing to take into account  GEN.1.9.   Mr  Davis
    submitted that it was clear that this was  the  only  reason  that  the
    judge found for not considering EX.1.

18. Mr Melvin submitted written representations dated  4th  September  2015
    accepting that  the  judge  had  erred  in  not  considering  EX.1  but
    contended that the error was not material.  In his oral submissions  Mr
    Melvin accepted that the error was material.

19. In my view the judge materially erred as contended  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  This was conceded  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  at  the
    hearing before me.

20. The judge erred by not taking into account GEN.1.9(a).  It is  accepted
    that the Appellant did not make a valid application for  limited  leave
    to remain as a partner, but the provisions  of  GEN.1.9(a)  state  that
    this requirement will not apply if Article 8 is raised as  part  of  an
    asylum claim.  I find  that  Article  8  was  raised  as  part  of  the
    Appellant's asylum claim, and this was acknowledged by  the  Respondent
    in the reasons for refusal letter dated 24th November 2014 at paragraph
    17, and  the  Respondent  recorded  that  the  Appellant  claimed  that
    removing him to Turkey or requiring him to leave  the  UK  would  be  a
    breach of his Article 8 ECHR rights because of  his  relationship  with
    his wife and her children.

21. It is apparent that it was conceded on behalf of the Respondent  before
    the judge that the Appellant had a genuine family life  with  his  wife
    and two step-children and the judge would have considered EX.1  had  it
    not been for his error in believing that there needed  to  be  a  valid
    application for leave to remain before he could do so.

22. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation  to
    EX.1.  There had been no challenge to the findings made in relation  to
    risk on  return,  and  therefore  the  findings  that  the  appeal  was
    dismissed in relation to asylum, humanitarian protection, and  Articles
    2 and 3 were preserved.  There had been no challenge  to  the  findings
    made in relation to Article 8 outside the rules,  and  therefore  those
    findings were also preserved.

Re-Making the Decision

23. I indicated that the decision would be re-made by the  Upper  Tribunal,
    as in my view this was not an appropriate appeal to remit to the First-
    tier  Tribunal.   I  observed  that  although  the  Appellant  was   in
    attendance, there was no interpreter, and therefore if further evidence
    was to be heard, the hearing would have to  be  adjourned  so  that  an
    interpreter could be provided.

24. Mr Melvin submitted that it would be appropriate to adjourn the hearing
    so that findings of fact could be made in relation to EX.1.

25. Mr Davis indicated that it was not proposed to call  further  evidence,
    and the Upper Tribunal had all the information needed in order  to  re-
    make the decision.  Mr Davis submitted that the decision should be  re-
    made without a further hearing.

26. Mr  Davis  submitted  that  it  was  clear  that  the  suitability  and
    eligibility requirements were met so that EX.1 could be considered, and
    I was asked to note that the First-tier Tribunal had made full findings
    in relation to EX.1, and I was  asked  to  adopt  those  findings.   In
    making those  findings  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  heard  detailed
    evidence from both the Appellant and his wife.

27. Mr Davis submitted that if the First-tier Tribunal  had  not  erred  by
    finding that EX.1 could not be considered because a  valid  application
    for leave had not been made, then the appeal would have  been  allowed,
    based on the findings made in paragraph 55 of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision.

28. I was asked to find that the  conclusions  reached  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in relation to EX.1 were not  inconsistent  with  the  finding
    that Article 8 outside the rules would not be breached.  The  issue  of
    reasonableness was not  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  when
    considering Article  8  outside  the  rules,  and  the  proportionality
    decision was not related to the issue of whether it was reasonable  for
    the two step-children to leave the United Kingdom.  In effect the First-
    tier Tribunal had found that separation of  the  family  would  not  be
    disproportionate.

29. Having heard oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

30. I will not set out in full the preserved  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In brief summary the finding in relation to the  Appellant's
    account of events in Turkey, that the  Appellant  was  not  a  truthful
    witness is  preserved.   Findings  that  the  Appellant  had  not  been
    arrested and detained  are  preserved,  as  is  the  finding  that  the
    Appellant would not be at risk if returned to Turkey.   Also  preserved
    is the finding that Article 8 outside the rules would not be  breached,
    in that the relationship between the Appellant and his  family  in  the
    United Kingdom could be  maintained  by  the  frequent  visits  of  the
    Appellant's wife to Turkey for short periods,  and  modern  methods  of
    communication.

31. The issue that I have to decide is whether the  Appellant  can  succeed
    with reference to section EX.1 of Appendix FM.  The burden of proof  is
    on the Appellant, and the standard of proof a balance of probabilities.
     The Appellant relies upon EX.1(a) which I set out below;

    'EX.1  This paragraph applies if

    (a)(i)    the  applicant  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a child who -

           (aa)   is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of  18
                years when the applicant was  first  granted  leave  on  the
                basis that this paragraph applied;

           (bb)   is in the UK;

           (cc)   is a British citizen or has lived in the UK  continuously
                for at least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of
                application; and

       (ii)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
           UK;'

32. For the avoidance of doubt, it was made clear that the  Appellant  does
    not rely upon EX.1.(b) which  relates  to  his  relationship  with  his
    partner, and would involve proving that there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

33. Having reflected upon the submissions made at the  hearing,  I  decided
    that it is not necessary to have a further hearing or to  hear  further
    evidence, and that I can  decide  this  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence that was given to the First-tier Tribunal.

34. It is appropriate to preserve the finding in paragraph 55 that there is
    genuine family life between the Appellant, his wife and the Appellant's
    two step-children.  This finding followed a previous appeal, in which a
    finding was made that there was genuine family life, and the fact  that
    there was genuine family life between  the  parties,  was  conceded  on
    behalf of the Respondent before the First-tier Tribunal at the  hearing
    on 1st April 2015.

35. I find that the Appellant and  his  wife  married  in  Turkey  on  22nd
    December 2010.  The Appellant's wife  has  two  sons  from  a  previous
    relationship, and they were both born in the United Kingdom, the  elder
    having a date of birth of 15th November 1999 making  him  15  years  of
    age, and the younger having a date of birth of 14th April  2003  making
    him 12 years of age.

36. The Appellant's wife has been in the United Kingdom since 1992 and is a
    naturalised British citizen.  Both boys are British citizens.

37. The biological father of the boys died following an accident in 2009.

38. It is not disputed and I find as  a  fact,  that  the  suitability  and
    eligibility requirements necessary for Article EX.1 to  be  considered,
    are satisfied.  I find that EX.1(a)(i) is satisfied  because  the  boys
    are under 18, in the United Kingdom, and are British citizens.

39. The issue that I have to decide is whether it would  be  reasonable  to
    expect them to leave the UK.

40. I agree with the submissions made by Mr Davis that this is not the same
    issue that was considered by the First-tier Tribunal when Article 8 was
    considered outside the rules.  I find that  the  judge  in  considering
    that issue, concluded that separation of the  family  would  not  be  a
    disproportionate breach of Article 8.

41. In considering whether it would be reasonable to  expect  the  boys  to
    leave the UK, I have considered ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 which gives
    a guidance on the best interests of children.  I note paragraph  41  in
    which it is stated, inter alia,

         "The fact of British citizenship does not  trump  everything  else.
         But it will hardly ever be less than a very significant and weighty
         factor against moving children who  have  that  status  to  another
         country with a parent who has no right to remain  here,  especially
         if the effect of doing this is that they will inevitably lose those
         benefits and advantages for the rest of their childhood."

42. I have also taken into account the principles in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74
    and in particular paragraph 12 which I set out below in part;

         "The benefits of British citizenship are  an  important  factor  in
         assessing whether it is reasonable to  expect  a  child  with  such
         citizenship to live in another country.  Moreover  in  H  (H)  Lord
         Kerr explained (at para 145) that what he was seeking  to  say  was
         that no factor should be given greater weight than the interests of
         a child."

43. I also take into account the principles in Sanade and  others  (British
    children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC) and set out below
    paragraph 95;

         "95. We shall take this helpful submission  into  account  when  we
             consider the application of  Article  8  to  each  Appellant's
             case.  We agree with it.  This means that where the  child  or
             indeed the remaining spouse is a British citizen and therefore
             a citizen of the European Union, it is not possible to require
             them to relocate outside of the European Union  or  to  submit
             that it would be reasonable for  them  to  do  so.   The  case
             serves to emphasise  the  importance  of  nationality  already
             identified  in  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  ZH
             (Tanzania).  If interference with the family  life  is  to  be
             justified, it can only be on the basis that the conduct of the
             person to be removed gives  rise  to  considerations  of  such
             weight as to justify separation."

44. I also bear in mind  EV  (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  and  in
    particular paragraph 35 which relates  to  factors  to  be  taken  into
    account when the best interests of children are  considered  and  those
    factors are set out below;

       . their age;

       . the length of time that they have been here;

       . how long they have been in education;

       . what stage their education has reached;

       . to what extent they have become distanced from the country to which
         it is proposed that they return;

       . how renewable their connection with it may be;

       .  to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic  medical  or  other
         difficulties in adapting to life in that country;

       . the extent to which the course proposed will interfere  with  their
         family life or their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.

45. The boys in this appeal are aged 15 and 12.   They  were  born  in  the
    United Kingdom and have always lived in this country.  They  have  been
    educated here and I find have no connection  with  Turkey,  other  than
    they have visited, and their mother and other relatives originate  from
    Turkey.  There are no relevant medical issues, and although their first
    language is English, I accept that if they do not  already  speak  some
    Turkish, they would  not  have  great  difficulty  in  learning  a  new
    language.   However  I  find  that  their  removal  would  be  a   very
    significant interference with their rights as British citizens.

46. I have taken into account the witness statement dated  1st  April  2015
    made by the Appellant's wife in which she explains that her younger son
    is still receiving counselling following the death of his father.   The
    elder boy was exhibiting behavioural problems at school and now attends
    a specialised college where he commenced his education at  the  end  of
    2014.

47. I accept that both boys  have  close  relatives  including  their  late
    father's parents, brothers and sister in the UK.

48. I accept that the eldest boy has visited Turkey twice, once  he  was  2
    years of age, and once when he was 11 years of age and that the younger
    boy has visited three times.

49. Having considered the case law referred to above, and having considered
    the facts as I find them, I  conclude  that  placing  weight  upon  the
    British citizenship of the boys, the fact that they were born here  and
    educated here, and that  they  have  close  family  members  here,  and
    although they have visited Turkey they have never lived there  for  any
    length of time, that it would not be reasonable to expect them to leave
    the  United  Kingdom.   Therefore  the  requirements  of  EX.1(a)   are
    satisfied and the appeal succeeds for that reason.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.

I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

I allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules  with  reference  to  section
EX.1(a) of Appendix FM.

I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  direction.   I  continue  the
anonymity order pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules  2008.   Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.

This direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.  The order is made because  this  appeal  involved  considering
the interests of the Appellant's minor step-children.


Signed   Date: 10th September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there is no fee award.


Signed   Date: 10th September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

