
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11491/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 July 2016                       |On 26 July 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     S D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagiotopoulou, Counsel, instructed by Yemets
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of the  Ukraine  born  on  [  ]  1964.   He
    arrived on the most recent occasion on 15  February  2015  and  claimed
    asylum on arrival.  The basis of his claim is that he was a colonel  in
    the Ukraine military labour forces based in Crimea and had been in  the
    forces for over 30 years.  However, he resigned in October  2014  as  a
    result of an event that had befallen him,  namely  that  following  the
    Russian takeover of Crimea in late 2014, initially  his  wife  received
    threatening text messages and telephone calls as a consequence of which
    she fled the country.  Subsequently the  Appellant  was  advised  by  a
    member of the SBU, the Ukrainian security service, that he would be  in
    difficulty if he continued to make clear his criticism of colleagues in
    the military  including  senior  officers  whom  he  considered  to  be
    traitors because  they  supported  and  assisted  the  Russian  forces,
    despite their public claims otherwise.

 2. The Respondent refused his application for asylum on 7 August 2015  and
    the Appellant appealed against this decision.  His appeal  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mill for hearing on 21 April 2016.  In
    a decision dated 4 May 2016 the judge dismissed the appeal.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was made on 16 May 2016 in time
    on the basis of the following grounds: firstly,  that  the  judge  made
    material errors of fact and failed to have regard to relevant  factors.
    It was asserted that the  judge  erred  in  his  understanding  of  the
    Appellant's claim for seven reasons.

    (i)  at paragraph 30.a. the judge considered  that  the  Appellant  had
         failed to adequately  explain  his  move  from  Crimea  to  Odessa.
         However, in so finding the judge failed  to  take  account  of  the
         Appellant's response at 4.2 of his screening interview that he  and
         other naval officers were evacuated from Crimea to Odessa after the
         crisis unfolded

    (ii) at 30.a. the judge regarded it as important that the Appellant did
         not seek to flee from Ukraine after the  initial  threats  that  he
         received but in so doing failed to have regard to  the  Appellant's
         account that he would disappear if he did not resign from the armed
         forces and that having resigned he considered that  the  threat  to
         himself had been eliminated

    (iii)    at 29.k. of his decision the judge finds  that  the  Appellant
         had been unable to explain why  he  had  not  contacted  anyone  in
         Ukraine to provide information regarding him speaking  out  against
         those who had acted to support the  Russian  cause.   However,  the
         Appellant in oral evidence stated he had  no  family  remaining  in
         Ukraine and he did not believe that his SBU source would be able to
         assist him as he would be concerned about his own  safety  and  had
         only agreed to meet the Appellant in person  in  Kiev  in  February
         2015.

    (iv) at paragraph 30.b. the judge states that the Appellant believed if
         he resigned he would not receive any threats but failed  to  advise
         as to any specific threat that he had received.  The point was made
         that this is incorrect as the Appellant had specifically stated  he
         had been threatened if he did not resign and that he would be  sent
         to Luhansk or Donestsk where he would disappear, which he perceived
         as implying he would be killed in the conflict  or  something  more
         sinister.

    (v)  it was submitted that the judge erred in  failing  to  assess  the
         Appellant's credibility in  the  round.   Nowhere  in  the  judge's
         assessment is there any consideration of the answers given  by  him
         in interview or indeed his screening interview  which  were  highly
         consistent with the account as set out in his statement.

     (vi)    the judge erroneously assumed that the Appellant ought to have
         known why his attendance at the public prosecutor's office had been
         requested [30.h.] but the Appellant was not asked by either of  the
         parties or the judge at the hearing to speculate as to  the  reason
         for such a request and it was unjust  for  the  judge  to  make  an
         adverse credibility finding on this basis;

    (vii)    the judge's conclusion at 30.n. that the Appellant is  one  of
         many thousands of people that may have or have criticised those who
         defected to support the Russian  cause  in  Crimea  fails  to  have
         regard to the Appellant's prominent position in the naval forces in
         Ukraine and it cannot rationally be  said  that  his  criticism  of
         those who defected would carry  the  same  weight  as  an  ordinary
         civilian.

 4. The second of the grounds of appeal is that the judge  failed  to  give
    any or any adequate reasons for his findings, in  particular  rejecting
    the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  spoken  publicly  against   specific
    individuals, in finding that the Statement of Additional Grounds is not
    consistent with the Appellant's stated position in the Asylum Interview
    Record, in finding that the Appellant is not wanted  by  the  Ukrainian
    government because this is not evidenced, e.g. by  an  arrest  warrant,
    and in finding that the Appellant had been vague in relation to a range
    of other matters at 30.k.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on
    27 May 2016 on the basis that it was arguable that  too  much  emphasis
    was placed by the judge  on  (a)  the  Appellant's  failure  to  obtain
    corroborative evidence from the Ukraine, which he has no requirement to
    do; (b) his wife's failure to give evidence, which may  not  have  been
    helpful if she was here at the relevant time and  (c)  his  failure  to
    clarify matters that had not been put to the Appellant and  accordingly
    there was a material error of law in the way the evidence was assessed.

    Hearing

 6. The appeal came before me for hearing on 7  July  2016  where  I  heard
    submissions from Ms Panagiotopoulou on behalf of the Appellant  and  Mr
    Whitwell on  behalf  of  the  Home  Office.   Ms  Panagiotopoulou  made
    submissions in line with the grounds of appeal.  She drew my  attention
    to the  fact  that  the  judge  had  accepted  material  parts  of  the
    Appellant's claim, in particular that he had been a high-ranking  naval
    officer and served in the  Ukraine  military  for  33  years  and  that
    latterly he had been head of fuel supplies in the Ukraine and at  29.k.
    of his decision the judge expressly accepted  that  the  Appellant  was
    likely to have criticised those  generally  who  assisted  the  Russian
    cause and did defect.

 7. The judge then went on to find that  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant had made such criticism publicly or to any source that  would
    cause him any  difficulty  and  the  judge  relied  on  an  absence  of
    documentary evidence to support his claim and on  that  basis,  amongst
    others, found the Appellant not to be credible.

8.   I found that the First tier Tribunal Judge erred materially in law  and
    announced my decision at the hearing. I now give my reasons.

    Decision and reasons

 8. I find the judge erred materially in law because, having accepted  that
    the Appellant had a high profile in the Ukrainian Navy and that he  was
    likely to have criticised individuals who assisted  the  Russian  cause
    and did in fact defect, I do not find that it was properly open to  the
    judge to go on to  say  that  the  Appellant  did  not  make  any  such
    criticism either publicly or to any particular source that would  cause
    him difficulty.  There would have been little point in the  Appellant's
    criticism, for example, of individuals of lower ranks and I accept that
    the targets of his concern and criticism would  have  been  his  fellow
    officers of relatively high rank.

 9. I  also  note  in  this  respect  that  the  Appellant  named  specific
    individuals in his asylum interview and, as is recorded by the judge at
    29.a. and at 29.d. two online petitions were produced and translated at
    pages 25-31 of the Appellant's bundle in which two of these individuals
    are named and identified as having betrayed Ukraine.  The judge appears
    not to place any weight on these because of the fact that the petitions
    were only initiated in 2016, which  postdates  the  Appellant's  claim.
    However, in my view it adds substance to the Appellant's claim in terms
    of supporting what he says as being likely to be true  that  those  two
    high-ranking Ukranian officers, Commander Admiral  Gayduk  and  Admiral
    Tymchuk, had indeed supported Russia as opposed to Ukraine.  I  further
    find that the judge erred materially  in  law  in  failing  to  clarify
    matters with the Appellant and then taking the  point  against  him  in
    respect of his credibility.  This is  arguably  in  breach  of  natural
    justice and does render as a whole  the  judge's  credibility  findings
    unsound.

10. In relation to this second point Mr Whitwell did not seek to argue that
    the judge was justified in so doing, if indeed  this  is  what  he  had
    done. In light of my conclusions above, I find that there is a material
    error of law which vitiates the findings and conclusions of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.

    Notice of Decision

11. Therefore I allow the appeal to the extent that it is remitted back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mill.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 26 July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
