
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11595/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th September  2015                       |On 1st October  2015          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                                    S S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. Saleem of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 30th December 1996 is a citizen  of  Afghanistan.
    The Appellant had come to the United Kingdom on 10th October  2012  and
    claimed asylum on  18th January  2013.   The  Respondent  refused  his
    application on 19th May 2014 but by virtue of his age  he  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain until 29th June 2014.  On 24th June  2014
    he made further application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.
    That application had been refused by the  Respondent  on  4th  December
    2014.

 2. The Appellant had appealed that decision and his appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Sullivan sitting at Hatton Cross on 1st April
    2015.  The judge had allowed the appeal on both asylum and human rights
    (Article 3) grounds.

 3. The Respondent had made application to appeal  that  decision  on  24th
    April 2015.  Essentially the Respondent asserted  that  the  judge  had
    erred in law in making findings that the Appellant would be at risk  in
    his home area or unable to relocate internally.

 4.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth on 7th May 2015 saying that it was arguable that an error
    of law had been made in the manner referred to within  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  The matter comes before me in accordance  with  directions  to
    firstly determine whether an error of law was made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or not.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 5. Mr Tarlow made submissions based on the  Grounds  of  Appeal  contained
    within the application stressing the fact that the Appellant was now an
    adult and not a child.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 6. It was submitted that the judge was clearly aware  that  the  Appellant
    was an adult and that a reading of paragraphs 54 to  56  indicated  the
    judge considered a risk on return and had  also  considered  relocation
    elsewhere.  It was agreed by both  representatives  that  elsewhere  in
    Afghanistan essentially meant Kabul.

 7. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    submissions and the evidence.  I now  provide  that  decision  with  my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 8. The judge was criticised within the Grounds of  Appeal  for  apparently
    applying the wrong test in  terms  of  return  to  Afghanistan,  namely
    applying "reasonableness" rather than risk.  Permission granting appeal
    adopted the same approach.

 9. The judge had carefully noted and assessed the Appellant's evidence and
    had for the most part found him to be credible and  consistent.   There
    is no challenge to those findings made by the judge and indeed they are
    reasonable and sustainable.

10. The judge had concluded that the Appellant as a teenager and within the
    last three years had been subject to sexual abuse in a  practice  known
    as bacha bazi within his home area.  She had accepted  the  perpetrator
    was a man of power  and  influence  at  that  stage  but  as  noted  at
    paragraph 54 was uncertain as to his level of power and influence  now.
    However she also made clear findings  at  paragraph  54  that  the  man
    (referred to as CS) had links to the  government  and  had  abused  the
    Appellant's family since the Appellant left and as  recently  as  2014.
    The judge also noted at paragraph 55 that it would not be reasonable to
    expect the Appellant to return to his home area of Afghanistan.  It  is
    unfortunate the judge used the word "reasonable" because regrettably it
    is easy to cherry pick words or phrases out of context but a reading of
    the decision as a whole presents in a different picture.

11. A reading of paragraphs 53 to 57 provides the context  of  the  judge's
    findings.  The judge had concluded that CS had links to the government,
    had abused the Appellant's family  since  the  Appellant's  escape  and
    would still have an interest in  the  Appellant.   She  concluded  that
    within his home area his family had not and would not in the future  be
    able to protect the Appellant.  She had concluded that because  of  his
    age he would not be at risk of sexual abuse, however found  that  there
    were other risks posed that his family could not  protect  him  against
    (paragraph 56).

12. It seems clear when also reading paragraph 54 that  the  judge  had  in
    mind the risks faced by the Appellant from  CS  as  someone  who  would
    regard the Appellant  as  an  individual  potentially  able  to  inform
    against CS and thereby  place  him  at  risk  of  arrest  or  at  least
    exposure.  The risk to the Appellant on return to his home area was not
    therefore of potential further sexual abuse but  essentially  of  being
    silenced because he would  be  perceived  as  a  potential  witness  or
    informant against a powerful individual.  That was  a  conclusion  that
    the judge was entitled to reach and the narrative of the decision  when
    read fully demonstrates a logical process  for  her  arriving  at  that
    conclusion.

13. It seems clear therefore that the judge had found a risk on  return  to
    his home area and thereafter the judge  had  correctly  looked  at  the
    potential of relocation elsewhere in Afghanistan.  As  conceded  by  Mr
    Tarlow that essentially meant Kabul.

14. In terms of relocation within his home  area  the  applicable  test  is
    whether such relocation would be unduly harsh.  The judge  had  already
    identified a risk to the Appellant from CS who she had found had  links
    to the government.  She found the Appellant had not lived independently
    before, nor would relocation provide family support.  She further found
    a vulnerability within the Appellant given his exposure of sexual abuse
    within the last three year  period.   The  judge  referred  to  factors
    within AA [2012] UKUT 0016 which deals with the  return  of  unattended
    children.  The Home  Office  criticised  the  judge  pointing  out  the
    Appellant is an adult.  The judge was aware that the  Appellant  is  an
    adult.  The judge referred to "combination of circumstances highlighted
    in AA, and the Appellant's particular circumstances as  a  young  adult
    who has been the victim of sexual abuse as  a  child  within  the  last
    three years".   That  does  not  suggest  the  judge  was  unaware  the
    Appellant was now an adult nor necessarily  relied  solely  on  AA  but
    regarded the features within AA  as  useful  and  pertinent  given  the
    particular circumstances of the  Appellant.   Those  were  matters  the
    judge was entitled to consider in the context  of  this  case  and  her
    findings on fact and credibility.  When the decision is read as a whole
    it does not disclose any material error of law.



Notice of Decision

15. I do not find a material error of law was made by  the  judge  in  this
    case and uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

16. Anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

