
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11390/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th December 2016                          |On 15th December 2016         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                     H S
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Burns (instructed by Parkview Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This matter came  before  me  for  a  resumed  hearing  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal, an error of law having previously been identified by  Deputy
      Upper Tribunal Judge Monson on 10th May 2016.

   2. The original appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  was  before  Judge
      Gladstone on 16th July 2015.  She  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
      against refusal of his asylum claim. The Appellant claimed  to  be  at
      risk on account of having attended Christian meetings in Iran,  having
      previously been a devout Muslim. The Judge dismissed his appeal.


   3. Judge Monson, in his decision, noted the principal  ground  of  appeal
      advanced on behalf of the  Appellant  was  that  Judge  Gladstone  had
      failed to engage with the detailed expert evidence of Dr Kakhki. Judge
      Monson was persuaded that there was an error of law on the grounds  of
      inadequate  reason.  He  found  that  there  were  two  broad   themes
      discernible in Dr Kakhki's report.  The  first  that  in  the  country
      guidance case of SB (risk on return - illegal  exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]
      UKAIT 00053 the central focus of his expert evidence lay elsewhere and
      thus he did not deploy all the available existing material which  bore
      upon the risk factors associated with the return of  a  failed  asylum
      seeker who had exited illegally. Judge Monson considered the Judge had
      given adequate reasons for not departing from the findings  of  SB  on
      that ground.


   4. However, the other theme Judge Monson found discernible in Dr Kakhki's
      report was that in early 2011 there had been a hardening of  attitudes
      to returning failed asylum seekers, such that the risk of  them  being
      persecuted for claiming asylum abroad  and/or  exiting  illegally  had
      considerably increased. In  support  of  that  proposition  Dr  Kakhki
      relied on specific cases and pronouncements in the Iranian media which
      clearly post-dated the promulgation of SB. Judge Monson found  it  was
      incumbent on Judge Gladstone to engage with that new material  and  if
      she did not consider that it was  of  sufficient  cogency  to  justify
      departure from  SB,  she  needed  to  explain  why  she  reached  that
      conclusion.


   5. Judge Monson directed that the matter be listed for a resumed  hearing
      preserving all findings save for the finding on the risk on return  to
      the Appellant as a failed asylum seeker who had exited illegally.


   6. The matter first came before me on 1st December 2016. By that time the
      Appellant was unrepresented and the Upper Tribunal had not  booked  an
      interpreter. Due  to  the  lack  of  either  a  representative  or  an
      interpreter I adjourned the matter to be relisted  before  me  on  8th
      December.


   7. By the time it came before  me  on  8th  December  the  Appellant  had
      secured representation and Mr Burns appeared before me.


   8. The Appellant is in some difficulties in this case because although Dr
      Kakhki was the expert in SB he was also the expert in the new  country
      guidance case of SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker)  Iran
      CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC). That decision was  promulgated  after  the
      error of law decision  but  before  the  matter  came  before  me.  Dr
      Kakhki's evidence as detailed in the present case was fully considered
      in that country guidance case which concluded:-


        a. An Iranian male whom it is sought to return to  Iran,  who  does
           not possess a passport, will be returnable on a laissez  passer,
           which he can  obtain  from  the  Iranian  embassy  on  proof  of
           identity and nationality.


        b. An Iranian male in respect  of  whom  no  adverse  interest  has
           previously been manifested by the Iranian state does not face  a
           real risk of persecution/breach  of  his  Article  3  rights  on
           return to Iran on account of having left Iran  illegally  and/or
           being a failed asylum seeker. No such risk exists at the time of
           questioning on return to Iran  nor  after  the  facts  (i.e.  of
           illegal  exit  being  a  failed   asylum   seeker)   have   been
           established.  In  particular,  there  is  not  a  real  risk  of
           prosecution leading to imprisonment.


   9. That country guidance case having been  promulgated,  the  Appellant's
      case has disappeared. On the basis of that case he clearly is  not  at
      risk on return. Mr Burns accepted that he was unable to point  to  any
      meaningful distinction between the Appellant's case  and  the  country
      guidance  case  and  he  indicated  the   Appellant   understood   the
      difficulties he faced.


  10. As the new country guidance case provides a  complete  answer  to  the
      Appellant's case his appeal falls to be dismissed.


  11. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

   Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008

   Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant  is
   granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
   indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  Failure to comply
   with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings



Signed                              Date 14th December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
