
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11149/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th December 2015                |On 17th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                     a t
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Thornhill
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 8th January  1981.   The
    Appellant claimed to have arrived in  the  UK  in  2010  with  a  valid
    student dependent visa.  This  was  subsequently  extended  until  June
    2014.  He was then issued with a 151A detailing that the Appellant  had
    no leave to remain in the UK.  Subsequent to that he made a  claim  for
    asylum on 18th August 2014.  That claim for asylum was based  on  three
    factors namely that the Appellant was of the Christian faith,  that  he
    had received  threats  from  his  brother  and  that  a  FIR  had  been
    registered against him.  By Notice of Refusal dated 3rd  December  2014
    the Appellant's application for asylum was refused.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Hands sitting at North Shields on 27th March 2015.  In  a
    determination promulgated on 14th April 2015 the Appellant's appeal was
    dismissed on asylum and human rights  grounds  and  the  Appellant  was
    found not to be in need of humanitarian protection.

 3. On 21st April 2015 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal.
     On 6th May 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle granted permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Astle noted that the grounds asserted that the judge had
    made a mistake  of  fact  that  created  unfairness  and  that  it  was
    incorrect to say that no-one overheard his argument with  his  brother.
    The Appellant's evidence was that there  were  others  present.   Judge
    Astle noted that the judge's  finding  that  his  parents  continue  to
    practise their faith was unsupported by evidence and it was argued that
    the judge's approach appeared to be that any  documents  from  Pakistan
    were unreliable.  He noted that the  two  reports  submitted  were  not
    inconsistent and that the judge's findings with regard to the  warrants
    were also unsustainable.  Further he considered it  was  arguable  that
    the judge was in error in her treatment of the documents submitted.

 4. On 18th May 2015 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24 response contended  that  the  judge
    had provided cogent reasoning for rejecting the Appellant's account and
    noted that it was not suggested that the Appellant's  parents  did  not
    continue to  follow  their  faith  and  that  it  was  clear  that  the
    Appellant's brother did not seek to convert them.  It was accepted that
    the  judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  therefore  that  they   remain
    Christians and that the judge was entitled to find that the assault was
    carried out by the Appellant's brother notwithstanding that the  matter
    then descended into a fracas.

 5. I was considerably assisted at the hearing of the error of law  by  the
    approach adopted by Mr Harrison on behalf of the Secretary of State who
    whilst acknowledging that he could not concede there was  an  error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  acknowledged  the
    forces of the arguments put forward by Mr Thornhill and would not  wish
    to put further opposition  to  them.   Those  arguments  were  that  at
    paragraph 21 of the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    where he set out various breaches of the  Appellant's  case  which  are
    said to go to his general credibility,  there  were  mistakes  of  fact
    which have created unfairness.  This appears to have been  apparent  by
    the manner in which the judge dealt with the events of  21st  September
    2013 when the Appellant and his brother were involved  in  the  violent
    argument and, at paragraph 27(g), where there was speculation that  the
    Appellant's parents continued to practise their faith,  notwithstanding
    that in his asylum interview the Appellant had described how his father
    was frail, disabled and bedridden and that his mother  too  was  frail,
    suffers from hearing loss and that harmony had existed in the household
    for many years even though the Appellant's  brother  had  converted  to
    becoming a verdant Muslim.  I accepted the contention put forward by Mr
    Thornhill that that finding was unsupported by the evidence.

 6. Further I accepted, and this appeared to be the  main  failing  of  the
    determination, that the First-tier Tribunal Judge fell  into  error  by
    making a mistake which led to unfairness at paragraph 21(i) and whether
    weight should be attached to  the  documentary  evidence  at  paragraph
    21(j).

 7. I consequently set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    gave directions for the re-hearing  of  this  matter.   It  was  agreed
    between the parties that albeit none of the findings of  fact  were  to
    stand this case should be retained by me in the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    matter came back before me on 29th September when it was adjourned  due
    to a service of a document verification  report  dated  29th  September
    2015 and the Secretary of State's acknowledgement that such service did
    not give  the  Appellant's  legal  representative  sufficient  time  to
    respond/investigate.

 8. It is on that basis that the  appeal  comes  back  before  me  for  re-
    hearing.  The Appellant is represented by his instructed  solicitor  Mr
    Thornhill.  The Secretary of State by Mr Harrison.  I  am  assisted  in
    this matter by the fact that both Mr Thornhill  and  Mr  Harrison  have
    appeared  in  this  matter  previously  and  consequently   are   fully
    conversant with the facts and issues.

Evidence

 9. Mr Thornhill advises me of the additional  evidence  produced  in  this
    matter consisting of objective evidence by way of  a  report  from  the
    Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada and an extract from the Express
    Tribune with the International  New  York  Times.   In  addition  I  am
    referred to subjective evidence being the medical report  of  Dr  Kokri
    dated 26th October 2015, the translated  letter  from  the  Appellant's
    advocate in Pakistan, Shazia Gulzar, and  the  communication  from  the
    Court of District and Session Judge Faisalabad dated 4th November  2015
    along with the statement of the Inspector  at  Saddar  Samundri  police
    station dated 2nd November 2015.  I note these documents are used along
    with English translations and evidence of courier packaging.

10. The Appellant attended and gave evidence.  He confirmed and adopted his
    witness statement which dates from  10th  March  2015.   Save  for  one
    typographical error at page  4  referring  to  the  conversion  of  his
    brother to the Muslim rather than  Christian  faith  he  confirms  that
    witness statement as  his  evidence-in-chief.   He  confirms  that  the
    original documents relied upon were submitted at the beginning  of  his
    asylum interview and that they are still held by the Home  Office.   He
    confirms that Shazia  Gulzar  is  his  solicitor  in  Pakistan  and  he
    confirms  and  identifies  the  original  documents  referred  by   his
    solicitors and now produced  before  the  Tribunal.   He  advises  that
    Shazia Gulzar is a Christian lawyer and that this lawyer was originally
    instructed through the assistance of his friend Nazir.

11. The Appellant was cross-examined by Mr Harrison.  The Appellant advises
    that the documents produced from Pakistan via  Shazia  Gulzar  had  not
    previously been seen by him or any of his family.  He advises  that  he
    had seen a copy of the arrest warrant but only with the documents  that
    are now produced.  When asked as to whether any members of  his  family
    had seen the arrest warrant in Pakistan he responds that the police had
    been visiting his parents' home and although his  father  had  died  in
    April 2015 they still visited and that his mother had been told of  the
    warrant.  He was apparently further told that there was a  warrant  for
    her despite the fact that she is old, disabled and unable to see.

12. Mr Harrison enquiries as to whether the Appellant has done any research
    into Shazia Gulzar.  The Appellant states that she is  a  solicitor  in
    the District Court and that he is aware that she is  a  Christian.   He
    states that he came to know about her because  his  English  solicitors
    advised that if he could obtain documents through a Christian solicitor
    that would be helpful and consequently his friend Nazir  contacted  her
    and asked her to prepare and obtain these documents which  she  did  by
    making an application to the court.  He states that she has two offices
    one being her principal office but also a chambers and  that  he  knows
    that because he made enquiries  himself  through  other  solicitors  in
    Pakistan.  He re-emphasises the fact that the suggestion that he should
    have got a Christian solicitor stems from an original  prompt  from  Mr
    Thornhill.

13. The Appellant advises that he was aware of his brother's conversion  to
    Islam in about 2005 when he (the Appellant) was still in Pakistan.   He
    advises his brother started pressurising him to convert in  about  2006
    when his brother started to have links  with  terrorist  organisations.
    The Appellant continued to reside in Pakistan between 2006 and 2010 but
    not with his parents because of death threats that were being  made  to
    him primarily due to his failure to convert to Islam.  He confirms that
    he married in 2008 but it was decided that she would come to the UK  to
    study.  He agrees that both he and his wife made that decision prior to
    their marriage and that she had borrowed money from her father  towards
    this.  He states that he was unable to assist because he  was  studying
    and whilst working it was only in a small job and that his wife came to
    the UK in 2007 as a student.  They married in 2008 back in Pakistan and
    she remained in Pakistan for some three weeks.

14. The Appellant states that he applied to come to the UK  in  about  2009
    but eventually left in 2010.  When  he  left  he  was  still  receiving
    regular threats from his brother asking him to join  his  organisation.
    The threats that he received included  those  stating  that  unless  he
    converted to Islam his brother would arrange for his belongings  to  be
    thrown out of his home despite the fact  that  both  his  parents  were
    Christian and he had been brought up as a Christian.   He  acknowledges
    that he has three other brothers (all  older)  and  three  sisters  and
    states that they were not targeted because they had already  moved  out
    of his parents' home.

15. The Appellant confirms that the threats made against him  were  at  the
    highest level indicating that for example a threat he received from his
    brother was that if he did not convert he would  "go  to  hell".   This
    culminated in a family visit in September 2013 which led to a fight and
    allegations were made against him by his brother who went to the police
    station and made  a  formal  complaint  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    disrespectful of the prophet Muhammad.

16. When asked if before 2013 either his wife or children (now aged  4  and
    2) had been threatened with physical violence or  death  the  Appellant
    responds that because of the threats made to him she was very concerned
    particularly bearing in mind that his brother was trying to  force  him
    to accept the teachings of the prophet Muhammad and was also mentioning
    the terrorist organisations which he belonged to.  He states  they  had
    an ongoing dispute and his brother asked him to  abandon  Christianity.
    He states that he advised his brother that belief in Muhammad was false
    and that he believed in Christianity and this then  led  to  his  being
    physically assaulted by his brother.  Thereafter his  brother  went  to
    the mosque and said that he  had  insulted  Muhammad  and  people  were
    looking for him telling him that they were going to kill him and he was
    forced to escape.  He advises he was afraid that  he  would  be  killed
    because  there  had  been  other  incidents  like  this  in  the  area,
    particularly bearing in mind that his brother had joined  an  extremist
    organisation, although so far as he is aware, his brother  had  himself
    never actually killed anybody.

17. The Appellant emphasises that  when  this  happened  he  did  not  only
    believe that he was going to be killed by  his  brother  but  that  the
    other Muslims who had gathered with him were likely to do so and in the
    light of the threat from what he considered to be a mob  who  were  out
    looking for him he managed to escape and got back to the UK arriving on
    26th September 2013.

18. The Appellant confirms that his wife had applied for  an  extension  of
    her visa in 2014 and that was refused and that the Appellant was issued
    with IS151A on 14th June 2014.  He confirms that only when he  received
    that notice did he claim asylum.  He  states  that  he  did  not  claim
    asylum immediately upon his return from Pakistan because at the time he
    was dependent upon his  wife  and  he  was  not  aware  of  the  asylum
    procedure.  Mr Harrison comments to the Appellant that  he  finds  that
    difficult  to  believe  bearing  in  mind  that  the  Appellant  is  an
    intelligent man with a good command of English and has  a  Bachelor  of
    Arts degree.  The Appellant responds by stating that on his  return  he
    was aware that there was a concept of asylum but  firstly  he  did  not
    know how to go through the process, secondly he felt that once  he  was
    in the UK he was safe and thirdly he concentrated on helping  his  wife
    look after the children.

19. Mr Harrison enquires as to the Appellant's employment in  the  UK.   He
    confirms that when he first arrived in  2012  he  worked  for  KFC  and
    thereafter in a care home looking after elderly  people.   He  confirms
    that he has had some medical treatment in the UK  having  an  operation
    some three years ago and that his daughter has had treatment in the  UK
    having been born with a hole in her heart.  Fortunately she  is  making
    good progress and she is monitored every six months and at the date  of
    the re-hearing of this appeal she is aged  2�.   He  advises  that  the
    doctors have told him that they would only operate upon her if the hole
    gets bigger.  He confirms his wife has not attended to give evidence  -
    stating this is on the advice of his solicitor - and  that  she  is  at
    home in Middlesbrough with the children.

20. Mr Thornhill had no re-examination.  I posed some further questions  to
    the Appellant enquiring as to whether he had contact with  his  mother.
    He states that he is unable to contact her and that all contact he  has
    made has been through the community.  He states that his brother  lives
    in the house with her but that he does not look after her  and  she  is
    dependent upon the local community and one of her daughters.  He admits
    to having contact with his  sister  who  helps  in  looking  after  his
    mother.  Finally he confirmed that his wife when studying in the UK was
    studying business management and that she completed the course and that
    her status within the UK is now dependent upon the  Appellant's  asylum
    claim.

Submissions

21. Mr Harrison relies on the Notice of Refusal of 3rd December  2014.   He
    submits that there are no direct physical threats  being  made  to  the
    Appellant or his family but that the threats are localised and  consist
    of a family dispute with his brother.  He further emphasises that there
    is only one member of the family namely the Appellant whom his  brother
    has tried to convert.   He  emphasises  that  the  Appellant  had  left
    Pakistan for the UK with his wife who wanted to carry on  studying  and
    that the Appellant returned to Pakistan and the incident  occurred  and
    in the ensuing argument allegedly reference was  made  to  the  prophet
    Muhammad and his brother purportedly ran off to the  mosque  contending
    to the attendees that the Appellant had  blasphemed  the  prophet.   He
    submits that once that had happened the Appellant left Pakistan and did
    nothing regarding the  threat.   He  points  out  that  only  when  the
    Appellant's wife was refused an extension to her visa and the Appellant
    had been issued with IS151A that he made his application.  Mr  Harrison
    relies on TP (Credibility) Zimbabwe  [2004]  UKIAT  00159  as  a  basic
    general premise.  Within that authority he points out that the Tribunal
    was entitled to reject an asylum claim  purely  on  the  basis  of  the
    Claimant's immigration history without considering the substance of his
    claim at all drawing the comparison that in TP the Appellant had failed
    to claim asylum for over a year after arriving in the UK and did not do
    so until he was arrested and told he would be deported.  He contends  a
    similar scenario applies in this case.  He submits that the Appellant's
    other good reasons in which he would wish to stay in the UK are  namely
    that he has two children who could be educated in this country and that
    one child has a serious heart condition.  He  further  points  out  the
    Appellant has been  in  employment  and  that  his  daughter  would  be
    entitled to free medical treatment for her heart condition  in  the  UK
    but that he would have to pay in Pakistan.  He asked me to dismiss  the
    appeal.  He points out  that  I  am  not  required  to  deal  with  any
    application pursuant to Article 8 on the basis  that  none  is  pursued
    within the appeal process.

22. In response Mr Thornhill  acknowledges  that  whilst  in  Pakistan  the
    Appellant could "just about tolerate his elder brother."  He points out
    that the Appellant distanced himself from his brother by moving to  the
    nearest largest town and that although threats were  made  against  him
    nothing came to physical harm but that his  family  had  said  that  he
    could move away completely.

23. Mr Thornhill refers me to paragraph 17 with regard to the timing of the
    Appellant's asylum claim and the fact that it  would  be  considered  a
    late application.  He points out that  the  Appellant's  testimony  has
    never altered and that he has  been  completely  up  front  as  to  the
    approach that he adopted.  He has set out at paragraph 17 why  he  took
    that decision.  He has set it out in some  detail.   He  contends  that
    that was a reasonable decision for the Appellant to take even  if  with
    hindsight it could be contended that that was not the  right  decision.
    Mr Thornhill accepts that the Appellant has returned  to  Pakistan  but
    then an argument arises and he is accused of blasphemy.  He  emphasises
    that the First Information Report is  not  a  false  one  as  is  often
    suggested in asylum appeals.  It  is  accepted  he  contends  that  the
    Appellant said certain things which you are not able to do in Pakistan.
     He points out that the Notice of Refusal does not deal with documents.
     Albeit that it was wrong for it not to give regard to the translations
    he acknowledges that perhaps at that time the author was unable  to  do
    so because the translations  were  not  before  him.   So  far  as  the
    document verification report he  notes  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    merely  relies  on  telephone  calls  and  a  report  writer  in  their
    contention that the report is not genuine.  He reminds me that the Home
    Office have to prove to a high degree of probability that it is a false
    document.  He emphasises the Appellant has now  through  his  Christian
    lawyer produced further evidence and that there is substantial evidence
    now before the Tribunal to show that those documents  are  genuine  and
    indeed that Mr Harrison on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  has  not
    sought to challenge him.  He points out that the  documents  have  upon
    them the seal of the police station.  He enquires  as  to  how  we  get
    therefore a conflicting view  on  the  First  Information  Report.   He
    points out that is the only evidence produced  from  the  Home  Office.
    There is nothing produced from the visa office from the District  Court
    in Faisalabad so the Tribunal  is  left  with  the  situation  where  a
    professional advocate has provided information which in theory the Home
    Office are suggesting must be false.  He  submits  that  the  threshold
    that the Secretary of State needs to reach has not been made  out.   He
    submits that the documents produced are genuine, that the  Home  Office
    have not made out their case and he asked me to allow the appeal.

Findings

24. I start by reminding myself that the burden of proof in asylum cases is
    on the lower standard.  Further it is necessary to  consider  a  proper
    approach to the credibility in  this  matter.   A  proper  approach  to
    credibility requires an assessment of the evidence and of  the  general
    claim.  In asylum claims, relevant factors  are  firstly  the  internal
    consistency of the claim; secondly the  inherent  plausibility  of  the
    claim; and thirdly the consistency of the claim with  external  factors
    of the sort typically found in country guidance.  I accept that  it  is
    theoretically correct that a Claimant need do no more  than  state  his
    claim but that claim still needs to be examined with consistency and as
    to inherent plausibility.  In nearly every  case  external  information
    against which the claim could be checked is available.

25. That would appear to be the case  in  this  appeal.   I  have  had  the
    benefit of hearing the Appellant's  evidence  under  cross-examination.
    The Appellant has answered the questions clearly and has  not  deviated
    from the evidence produced in his witness  statement.   It  is  to  the
    credit of Mr Harrison that he  has  not  sought  to  suggest  that  the
    Appellant has done so.  Further  it  has  to  be  remembered  that  the
    evidence before me is considerably different on  this  re-hearing  than
    that that appeared before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   Whilst  I
    accept that there is a document  verification  report  the  requirement
    from the Secretary of State is to a very high standard and that,  I  am
    satisfied, has not been discharged.  I have been shown the letter  from
    Shazia Gulzar and the arrest warrant issued out of the Saddar  Samundri
    police station in Faisalabad.  That evidence is  supported  insofar  as
    the envelopes in which  they  were  sent  to  Mr  Thornhill  have  been
    produced.  That evidence has been obtained at the recommendation of  Mr
    Thornhill who is a much respected and competent practitioner.   I  find
    that evidence compelling.  It is supportive of the  position  in  which
    the Appellant finds himself.

26. I acknowledge that the Appellant could be strongly criticised  for  the
    timing of his appeal.  He has deferred making that appeal until  served
    with notice of deportation.  The delay is not in his favour  but  I  am
    persuaded having heard his testimony there was good reason for that  as
    set  out  in  paragraph  17  of  his  witness  statement.   I   further
    acknowledge that it could well be  construed  that  the  Appellant  has
    other reasons for wishing to stay in  the  UK  namely  the  unfortunate
    position regarding his daughter's health and the fact  his  family  are
    now established in the UK and would wish to  remain.   I  note  however
    that no effort is made to bring this claim pursuant to Article 8 of the
    European Convention of Human Rights.  Mr Thornhill  puts  his  client's
    case solely on the risk that he would have on return.

27. I am satisfied that that is a real and genuine risk.   I  am  satisfied
    that to the lower standard the Appellant has discharged the  burden  of
    proof.  He has never veered from the threats he has received  from  his
    brother.  I totally accept that  if  this  were  purely  a  case  of  a
    property dispute or a family dispute then the Appellant would not be in
    a position to sustain an asylum claim.  However that no longer  remains
    the position.  This is an Appellant who has been accused  of  blasphemy
    of the prophet Muhammad.  I accept that he was pursued by  a  mob.   He
    managed to escape from that mob and returned to the  UK.   He  has  not
    returned to Pakistan since  then.   Subsequent  to  the  accusation  of
    blasphemy the Appellant has produced  evidence  of  an  arrest  warrant
    obtained against him by a Christian lawyer in Pakistan.  No evidence is
    produced by the Secretary of State discrediting the genuineness of that
    lawyer and I am, despite the document verification report, prepared  to
    accept having seen that  that  document  was  sent  in  envelopes  from
    Pakistan by the lawyer that those documents are genuine  and  that  the
    research has been carried out  and  the  evidence  obtained  by  Shazia
    Gulzar.

28. In the light of same I am satisfied for  all  these  reasons  that  the
    Appellant has a genuine fear of persecution for a Convention reason and
    that the Appellant is entitled to succeed in his claim for asylum.  The
    Appellant's appeal is consequently allowed.   It  is  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State that any claims pursuant to Articles 2 and 3 of  the
    European Convention of Human Rights rise and fall on the asylum  appeal
    and they too are therefore subsequently allowed.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

The Appellant's appeals are allowed pursuant to Articles  2  and  3  of  the
European Convention of Human Rights.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
