
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11567/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Birmingham Employment |Determination Promulgated       |
|Tribunal                        |                                |
|On: 18 November 2016            |On: 24 November 2016            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     EP
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Naz, Counsel instructed by Morden Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       Parkes in which the Judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, who
       claims to be a citizen of Eritrea, against the Secretary of  State's
       decision to refuse asylum and set removal directions.

    2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  12  March  2015  and
       claimed asylum the same day. His  application  was  refused  by  the
       Respondent on 7 August 2015. The Appellant exercised  his  right  of
       appeal against this decision and this is the appeal that  was  heard
       before Judge Parkes on 30 March 2016 and dismissed. The  Appellant's
       application for permission to appeal against the First-tier Tribunal
       Judge's decision was granted on 13  May  2016  by  Designated  Judge
       MacDonald in the following terms

    "The grounds of application state that the judge ignored the  terms  of
    the appellant's witness statement as to  why  he  only  spoke  Amharic.
    Furthermore, the judge failed  to  take  into  consideration  that  the
    Ethiopian Embassy failed to provide any written documentation to  those
    who are not Ethiopian nationals. In addition, the appellant  had  given
    his reasons for not claiming asylum in  Greece  and  France  which  the
    judge did not consider. Other grounds were put forward.

    The judge noted that the appellant's claim for  asylum  turned  on  his
    nationality (paragraph 16) but it appears he may  not  have  considered
    the explanations given by the  appellant  as  noted  above.  While  the
    grounds correctly say  it  is  a  material  error  of  law  to  require
    corroboration, the judge merely  said  that  there  was  no  supporting
    evidence from his uncle and  that  absence  did  not  assist  his  case
    (paragraph 25).

    However, for the reasons stated, the judge may have erred in law in not
    fully considering the appellant's evidence and permission to appeal  is
    therefore granted, for clarity, on all grounds."

    3. By a rule 24 response dated 20 May 2016 the Respondent  opposed  the
       appeal.

    4. At the hearing before me Ms Aboni  appeared  for  the  Secretary  of
       State and Ms Naz represented the Appellant and submitted  a  written
       skeleton argument.

Background

    5. The Appellant is 22 years old and claims to be a citizen of  Eritrea
       and a Pentecostal Christian. According to his account he was born in
       Campo Sudan, Assab and his mother died at the time of his birth. His
       father was a lorry driver so had to stay away from home for days  at
       a time. The Appellant's father employed an elderly lady who  was  an
       Amharic speaker  to  care  for  the  Appellant,  Amharic  being  the
       predominant language in the area. When the Appellant was 2 years old
       he moved with his father and the carer to Addis  Ababa  in  Ethiopia
       where they remained until 2000 when, like other Eritreans living  in
       Ethiopia, they were deported to Eritrea. They  remained  in  Eritrea
       until 2003 when following a police raid  on  a  Pentecostal  service
       that the Appellant was attending with his uncle  and  his  carer  he
       fled to Sudan. The Appellant remained there for the next 8 years and
       six months. He left Sudan with the help of an agent flying first  to
       Turkey and then moving on to Greece before travelling through Europe
       to the United Kingdom where he claimed asylum. The  Appellant  fears
       that on  return  to  Eritrea  he  will  be  persecuted  due  to  his
       Pentecostal religion and due  to  the  fact  that  he  left  Eritrea
       illegally.

    6. In dismissing his appeal, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  found  that
       the Appellant's claim turned on his  nationality.  The  Judge  found
       that the Appellant's  failure  to  speak  an  official  language  of
       Eritrea militated against his claim to  be  Eritrean  but  that  his
       evidence was consistent  with  him  being  an  Ethiopian  living  in
       Eritrea. The Judge did not believe that if  the  Appellant  were  an
       Eritrean national living in Eritrea with a father of that origin  he
       would be unable to speak Tigrinya. The  Judge  also  found  that  he
       could not attach any weight to the  Appellant's  evidence  of  being
       denied proof of nationality by the Ethiopian Embassy.

Submissions

    7. Ms Naz referred to the grounds of appeal. The  issues  are  language
       and nationality. The Judge found  that  the  Appellant  was  not  an
       Eritrean national because  he  spoke  Amharic  but  failed  to  take
       account of his detailed witness statement explaining why that is the
       language he speaks. Answering questions from me Ms Naz said that the
       Appellant lived in Eritrea from birth until the age of  2  and  then
       from age 6 to age 9. It was also wrong of  the  Judge  not  to  take
       proper account of the  fact  that  the  Ethiopian  Embassy  did  not
       consider  the  Appellant  to  be  Ethiopian.  Having   made   unsafe
       credibility findings, the Judge has then failed to consider  country
       guidance in dealing with risk on return.

    8. For the Respondent Ms Aboni referred to the rule 24 notice and  said
       that the Judge was entitled to find that the  Appellant's  inability
       to speak the language of Eritrea was sufficient for him to reach the
       finding that the Appellant was  not  Eritrean.  The  fact  that  the
       Ethiopian Embassy did not issue anything in writing  had  no  effect
       and having found that the Appellant was not Eritrean  there  was  no
       need  for  the  Judge  to  consider  Eritrean  country  guidance  in
       assessing risk on return.

    9. I said that  the  appeal  would  be  allowed.  The  Appellant  gives
       detailed reasons for his failure to speak Tigrinya  in  his  witness
       statement. The Judge appears to accept the chronological aspects  of
       the Appellant's account but does not refer to his witness  statement
       and explain why he does not accept the Appellant's account of why he
       speaks Amharic. I reserved my written decision.

Error of law

   10. The Appellant's account is clearly given in his  witness  statement.
       He claims to be a person who was born in the Campo Sudan district of
       Assab in Eritrea and that this was an  Amharic  speaking  area.  His
       mother died when he was born and so his father, a lorry driver hired
       an elderly Amharic speaking lady as his carer.  He  moved  with  his
       father and the carer to Addis Ababa at the age of 2 and then when he
       was 6 they,  along  with  other  Eritreans  were  deported  back  to
       Eritrea. He stayed in Assab again until the age of 9  when  he  left
       the country.

   11. The Appellant's account as briefly summarised above gives clear  and
       plausible reasons why he speaks Amharic  rather  than  Tigrinya.  In
       making his findings the Judge does not address any  of  the  reasons
       given and as such does not make  any  findings  that  address  those
       reasons. Indeed, the findings made seem to ignore  or  overlook  the
       Appellant's evidence. The Judge finds that if the Appellant were  an
       Eritrean national living in in Eritrea with a father of that  origin
       he would be able to speak the language of Eritrea. This ignores  the
       Appellant's claim that his father was largely absent  (the  question
       of what language his father spoke  does  not  appear  to  have  been
       raised), that he spent only the years from birth to 2 and 6 to 9  in
       Eritrea, that his carer was Amharic speaking and  that  Campo  Sudan
       (as opposed to Assab in general) is an Amharic speaking area.

   12. It is also a concern that the Judge  does  not  address  the  letter
       attesting the Appellant's nationality from the Eritrean Community in
       Lambeth. As such it is not clear whether this has been overlooked or
       discounted.

   13. In my judgment the apparent failure of the  Judge  to  consider  and
       address the Appellant's evidence is a material error of law.  It  is
       possible that a Judge assessing the Appellant's  evidence  may  have
       reached a different conclusion.

   14. The effect of this error must be to render the credibility  findings
       as a whole unsafe. Due to the nature of the  error  of  law  and  in
       accordance with the President's direction it is appropriate for this
       matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing de novo
       with  no  findings  preserved  although  following  MST  and  others
       (National Service - risk categories) CG [2016} UKUT  443  (IAC)  the
       only real issue given the  Appellant's  age  is  likely  to  be  his
       nationality.



Conclusion

   15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error of law for the reasons set out above.

   16. I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in
       accordance with the President's direction this  matter  is  suitable
       for and should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:  Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
