
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11803/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 9 February 2016                   |On 19 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    I E A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Wilford, Counsel instructed by Barnes, Harrild,
                    Dyer solicitors
For the Respondent     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that order.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The Appellant appeals against a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
         Judge J J Maxwell promulgated on  5  March  2015  ("the  Decision")
         dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's
         decision  dated  12  December  2014   refusing   his   asylum   and
         humanitarian protection claim.

      2. The background facts so far as it is necessary to recite  them  are
         that the Appellant who is a national of Afghanistan arrived in  the
         UK and claimed asylum on 31 March 2014.  The Appellant is  accepted
         by the  Respondent  to  have  been  born  on  1  January  2003  and
         accordingly he has been granted discretionary leave to remain as an
         unaccompanied asylum seeking child.   His appeal therefore  relates
         only to the refusal of his asylum and humanitarian  and  protection
         claim and proceeds under section 83  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 ("section 83").  The issue - indeed the only  issue
         - therefore for the Judge was whether the Applicant is a refugee or
         a person entitled to humanitarian protection.

      3. It is also relevant to note by way of background that the Appellant
         arrived in the UK with his cousin, Master  A  M  J.   His  cousin's
         appeal also under section 83 was  allowed  by  First-Tier  Tribunal
         Judge Oakley in a decision promulgated on  13  January  2015.   The
         Appellant submits that since his appeal relies on the  same  facts,
         his appeal should be allowed on the same basis.

      4. Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Pooler on 30 March 2015 but granted by the  Upper  Tribunal  on  29
         July 2015.  The matter  comes  before  me  to  decide  whether  the
         Decision contains a material error of law and, if  so,  to  re-make
         the decision or remit the appeal for rehearing  to  the  First-Tier
         Tribunal.

    Discussion and conclusions

      5. The Judge noted at [25] of the  Decision  that  the  Appellant  has
         discretionary leave in the UK.  Having noted that his discretionary
         leave may in fact endure for longer than currently granted  due  to
         his accepted age, the Judge continued as follows:-
             "[26]     ... the appellant will be required to  seek  further
             leave if he wants to remain in the  United  Kingdom;  at  that
             point, by reason of his then age,  LQ  could  not  be  further
             relied on.  Even if the appellant were granted asylum  now  on
             such a basis, the security situation in Afghanistan would,  at
             that point, need to be considered afresh.  I see little or  no
             practical difference for this appellant  whichever  status  he
             holds until the time comes for  him  to  apply  to  renew  his
             leave; if indeed that is what he decides to  do.   It  follows
             the appellant has not, in the light of my findings in  respect
             of future persecution by the Taliban,  been  disadvantaged  by
             any failure to trace; whether currently or in the future.
             [27]       I  am  aware  that  the  appellant's   cousin   was
             successful in his appeal against a refusal  of  asylum  and  a
             copy of the decision to allow his appeal is in the appellant's
             bundle.  That decision does not bind this Tribunal although  I
             have read it.   In  the  light  of  my  own  analysis  of  the
             authorities and this appellant's circumstances, it  is  not  a
             decision I am minded to follow."

      6. Having  referred  to  JS  (Former  unaccompanied  child  -  durable
         solution) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00568 (IAC)  and  AA  (unattended
         children)  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00016  (IAC),  the  Judge
         concluded that the Appellant had a durable solution in the form  of
         the discretionary leave which he had been  granted  and  thereafter
         concluded at [31] that the Appellant does not have  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution for a Convention reason and is not entitled  to
         humanitarian protection.

      7. Mr Wilford submitted that the  Judge  erred  by  dealing  with  the
         appeal on the basis that there would be no risk for  the  Appellant
         on return if his family could be traced when in fact they  had  not
         been. Applying Ravichandran v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [1996] Imm AR 97, Mr Wilford submitted  that  the  Judge
         was bound to consider the issue of risk  as  at  the  date  of  the
         hearing and not at some later date when the  Appellant  might  face
         removal.

      8. Mr Walker in response very  fairly  conceded  that  the  Judge  had
         failed to answer the very question which he was bound  to  consider
         namely  whether  the  Appellant  was  a  refugee  or  entitled   to
         humanitarian protection at the date of the hearing.  He  was  right
         to make that concession.  Mr Walker accepted that  the  Appellant's
         cousin's circumstances were if not the same then  very  similar  to
         the Appellant's and it was difficult to discern from  the  Decision
         what evidence there was before the Judge which entitled him not  to
         follow the outcome of that appeal or,  more  importantly,  to  find
         that the Appellant was not a refugee or  entitled  to  humanitarian
         protection at the date of the hearing.

      9. The headnote in AA (Afghanistan) and the case of LQ (Age: immutable
         characteristic)  Afghanistan  [2008]  UKAIT  00005   are   key   to
         understanding  the  issues  of  fact  which  the  Judge  needed  to
         determine and which, by reason of his flawed approach, he  has  not
         considered.  As indicated in AA (Afghanistan):-
             "[2]       ...  the  background  evidence  demonstrates   that
             unattached children returned to  Afghanistan,  depending  upon
             their individual circumstances and the location to which  they
             are returned, may be exposed to risk of  serious  harm,  inter
             alia from indiscriminate violence, forced recruitment,  sexual
             violence, trafficking and a lack of adequate arrangements  for
             child protection.  Such risks  will  have  to  be  taken  into
             account when addressing the question of whether a return is in
             the child's  best  interests,  a  primary  consideration  when
             determining a claim to humanitarian protection."

         LQ (Afghanistan) found that age is an immutable  characteristic  so
         that  Afghan  minors  can  form  a  particular  social  group  when
         considering whether a minor is entitled to refugee status.

     10.  At  [20]  of  the  Decision,  the  Judge  notes  the  Respondent's
         concession that even when an appellant is not a de facto orphan, he
         may still  need  to  be  considered  as  such  if  surviving  close
         relatives are traceable.  He notes that  this  is  the  Appellant's
         claimed position.  Having reviewed the  case  law  in  relation  to
         tracing, the Judge goes on to consider  the  Respondent's  duty  in
         relation to tracing.  It appears to be  in  that  context  that  he
         considers that the Respondent has offered a durable solution by way
         of the grant of discretionary leave.  Of course,  as  a  matter  of
         fact and law, that means that the Appellant will not be required to
         leave the UK.  However, as I note at  [2]  above,  the  only  issue
         which arises in a section 83 appeal is whether the Appellant is  at
         the date of the hearing entitled to refugee status or  humanitarian
         protection.  Since section 83 is only operable when  a  person  has
         been granted a period of  discretionary  leave,  it  cannot  be  an
         answer to that issue to say that they will not in fact  be  removed
         until discretionary leave expires and  so  cannot  be  entitled  to
         refugee status or humanitarian protection.   There  is  an  obvious
         circularity in that approach.

     11. The Judge noted at [24] that the Respondent's efforts to trace  the
         Appellant's parents had thus far been  unsuccessful.   Having  made
         that finding, it was incumbent on the Judge to go  on  to  consider
         whether that fact meant that the Appellant  would  be  entitled  to
         refugee status or humanitarian protection if assessed on the  basis
         of a removal at the date of the hearing.  That is the consideration
         which the Judge failed  to  carry  out  and  for  that  reason  the
         Decision does contain a material error of law.

     12. Mr Wilford invited me to allow the appeal on the  same  basis  that
         the Appellant's cousin's appeal was allowed.  That decision  is  of
         course not binding on me any more than it would be on another First-
         Tier Tribunal Judge.  There is  a  lack  of  consideration  in  the
         Decision of the background evidence when  judged  against  findings
         about what would occur to the Appellant if returned at the  present
         time.  Those are findings which need to be made in order  to  allow
         or dismiss the appeal. The absence of those factual findings  makes
         this appeal one which is unsuitable to be determined  initially  by
         the Upper  Tribunal.   Mr  Wilford  accepted  that  if  I  was  not
         persuaded to allow the appeal on the basis of reliance on the  fact
         that the Appellant's cousin's appeal had  been  allowed,  then  the
         appropriate course would be to remit the appeal to  the  First-Tier
         Tribunal.  Mr Walker agreed that this is  the  appropriate  course.
         He noted also  that  the  Tribunal  should  continue  to  link  the
         Appellant's  file  with  that  of  his  cousin  (appeal   reference
         AA/08517/2014) and for his part, he agreed to ensure that  the  two
         Home Office files would remain linked.

DECISION

I am satisfied that the Decision contains a material error  of  law.  I  set
aside the Decision. I remit the appeal to the First-Tier  Tribunal  for  re-
hearing before a different Judge.  The Tribunal file in this  appeal  is  to
remain linked with the file in appeal reference AA/08517/2014.

Signed      [pic]      Date 12 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
