
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/01344/2015
                                                               AA/11019/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25th July 2016                    |On 6th September 2016                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                     J S
                                     TBS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr K Wyn (Legal representative, Liyon Legal Ltd)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are Indian citizens and arrived in the UK on visit visas
    which expired in April 2015 on the day that they applied for asylum.
    Their applications were rejected by the Secretary of State for the
    reasons given Refusal Letters of the 9th of September 2015. Their
    appeals were heard by Judge Fenoughty in Birmingham on the 24th of May
    2016 and dismissed in a decision promulgated on the 3rd of June 2016.
    The Appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in
    grounds of application of the 17th of June 2016. Permission was granted
    by Judge Froom on the 28th of June 2016.

 2. The basis of the Appellants' claim for asylum is that the First
    Appellant's husband was involved with the LTTE and that they were
    suspected of being involved as well. The Secretary of State had
    rejected their claim for the reasons given, there were a number of
    inconsistencies, they have been able to leave India by plane and there
    had been a delay in making the claim.

 3. The Judge's reasons are given in paragraphs 70 to 79 of the decision.
    The Judge referred to a number of inconsistencies, finding that not all
    were relevant to their credibility, and rejected the Second Appellant's
    claim to have been unable to attend his asylum interview. The failure
    to mention that the Second Appellant had been beaten and that there
    were arrest warrants was held against the First Appellant as these were
    matters fundamental to her claim.

 4. The grounds argue that the Judge erred in giving too much weight to the
    differences between the First Appellant's screening interview and
    asylum interview and her failure to mention matters at the screening
    interview which she later detailed in the main interview. It is also
    argued that the Judge erred in finding that the Appellant's ability to
    obtain a visa to the UK undermined their claims, this would have been a
    matter for the British High Commission and not the Indian authorities.
    The grounds went on to argue that the Judge erred in relation to delay
    and applied too high a standard of proof.

 5. Judge Froom granted permission on all grounds. His principal
    observation was that the granting of a visa would be for the British
    High Commission and in his view although other cogent reasons were
    given for rejecting the Appellants' account these could not be
    disentangled.

 6. At the hearing Mr Bramble provided a copy of the Secretary of State's
    rule 24 response. It was submitted that the Judge directed herself
    appropriately. The visa issues was one of a number of issues taken by
    the Judge, it could not be said to be central tenet on which the
    account had been rejected. The Appellants' ability to leave India
    through lawful channels was a relevant factor on which the Judge was
    entitled to find against her.

 7. At the hearing the parties were represented as indicated and made
    submissions in line with their respective positions. These are set out
    in the Record of Proceedings and referred to where relevant below.

 8. It is clear that the suggestion that the ability to obtain a visa is
    irrelevant as that would be issued by the British High Commission and
    would have nothing to do with the Indian authorities. To that extent it
    is clear that the Judge erred, the question is the extent to which it
    is material. It is closely allied to the ability of the Appellants to
    leave India through lawful channels without being apprehended by the
    Indian authorities.

 9. The decision has to be read as a whole and I disagree with Judge Froom
    that there may be difficulties with disentangling the strands of
    reasoning involved. If paragraph 86 is excluded from the decision it
    makes no difference to any other part of the decision, its absence does
    not undermine any other aspect of the Judge's reasoning and it was
    clearly not either a central part of the Judge's findings or any part
    of a chain of reasoning. Given the other reasons that were given it is
    not in any way material to the decision and it does not amount to an
    error of law.

10. That is not the end of the matter as there are other criticisms of the
    decision which need to be addressed. It is suggested that the Judge did
    not have regard to the First Appellant's explanation for not mentioning
    the arrest warrants and beatings of her son in the screening interview.
    That is not a justified criticism as this was expressly considered in
    paragraph 73 where he claim to have been distressed was raised. It
    might be added that there had been a significant distance in time
    before the First Appellant was being interviewed and so had had time in
    which to collect herself when being questioned.

11. The asylum interview is the time for an Appellant to expand on the
    basics of the claim as the grounds of application observe. However the
    matters were being raised for the first time and not expanded upon. The
    Judge had to consider the Appellant's explanation, did so and was
    entitled to reject it.

12. The Judge was obliged to consider the question of delay in making the
    claim and did so. She did not treat the fact of the delay as inevitably
    leading to the conclusion that the Appellants claim was unreliable but
    was entitled to treat it as a factor.

13. The suggestion that the Judge applied too high a standard of proof in
    paragraph 83 is without merit. In that paragraph the Judge simply
    summarised the findings made and the lack of evidence that might have
    assisted. The Judge had set out the correct burden and standard of
    proof in paragraph 62 of the decision and there is nothing in the
    decision that would suggest that she applied a higher standard. A Judge
    is entitled to have regard to the absence of evidence that might have
    been expected and the obligation is on Appellants to provide assistance
    in the investigation of their claims.

14. Any decision of the First-tier Tribunal has to be read fairly and as a
    whole. The grounds have taken aspects out of context and have sought to
    argue that they carry a weight that is not justified. Read as a whole
    the decision of the Judge was justified and for the reasons given. The
    one error, in relation to the issuing of the visa, is not material to
    the decision made and does not infect the other material findings set
    out. There is no material error in the decision which stands as the
    disposal of the Appellants appeal in this case.



CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)



Fee Award

In dismissing the appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:
M F Parkes
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 5th September 2016
