
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11515/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 December 2018                  |On 8 January 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                     MY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which, in a determination that followed  a  hearing  held  in  Glasgow,
    dismissed her asylum appeal.

 2. The decision in question is essentially that reached in March  2015  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bradshaw.   Proceedings  thereafter  can  be
    summarised as follows.  There was an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    which resulted in the Upper Tribunal finding no error of law; but  that
    finding was successfully appealed to the Inner House of  the  Court  of
    Session.

 3. Judge  Bradshaw  made  findings  about  what  had  not,  in  his  view,
    transpired in China, contrary to the claim of the appellant.   However,
    the judge fell into the classic error of not then considering what  the
    profile of the appellant was and  what  the  attitude  of  the  Chinese
    authorities would be towards her, having that profile, if she  were  to
    be returned to China.

 4. The position now is that it is common ground between the appellant  and
    the respondent that the appellant is  what  is  known  as  an  ordinary
    member of a Christian organisation known  as  Eastern  Lightning.   The
    appellant is an ordinary member of that faith, and  as  such  both  the
    general background evidence and the specific expert evidence shows that
    she would be expected, as part of that faith, to proselytise in  China.
    The background evidence  also  shows  that  the  appellant  would  face
    difficulties of a serious kind if she were to engage in that  activity.
    Indeed, the Chinese authorities regard Eastern Lightning as a  cult  to
    which they are significantly opposed.

 5.  In  the  circumstances,  therefore,  having  had  an  opportunity   of
    considering the matter, Mrs O'Brien, on behalf of the respondent,  does
    not oppose  the  appellant's  appeal  on  that  relatively  narrow  but
    nevertheless important basis.

 6. Without wishing to make any generalised findings regarding adherence to
    Eastern Lightning, on the particular facts of this case  the  appellant
    would, we consider, face a real risk of persecution.  Alternatively, if
    she were to moderate her behaviour to avoid that risk, then, compatibly
    with the decision in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31, she is still entitled to
    refugee status because any such moderation would be driven by a fear of
    serious harm from the authorities in China.

 7. Accordingly, the decision of the Upper Tribunal is that,  on  re-making
    the decision in the appeal, we allow it on asylum grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                               Signed                     Date 31/12/18


                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber
