
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11782/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd October 2015                 |On 6th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                               Mr amian ahmed
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Mahmood of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss A. Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  on  5th  February  1980.
    He appealed against a decision of the Respondent  dated  11th  December
    2014 which had refused his claim  for  asylum  and  had  given  removal
    directions for his removal to Bangladesh.  His appeal was dismissed  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Coutts sitting at Hatton Cross on  9th
    April 2015.  The Appellant appeals with leave against that decision and
    the matter therefore comes before me to determine whether there  is  an
    error of law in the First-tier decision such that it falls  to  be  set
    aside and the matter reheard.  If there is not then the decision of the
    First-tier will stand.

2.   The Appellant entered the United  Kingdom  lawfully  on  21st  November
    2009 on a Tier 4 Student visa valid from 9th November 2009  until  13th
    April 2013.  The Appellant's leave was curtailed by the  Respondent  as
    the Appellant did not have the finances to support his studies  and  on
    21st May 2012 the expiry date on his visa was brought forward  to  20th
    July 2012.  The Appellant failed to comply with the terms of this leave
    and overstayed  thereafter.   On  24th  June  2014  the  Appellant  was
    encountered by the Metropolitan Police and issued with a notice  as  an
    overstayer.  On 24th July 2014  the  Appellant  made  a  claim  to  the
    Respondent for asylum which was  refused  by  the  Respondent  on  11th
    December 2014.  The Respondent served the Appellant with  a  notice  of
    her decision to remove the Appellant.  It was  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against those decisions which gave rise to the present proceedings.

The Appellant's Claim

3.    At  paragraph  16  of  his  determination  the  Judge  summarised  the
    Appellant's case as follows:

         "The Appellant's claim is based upon  fear  of  violence  from  his
         uncle Mujeeb Ur Rehman  who  is  the  leader  of  a  fundamentalist
         religious organisation in Bangladesh known as  Jamat-i-Islami.   He
         is also the patriarch of their family to whom everyone else  defers
         without question.  The Appellant's parents live in  Bangladesh  and
         he has two older brothers Anupam Rahman and Nirupam Rahmad  one  of
         whom Nirupam lives here.  The Appellant has  regular  contact  with
         his mother in Bangladesh but he has no  contact  with  his  father.
         The Appellant says that he joined the  Bangladesh  Communist  Party
         initially as a student member and then as a full member from  1997.
         He was involved in raising awareness of environmental issues,  drug
         misuse and socialism.  This brought him into direct  conflict  with
         his uncle who said that communists were non-believers.   His  uncle
         also runs his own madrassah.  The  Appellant  ignored  his  uncle's
         wishes and continued with his political activities.  In 1996 he was
         attacked by followers of his uncle  when  he  was  walking  on  the
         street and they told him that  he  should  listen  to  his  uncle's
         wishes and he should stop being a member of  the  communist  party.
         His mother reported the attack to the police but the Appellant says
         that the police are corrupt in Bangladesh, inefficient and they did
         not help him.  After the incident his mother asked him  to  keep  a
         low profile  and  the  Appellant  did  so.   However  in  2000  the
         Bangladeshi government increased book prices for students  and  the
         communist party was  angered  by  this  and  the  Appellant  became
         involved in demonstrations against this increase.  He says that his
         uncle arranged for criminal charges to be laid against him; he  was
         arrested by the police and tortured.  He was eventually released on
         bail and there was a family meeting where his uncle  pressured  him
         into changing his views and stop opposing the Islamic faith.

4.   There was a further incident when the  Appellant  intervened  during  a
    heated discussion between Hindus and Muslims in Dhaka to try  and  calm
    the situation down.  His uncle's followers reported the matter  to  the
    uncle saying that the Appellant was supporting Hindus over Muslims.  In
    consequence the Appellant was attacked by his  uncle's  supporters  and
    his hand was broken.  The matter was reported to the  police  but  they
    took no further action.  The  Appellant  was  then  advised  by  family
    members to leave Bangladesh to save his life.   The  Appellant's  uncle
    later told the Appellant's mother that he  the  uncle  would  kill  the
    Appellant if he ever came across him again.   The  Appellant's  brother
    Nirupam who lives in the United Kingdom does travel  to  Bangladesh  to
    see their parents but says that  his  visits  are  limited  and  he  is
    discreet while he is there.

5.   The Appellant has started attending  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of
    Latter Day Saints since arriving in the United Kingdom  and  is  now  a
    dedicated Christian of that faith.  He was supported by his  bishop  in
    the asylum appeal.  If returned to Bangladesh  the  Appellant  said  he
    would not be able to practise his Christian faith and would  be  killed
    by his uncle and the followers of Jamat-i-Islami.  Whilst the Appellant
    was in the United Kingdom a fellow activist was killed by extremists in
    Bangladesh and the Appellant was afraid the same fate would befall him.

The Decision at First Instance

6.   The Judge found the appellant to be a credible witness  and  said  that
    the Appellant was genuine in his fear that if returned to Bangladesh he
    would suffer ill-treatment from his uncle or  his  uncle's  supporters.
    However that fear was in respect of non-state  actors.   There  was  no
    evidence that the Appellant would suffer persecution on account of  his
    political opinions  from  the  Bangladesh  authorities.   There  was  a
    sufficiency of protection in Bangladesh including a functioning  police
    force and judiciary.  There was no reason why if the Appellant  had  to
    return to Bangladesh he could not report any threats  or  incidents  to
    the police and for these to be investigated in the normal way  and  the
    matter pursued through the judicial process.

7.    n the past the Appellant's family had chosen  this  course  of  action
    when the Appellant had been threatened and attacked and  there  was  no
    reason why they could not do so again in the future.   The  Appellant's
    brother was able to travel back and see their parents.   The  Appellant
    could return and live with them and be discreet  about  things  as  his
    brother was  alternatively  the  Appellant  could  internally  relocate
    within Bangladesh to an area  not  connected  with  his  uncle  or  his
    uncle's followers.  If  he  did  so  he  would  still  be  entitled  to
    protection from the Bangladeshi authorities.

8.   Whilst the Appellant's  conversion  to  Christianity  was  accepted  as
    genuine the  objective  evidence  showed  that  there  was  freedom  of
    religion in Bangladesh and no reason why the Appellant could not return
    there and continue to practise his Christian  faith.   The  Appellant's
    conduct in overstaying and not making his asylum claim at the  earliest
    opportunity had damaged  his  credibility  but  having  considered  the
    evidence in the round the Judge found that  such  damage  was  minimal.
    The Judge dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

9.   In his grounds of onward appeal the Appellant  argued  that  the  Judge
    had failed to consider the objective evidence and current  increase  in
    religious  extremism  in  Bangladesh.   The  Appellant  had  previously
    suffered violence at the hands of his uncle  and  his  followers.   His
    uncle had previously  used  the  police  when  arranging  for  criminal
    charges to be laid against the Appellant as a result the Appellant  was
    arrested by the police and tortured.  The finding  that  the  Appellant
    could seek protection from the police  was  contrary  to  the  evidence
    before the Tribunal.  Further the  finding  that  the  Appellant  could
    safely relocate to a safe place in Bangladesh was not based on a cogent
    or reasonable analysis given the suffering the Appellant had endured at
    the hands of his uncle and the uncle's followers.   Jamat-i-Islami  was
    an extremist organisation with a nationwide network in Bangladesh.  The
    Judge had also overlooked the evidence of violence against  Christians.
    The conclusion that the Appellant could return and live discreetly  was
    contrary to the principles laid down in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31  where
    it was held that if a person returns to their  country  of  origin  and
    because of the dangers of living openly and carries on  any  homosexual
    relationship discreetly that person would be a refugee.

10.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge De Haney  on  9th  June  2015.   In  refusing
    permission to appeal she wrote that a full and proper  reading  of  the
    Judge's determination revealed the grounds of appeal to be little  more
    than a disagreement with the findings of the Judge and an attempt to re-
    argue the appeal.  Whilst the Judge did find the Appellant credible  in
    the core of his claim he nevertheless found there was a sufficiency  of
    protection and that the Appellant could relocate.  Whilst the basis for
    those findings was brief a Judge could not be  expected  to  deal  with
    every minor point raised.  Where a relevant  point  was  not  expressly
    mentioned the court should be slow to infer that it was not taken  into
    account.  There was no arguable error of law.

11.  The Appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on broadly speaking the same grounds.   The  application
    for permission to  appeal  came  before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chamberlain on 10th August 2015.  In granting permission to appeal  she
    wrote that the Appellant's grounds were arguable and merited a grant of
    permission to appeal.   There  was  no  comment  on  Judge  De  Haney's
    rejection of the grounds of permission to appeal.

The Hearing before Me

12.  Counsel for the Appellant  submitted  that  the  Appellant's  case  was
    based on the Appellant's fear of  persecution  by  both  non-state  and
    state actors.  There was an interplay between the two who were  working
    together.  The Appellant came from a family of fundamentalists and  his
    uncle occupied a  high  position  in  one  of  the  banned  parties  in
    Bangladesh.

13.  The Appellant had posted on his Facebook that  he  was  baptised  as  a
    result of which a fatwa had been issued against  him.   The  uncle  was
    using his position as a religious figure to do so.  The  fatwa  was  to
    the effect that the Appellant should be killed.  There had  been  three
    main incidents which had affected the  Appellant  referred  to  in  the
    determination.  The uncle had arranged for false  charges  against  the
    Appellant. There was no challenge to the credibility of the Appellant's
    account.  The Appellant did seek the help of the police  but  that  was
    not taken into account by the Judge.  The police were  in  tandem  with
    the uncle.  Since the Appellant's conversion to Christianity his mother
    had been assaulted by the same uncle her hair had been pulled  and  she
    had been slapped.

14.  At question 77 of his asylum interview the Appellant had said  that  he
    was in police custody for a month and seventeen days  when  they  broke
    his hand and tried  to  take  out  an  eye.   The  fabricated  case  he
    explained at question 85 of the interview was an  allegation  that  the
    Appellant  had  stolen  his  uncle's  watch  and  his  uncle's   wife's
    jewellery.  The Appellant was not arrested at the demonstration.  Later
    on the uncle withdrew the case against the Appellant  (question  97  of
    the asylum interview).  At question 104 the Appellant was asked why  if
    the uncle's case against the Appellant was fabricated did the Appellant
    not  complain  to  the  police  about  the  allegation?   In  Counsel's
    submission that was a bizarre question to ask as the uncle had arranged
    for the police to arrest the Appellant.  The Appellant had  made  clear
    in his interview that the uncle had authority to issue a  fatwa  as  he
    was in an organisation called Markajul Islam.  In Jamaat Islam he was a
    local leader not like one of the members of Markajul  Islam  who  could
    issue a fatwa.  Jamaat Islam was a very powerful organisation with  MPs
    in parliament.  It was difficult for the Bangladesh authorities to  ban
    that organisation.

15.  Further there was objective evidence before the Judge that one  of  the
    Appellant's friends had been killed but that was not referred to in the
    determination.  The death of the Appellant's friend showed  that  there
    was an insufficiency of protection.  As evidence of the  atmosphere  in
    Bangladesh it was submitted that  a  minister  had  been  sacked  after
    comments made about the Haj. Bangladesh was  not  a  safe  country  for
    anyone who was against the government.  Minorities were at  risk.   The
    state was complicit in that. The problems which  had  occurred  to  the
    Appellant were before his conversion  to  Christianity  but  they  were
    because the Appellant was not considered to be religious enough.  As he
    had now converted to another faith he would be at even more risk.   For
    the Appellant to pretend not to  be  who  he  was  namely  a  committed
    Christian he would still be a refugee  following  the  decision  in  HJ
    (Iran).

16.  For the Respondent it was submitted that there was  no  material  error
    of law in the determination.  What the Appellant had said  about  being
    in danger related to the fear of his uncle.  The Appellant did not fear
    the state.  At question 105 of the Appellant's interview he was  asked:
    "So to confirm, your problems in Bangladesh are from your  own  family.
    You do not have any problems with any  other  individual  or  with  the
    state.  Is that correct?" In response the Appellant had  replied:  "Yes
    it's my uncle and his followers".  Thus everything in  the  Appellant's
    case was tied to the uncle not to the state.

17.   The  Judge  had  specifically  considered  at  paragraph  28  of   the
    determination that the Appellant could relocate and  that  knocked  out
    the arguments made by the  Appellant.   It  was  inconsistent  for  the
    Appellant to say that his wife was able  to  move  around  but  he  the
    Appellant could not.  At question 183 of the  interview  the  Appellant
    had been asked "You have  told  me  that  your  wife  could  solve  her
    problems by moving to a crowded area away from your  uncle.   Is  there
    any reason why you could not return to Bangladesh and live elsewhere to
    avoid problems with your uncle in a similar manner?"  The Appellant had
    replied to that saying, "Because  I  am  directly  involved  with  some
    organisations and she isn't.  And  she  is  not  converted  to  another
    religion so it's two different things".  At question 176 the  Appellant
    had said that his wife believed if she moved to another area  then  the
    influence of the Appellant's uncle and his followers "will  not  affect
    her and she will be better off".  No-one would know the Appellant if he
    were to move elsewhere.  Even if the Judge had erred in suggesting that
    the Appellant could be discreet living with his mother upon return, the
    alternative finding made by the Judge that  nevertheless  there  was  a
    sufficiency  of  protection   if   he   moved   elsewhere   saved   the
    determination.  There was  no  reason  why  the  Appellant  should  not
    internally relocate.  The friend of the Appellant who  was  persecuted,
    he was a blogger whereas  the  Appellant  was  not  and  therefore  the
    Appellant would not have the same exposure.

18.  In reply Counsel for the Appellant argued that the Appellant had  dealt
    with why his position was different from that of his wife's namely that
    he was involved with some organisations and she was not.  One  did  not
    often have independent evidence of the death of a person  known  to  an
    Appellant but that was the case here with the evidence of the death  of
    the Appellant's friend Rajib.  It supported the Appellant's  case  that
    there was an insufficiency of protection.  The  Appellant's  answer  at
    question 105 that his only problems involved his uncle and the  uncle's
    followers had to be looked at in context.  There was evidence that  the
    Appellant had been  arrested  and  bailed.   The  Appellant  had  given
    evidence about the protest he had taken part in.   That  had  not  been
    rejected.  The Appellant was not arguing that the police had sought him
    out what he was saying was that his uncle was responsible.

Findings

19.  The challenge in this case to the Judge's determination is  essentially
    a reasons based challenge.   The  test  is  whether  from  reading  the
    decision the losing party can reasonably be expected to understand  why
    they  have  lost.   Although  the  Judge  broadly  speaking  found  the
    Appellant to  be  a  credible  witness  and  accepted  the  Appellant's
    evidence that he feared an uncle and the uncle's followers,  the  Judge
    also decided on the basis of the background material that there  was  a
    sufficiency of  protection  in  Bangladesh.   The  Judge  rejected  the
    argument that the Appellant would  be  at  risk  as  a  result  of  his
    conversion in this country to Christianity.  The Judge proceeded on the
    assumption that the Appellant's fear was of non-state actors the  uncle
    and his followers.   This  was  understandable  given  the  Appellant's
    answer at question 105 of the interview that he only feared  the  uncle
    and the uncle's followers and not the state authorities.

20.  Although the Appellant had complained about ill-treatment at the  hands
    of the police, the question was whether if the Appellant was in  danger
    again from the uncle and his followers the  Appellant  could  expect  a
    sufficiency of protection from the  police.   This  standard  does  not
    require an absolute level of protection which it is impossible for  any
    state authority to guarantee.  However  Bangladesh  has  a  functioning
    police force and the Judge's view was that it was reasonable to  expect
    the Appellant to turn to the police for protection.  That at the end of
    the day was a matter  for  the  Judge  on  the  basis  of  all  of  the
    background material.

21.  A line of authorities including Bagdanavicius [2005] EWCA Civ 1605  and
    AW Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31 held that  even  if  there  was  a  systemic
    sufficiency of protection an Appellant  might  still  show  a  fear  of
    persecution  where  the  authorities  were  unlikely  to  provide   the
    additional protection the particular  circumstances  of  the  Appellant
    required. It was open to  the  Judge  to  conclude  that  there  was  a
    systemic sufficiency of protection in Bangladesh in the  light  of  the
    background material which (inter alia) showed  that  Bangladesh  had  a
    functioning police force. What the Judge had to decide was whether  the
    risk of persecution would arise in  the  future  upon  the  Appellant's
    return in the light of the Appellant's particular circumstances. As  AW
    makes clear particular account must be taken of past persecution if any
    in deciding whether there  are  good  reasons  to  consider  that  such
    persecution  and  past  lack  of  sufficient  protection  will  not  be
    repeated.

22.  Whilst the Appellant could point to an individual who had  been  killed
    in Bangladesh for blogging (something which the Appellant  himself  has
    not done) even the evidence which the Appellant had  submitted  to  the
    First  Tier  Tribunal  was  that   the   Bangladesh   authorities   had
    subsequently arrested a man over the murder of a blogger  described  as
    an atheist.  As the Judge correctly pointed out  there  is  freedom  of
    religion in Bangladesh and the Appellant would have no reason  to  fear
    the state authorities as a result of the Appellant's Christian beliefs.
     If the Appellant wished to express his Christianity openly it would be
    possible within  Bangladesh  even  if  it  were  not  possible  in  the
    Appellant's home area where he says his brother behaves  discreetly  on
    visits back to Bangladesh.  I do not see that  that  would  offend  the
    principles laid down in HJ (Iran)  which  are  more  properly  directed
    towards the issue of whether it is possible at  all  to  express  one's
    faith or one's sexual orientation.

23.  In coming to the conclusion  that  the  Appellant  could  relocate  the
    Judge was also making an inference that the  uncle  and  his  followers
    could not operate outside  their  local  area  to  further  harass  the
    Appellant.  This too is grounded in the Appellant's own answers in  his
    interview that the uncle's membership of Jamat-i-Islami was very much a
    local one.  Any fatwa issued against the Appellant would of course have
    no legal effect and it is difficult to see how it could be argued  that
    the state authorities would in any way  enforce  such  a  fatwa.   That
    there are extremists in Bangladesh is not  of  itself  in  dispute  the
    issue which the Judge had to decide was whether there was a  particular
    risk to this Appellant  based  on  the  Appellant's  personal  factors.
    Given that the Appellant's expressed fears were of his  uncle  and  his
    uncle's followers, it was open to the Judge on the evidence before  him
    to conclude that the Appellant could safely  internally  relocate  away
    from these  non-state  actors  to  an  area  where  there  would  be  a
    sufficiency of protection.  In the light of the Judge's  conclusion  on
    this  point  the  Appellant  could  not  successfully  argue  that  the
    Bangladesh authorities would  know  or  ought  to  know  of  particular
    circumstances likely to expose the Appellant to risk of  ill  treatment
    (see Bagdanavicius at paragraph 55 (15)).

24.  The Appellant was not wanted by the police, there were  no  outstanding
    charges against him, false allegations  made  by  the  uncle  had  been
    dropped by the uncle.  In those circumstances I see no error of law  in
    the  Judge's  decision  that  the  Appellant  could  safely  internally
    relocate upon return.  The Judge did not in terms refer to the death of
    the Appellant's friend but the Appellant's wife was able to  evade  the
    uncle and his followers suggesting that the reach of the uncle and  his
    followers was geographically  limited.  As  Judge  De  Haney  correctly
    observed in refusing permission to appeal it was not necessary for  the
    Judge to rehearse every piece of evidence before him but the fact  that
    the determination did not refer to all of the  evidence  did  not  mean
    that the Judge had ignored it.  The Judge specifically  stated  in  his
    determination that he had looked at all the evidence in the round and I
    see no reason to disagree with that comment.  That being so  there  was
    ample evidence  before  the  Judge  that  the  Appellant  could  safely
    relocate internally and it was open  to  the  Judge  to  come  to  that
    conclusion which  he  did.  The  Judge  adequately  explained  why  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed. I find that there was no error of law
    in the determination and the determination  at  first  instance  should
    stand.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 5th day of November 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee was payable there can be no fee award in this case.


Signed this 5th day of November 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
