
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11237/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 October 2015                   |On 14 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     E A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagiotopaulou, Counsel, instructed by The
                    Migrant Law Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a national of Turkey of Kurdish ethnicity, born on  24
    September 1992.   He entered the  UK  illegally  in  October  2012  and
    claimed asylum in November 2012  on  the  basis  of  imputed  political
    opinion  by  reason  of  ethnicity  and  support  for  the  PKK,  as  a
    consequence of which he claims to  have  been  arrested,  detained  and
    tortured on several occasions between 2009  and  2012.  The  Respondent
    refused to recognise him as a refugee for the  reasons  set  out  in  a
    refusal letter dated 28 November 2014 and made a decision to remove him
    as an illegal entrant by way of directions  under  paragraphs  8-10  of
    schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

2.   The First-tier Tribunal dismissed his appeal and concluded that he  was
    not a refugee and not  in  need  of  international  protection  on  the
    grounds that his case was not a credible one.  He sought permission  to
    appeal against that decision.   Permission  was  initially  refused  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes on 22  April  2015.   He  renewed  his
    application to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission was  granted  by  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman on 8 July  2015  on  the  basis  that  the
    credibility findings made by the judge were mixed in that  he  accepted
    some aspects of the claim but rejected others and it was arguable  that
    the ultimate negative credibility findings  at  paragraph  90  did  not
    necessarily flow from the positive credibility findings  at  paragraphs
    71, 74, 83 and 88.  Further, it was arguable  that  in  coming  to  the
    negative credibility findings the Judge failed to take account  of  the
    fact that in interview at question  157  the  Appellant  described  the
    authorities visiting his home after he fled and arresting his father.

The Grounds

4.   Ms Panagiotopaulou relied on both sets of  grounds  for  permission  to
    appeal and so I summarise them here.

5.   The grounds for permission to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  assert
    the following:

    (i)  Material  weight  should  have  been  placed  on  the  Appellant's
    brother's evidence notwithstanding that it was hearsay;

    (ii) Corroborative evidence from the Appellant's parents who  continued
    to reside in Turkey should not be required;

    (iii)    One of the main reasons why credibility was not  accepted  was
    that the Appellant did not mention in his witness  statement  that  the
    authorities were raiding the family house  following  his  flight  from
    Turkey. The Immigration Judge failed to note or  place  weight  on  the
    fact that at question 157 the Appellant had described  the  authorities
    visiting his parental home after he had fled and arresting  his  father
    which was corroborative of  his  oral  evidence  that  the  authorities
    maintained an adverse interest in him.

6.   The renewed grounds for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    repeat the previous grounds and assert  that  the  Judge's  credibility
    findings were mixed but the final conclusion at paragraph 90  was  that
    credibility was severely damaged.  The  negative  credibility  findings
    were that  the  Appellant  had  lied  in  a  previous  entry  clearance
    application; was inconsistent as to whether there was an arrest warrant
    and if so what happened to it; did not mention that his family home had
    been raided in his witness statement and that his parents had not  made
    statements in support of his allegation that he was wanted  in  Turkey.
    The renewed grounds accept that the First-tier  Tribunal  set  out  the
    correct standard of proof.



The Rule 24 Response

7.   The Respondent submits that the Judge  correctly  identified  the  risk
    factors and factored them into a  consideration  of  the  risk  to  the
    Appellant and to the Appellant's credibility. The Judge noted that  the
    consistency of the Appellant's account with the background evidence was
    not  determinative  of  the  claim.  The  Judge  noted  the   lack   of
    corroborative evidenced from the Appellant's mother and father and that
    they had not provided evidence to support the account of the  Appellant
    which  clearly  included  the  assertion  at  question  157  that   the
    Appellant's father was arrested. It was open to  the  Judge  to  expect
    such corroboration to be  available.  The  Judge  was  not  obliged  to
    particularise every part of the Appellant's claim. It was open  to  the
    Judge to conclude that the inconsistencies and omissions identified  at
    paragraphs 84 to 86 were such as to render his account not credible. It
    is argued that it was further open to the Judge to  consider  that  the
    Appellant was seeking to come to the UK and that there was no intention
    on the part of the Appellant other than to come to the UK and therefore
    arguably no opportunity to claim elsewhere.

The Hearing

8.   I heard submissions from both representatives which I  summarise  here.
    Ms Panagiotopaulou submitted that the Appellant had  been  detained  on
    four occasions and claimed that there were also sur  place  activities.
    She submitted that the First-tier Tribunal made mixed findings but also
    failed to make crucial  findings  and  at  paragraph  47  rejected  the
    Respondent's argument that he did not recognise the flag. There was  no
    reference  as  to  whether  the  First-tier   Tribunal   accepted   the
    Appellant's claim in relation to findings regarding the BDP which  were
    identified as risk factors in the case law.

9.   The First-tier Tribunal rejected the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  was
    detained but did not give cogent reasons, and looking at paragraphs  76
    to  88  it  appeared  that  the  Tribunal  found  that  there  was   no
    corroborative evidence. There was no requirement for such evidence  and
    in any event the Respondent would have said it was self-serving.

10.  The second point was that the matter in relation to  the  raid  on  the
    family home was in fact raised in the  interview.   Counsel  said  that
    there were in  fact  no  inconsistencies  and  the  decision  contained
    material errors.

11.  Looking at paragraph 19, having made his findings the First-tier  Judge
    failed to move on to identify risks on return on the basis of the  case
    of IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312.  Whilst
    he had mentioned IK in paragraphs 50 and 68 of his findings he did  not
    apply it to the Appellant.  He had  accepted  the  Appellant's  Kurdish
    ethnicity but had not made findings in terms of his membership  of  the
    BDP or his sur place activities in the UK which would be a risk factor,
    and the type of questions which would  be  asked  of  a  young  man  of
    Kurdish ethnicity and these were factors that enhanced risk.

12.  The Article 8 findings were open to him.  However  he  failed  to  take
    account of relevant facts and took into account  irrelevant  facts  and
    placed undue weight on certain factors and factual errors.

13.  Mr Nath relied on his Rule 24 response.  With regard to  the  assertion
    that there were inconsistent findings,  corroboration  was  a  relevant
    factor and the findings were open to the Judge.   At  paragraph  83  he
    made positive findings and as he did at paragraph 47 and  at  paragraph
    74 he found what level the Appellant would  be  and  he  addressed  sur
    place activities.  He could not see where  the  First-tier  had  erred.
    The Judge had systematically considered the  Appellant's  case.   There
    was no error of law.

14.  Counsel for the Appellant said in reply that there  was  a  failure  to
    apply the risk factors.  Paragraph  47  did  not  apply  to  sur  place
    activities and the relevance of them was that they were on Facebook and
    there  was  a  risk  that  this  would  become  known  to  the  Turkish
    authorities upon return.

15.  In terms of his findings, having accepted  that  he  was  a  low  level
    supporter the Judge gave no reasons for why he would  not  be  targeted
    when  he  accepted  that  the  area  the  Appellant  came  from  was  a
    problematic area. The reasons he gave for rejecting  the  account  were
    not good reasons.

16.  Both parties agreed that were I to find that there was an error of  law
    it should be a case that was remitted and reheard before the First-tier
    Tribunal de novo.

17.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge made a number  of  positive  findings  in
    relation to the Appellant's evidence. He accepted that he was  a  frank
    witness, did not find that his inability to answer questions about  the
    Kurdish flag adversely affected his  credibility  and  found  that  his
    account of arrests, detention and ill treatment was consistent with the
    background evidence. He also found that section 8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 was not engaged  as
    the Appellant had claimed asylum shortly after arrival.

18.  He also made a number of negative findings, namely that  the  Appellant
    had used false document when making a  visa  application  in  2011.  He
    correctly directed himself in relation to this finding at paragraphs 72
    and 73, reminding himself that the visa application was  of  peripheral
    importance to the asylum claim and that the employment of deception was
    not fatal to his asylum claim but a factor to  be  taken  into  account
    when assessing his credibility. He addressed his level of  support  for
    the PKK and  found  he  was  a  low  level  supporter  and  sympathiser
    (paragraph 76) and addressed risk in this  context.  He  made  specific
    findings  as  to  where  his  evidence  was  either   inconsistent   or
    unsatisfactory  at  paragraph  84.  He  found  at  paragraph  89   that
    notwithstanding the fact that the background  evidence  was  consistent
    with his account the adverse credibility findings went to the  core  of
    his account and consequently found that his  credibility  was  severely
    damaged. At paragraph 90 he applied the correct standard of  proof  and
    found he was not at risk.

19.  I find that the  Judge's  general  approach  to  the  evidence  was  in
    accordance Karanakaran v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2000] 3 All ER 449, assessing each piece of evidence and the weight to
    be attached to it before coming to a conclusion on future risk.

20.  I do  not  consider  that  the  Judge  erred  in  concluding  that  the
    Appellant's parents could have provided evidence to  support  his  case
    that  there  were  repeated  visits   by   the   authorities.   In   ST
    (Corroboration - Kasolo) Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119 the Tribunal found
    that it was a misdirection to imply that  corroboration  was  necessary
    for a positive credibility finding. In TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 40 the Court of Appeal held that where there were circumstances  in
    which  evidence  corroborating  the  appellant's  evidence  was  easily
    obtainable, the lack of such evidence must affect the assessment of the
    appellant's credibility.  It followed that where a judge  in  assessing
    credibility relied on the fact that there was no independent supporting
    evidence where there should be and there was no  credible  account  for
    its absence, he committed no error of law when he relied on  that  fact
    for rejecting the account of the appellant.   In Gedow, Abdulkadir  and
    Mohammed v SSHD [2006] EWCA 1342 a Somali  appellant  claimed  that  an
    uncle had funded his journey and the Immigration Judge referred to "the
    absence of any corroborative evidence by letter or any other means from
    his paternal uncle".  The Court of  Appeal  did  not  consider  he  was
    erroneously requiring corroboration but found that  he  was  drawing  a
    conclusion from the absence of corroboration; and he was entitled to do
    so so long as he bore in mind the difficulties faced by asylum  seekers
    in producing corroborative evidence.

21.  I find that the Appellant could reasonably have produced  as  statement
    from his father with whom he remained in contact and who, according  to
    his evidence, had been detained on three occasions. The  fact  that  he
    did not do so was a factor the Judge was entitled to take into  account
    in the assessment of credibility.

22.  However, permission to appeal  was  granted  in  part  because  it  was
    arguable that the Judge erred in  failing  to  take  into  account  the
    Appellant's answer in interview that the authorities visited his family
    home and arrested his father after he had fled. At paragraph 84 of  the
    decision the Judge found  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  was  either
    inconsistent or unsatisfactory in a number of respects and it is  clear
    that these findings led to overall  adverse  credibility  findings.  In
    examination in chief the Appellant said that the authorities  had  come
    back to his family home on three occasions since he left. This was  not
    in his witness statement drafted for the  appeal  and  the  explanation
    given for this by the Appellant in oral evidence was that  he  had  not
    been asked and did not think it was important. The First-tier  Tribunal
    considered that this  explanation  did  not  bear  examination  as  the
    Appellant had had ample time in  which  to  give  a  statement  to  his
    solicitors.

23.  The Appellant was asked at question 157 of his  interview  whether  the
    authorities visited his parent's house after he left. He  said  that  a
    week later they detained his father and told him that the Appellant had
    joined the guerrillas in the mountains and his father was kept for  2-3
    days. This does not appear to have been drawn to the Judge's  attention
    in closing submissions.

24.  In ML (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 844 Moses LJ held  at  paragraph
    [10]

         "A series of material factual errors can  constitute  an  error  of
         law.  It is trite in not only the field of judicial review but also
         statutory appeals and appeals by way of case  stated  that  factual
         errors, if they are significant to the conclusion,  can  constitute
         errors of law."

25.  At paragraph [18] Sir Stanley Burton added:

         "A material error of fact is  an  error  as  to  a  fact  which  is
         material to the conclusion.  If there is any doubt as to whether or
         not the incorrect fact in question was material to the  conclusion,
         that doubt is to be  resolved  in  favour  of  the  individual  who
         complains of the error."

26.  It is clear from the answer to question 157 of the interview  that  the
    Appellant had said that the authorities had returned to his family home
    after  his  departure.  In  concluding  that  the  Appellant  had   not
    previously mentioned that the authorities had returned  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made an error of fact. The adverse finding flowing  from  what
    was  found  to  be  an  inconsistency  led  to  the  rejection  of  the
    Appellant's account and it cannot be said that it was not  material  to
    the outcome of the appeal. In the circumstances in  the  light  of  the
    case law cited above I find that there was material error of law in the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

In those circumstances I conclude that there was a material error of law  in
the determination. All the findings in relation to credibility are  vitiated
by that error and the extent of judicial fact  finding  is  such  that  this
matter  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   for   complete
rehearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

