
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11223/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th May 2016                             |On 1st June 2016              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                                     sK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceeding or  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst other, all parties.

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka whose date of birth is recorded
    as [ ] 1983. On or  about  1st  March  2015  he  made  application  for
    International Protection as a refugee asserting that he was at risk  of
    persecution were he  to  be  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  because  of  his
    association with the Liberation Tamil Tigers of Elam ("LTTE"). On  30th
    July 2015 a decision was made to refuse the application. The  Appellant
    appealed. On 19th February 2016 his appeal was heard by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Mays,  sitting  at  Harmondsworth.   Judge   Mays
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 2. Not content with that decision, by Notice dated  30th  March  2016  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3. In the grounds the Appellant identified a number of  positive  findings
    made by Judge Mays these were:

     a) He joined the LTTE in December 2003;


     b) He undertook three months of training and thereafter  was  sent  to
        work for the LTTE in Colombo in March 2004;

     c) He worked at the Apollo Hospital  and  was  tasked  with  gathering
        intelligence and procuring medicines to supply the LTTE;

     d) He did this for a period of three years before leaving Sri Lanka in
        2009;

     e) He  also  occasionally  arranged  accommodation  for  LTTE  members
        visiting Colombo;

     f) He was not identified as LTTE prior to departing Sri Lanka for  the
        United Kingdom in 2009;

     g) It may be, that if returned to Sri  Lanka,  the  authorities  would
        come to know of the Appellant's previous involvement with the LTTE;

     h) If questioned by the Sri Lankan authorities he will be perceived to
        be a person who has in the past been involved with the LTTE.

 4. The grounds then focus on part of paragraph 62 of Judge  Mays  decision
    being:

         "...I do not find, if the Appellant was detained at the airport and
         questioned or later  visited  at  his  address  in  Sri  Lanka  and
         provided with the information relating to his  past  activities  in
         Sri Lanka, that the Sri Lankan authorities would  perceive  him  as
         currently being a threat to the integrity of Sri  Lanka  as  single
         State. He did not have a significant role in the LTTE and  has  had
         no significant role in relation to post-conflict  Tamil  separatism
         within  the  Diaspora.  While  the  Appellant  may  be  subject  to
         monitoring by the Sri Lankan  authorities  on  his  return  to  Sri
         Lanka, this would not be sufficient to amount to persecution".

 5. The grounds suggest that Judge Mays was at least accepting a reasonable
    risk  of  the  Appellant  being  detained  at  the  airport  and  being
    questioned about his past activities or in the alternative a reasonable
    risk that the Appellant  would  be  visited  at  home.  It  is  further
    submitted in the grounds that Judge Mays had accepted that were that to
    happen and once the Appellant disclosed the extent of  his  involvement
    he would be perceived as being a threat to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka
    with the Judge having failed to appreciate, it is submitted,  the  risk
    apparent to the Appellant during his  detention  while  such  enquiries
    would be carried out.

 6. The grounds go on to  make  reference  to  passages  from  the  Country
    Guidance case of CG and Others (Post - Civil War: Returnees) Sri  Lanka
    CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and in  reliance  on  the  various  passages
    referred to in the grounds it is submitted that  Judge  Mays  erred  in
    finding that the Appellant had failed to show a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Sri Lanka.

 7. There is a second ground based upon Judge Mays finding said  to  be  at
    paragraph 46 (sic) but in fact paragraph 47 which reads:

         "...Given the fact that the Appellant left Sri Lanka  openly  using
         his own passport the Sri Lankan authorities records would show that
         he had left Sri Lanka in 2009. The  Sri  Lankan  authorities  would
         have no need to attend at the Appellant's home and ask his  parents
         and brother where the Appellant was".

 8. The second ground submits that the finding  of  the  Judge  was  purely
    speculative with their being no  background  material  to  support  the
    notion that the Sri Lankan authorities keep a record of all individuals
    who exit Sri Lanka. Further, and in any event, the grounds submit  that
    the Appellant had provided  an  account  of  having  been  assisted  in
    leaving Sri Lanka by an agent. Reference is made to  paragraph  170  of
    the Country Guidance case of GJ  in which it was said that, "Given  the
    prevalence of bribery and corruption in  Sri  Lanka,  having  left  Sri
    Lanka without difficulty was not  probative  on  the  lack  of  adverse
    interest in  an  individual".  It  was  submitted  therefore  that  the
    Appellant's account was not at odds with the Country Guidance.

 9. On 12th April 2016 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Pooler  granted
    permission on all grounds thus the matter comes before me.

10. The Secretary of State filed a response pursuant  to  Rule  24  of  the
    Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008 submitting that the  findings  were
    open to the Judge and there was no error of law.

11. It was common ground that the Appellant left Sri Lanka in November 2009
    on a student visa and travelled to the United Kingdom  as  set  out  in
    Judge Mays' Decision and Reasons at paragraph 16. It was no part on his
    case that he ever returned but  rather  in  November  2012  received  a
    telephone call from his  father  informing  him  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities were looking for him, the Appellant  with  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities having shown the Appellant's father  a  copy  of  the  form
    which the Appellant had completed when he joined the LTTE and that  the
    authorities wished to speak to him, the Appellant. In January 2013  the
    Appellant received a further telephone call, this time from his  mother
    telling him that his father had been arrested, detained  for  two  days
    and questioned about the Appellant's whereabouts. The Appellant's  case
    was that his father was physically ill-treated by the  authorities  and
    only released when it was discovered that he, the  Appellant's  father,
    was a civil servant. Then in February 2013 the Appellant's father  told
    the Appellant that his brothers had been arrested and detained for five
    or six days by the Sri Lankan authorities. One brother had been  beaten
    during his time in detention and was unable to walk. That  brother  was
    only released when his father secured the services of the general staff
    servicemen and the authorities were informed  that  the  Appellant  was
    residing in the United Kingdom. The Appellant's father and brother  are
    now required to sign on at the local police station every month and the
    Appellant's home address in Sri Lanka has been searched  again  by  the
    authorities. Such was the case as advanced before Judge Mays.

12. On behalf of the  Appellant  it  was  submitted  that  Judge  Mays  had
    accepted that the Appellant's activities with the  LTTE  had  not  been
    identified by the  authorities  prior  to  him  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  On  the  point  made  by  Judge  Mays  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities' records would show that the Appellant left  Sri  Lanka  in
    2009, Mr Bramble accepted that there  was  no  background  material  to
    support the notion that the Sri Lankan authorities records  would  show
    that the Appellant left in 2009 but in answer to  the  contention  that
    somehow there was an error of law in that, Mr Bramble reminded me  that
    it was the Appellant's case that it was not until late  2012  that  the
    authorities showed any interest in the Appellant so that nothing turned
    on the Appellant having left Sri Lanka in 2009. Further Mr Bramble drew
    my attention to the answers given by the Appellant in interview to  the
    Secretary of State, from question 76 onwards. The  Appellant  confirmed
    that he left Sri Lanka in 2009 and that he had no problems up to  then.
    He confirmed that he left Sri Lanka on his own  passport  with  a  visa
    which he had obtained through an agent. Mr Bramble's point was that  in
    relation the assertion that the prevalence of bribery and corruption in
    Sri Lanka meant that having left Sri Lanka without difficulty  was  not
    probative of a lack of adverse interest in  an  individual  was  not  a
    point open, on the evidence to this Appellant. That was because on  the
    evidence the use of an agent was not in the context of passing  through
    the airport or any passport  control  but  in  the  context  of  having
    obtained his student visa. Ms  Anzani  accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    witness statement only went to that point and she was right  to  do  so
    because the  Appellant's  witness  statement  at  paragraph  22,  which
    statement was relied upon in the First-tier Tribunal reads as follows:

         "I was told by my superiors there would be  a  risk  for  me  if  I
         remained in Sri Lanka. I was told to get out of Sri Lanka. That  is
         why I applied for a Tier 4 Student Visa to come and  study  in  the
         United Kingdom. The arrangements took some time. I was assisted  by
         an agent but I needed to secure a college  and  ensure  I  had  the
         necessary funds".

13. The principal focus of Ms Anzani's submissions, which she said went  to
    the core of the decision such that if I were with her on the ground,  I
    should remake the appeal in the Upper Tribunal with the Appellant being
    entitled  to  succeed  outright  was  the  implicit  finding,  in   her
    submission, that the Appellant would be at risk of being questioned and
    detained after return, whereas with respect to the "2009"  issue,  were
    the Appellant successful on that point, there would  need  to  be,  she
    suggested a "re-consideration".

14. It remained Ms Anzani's submission that Judge Mays  had  accepted  that
    the Appellant was someone who was likely to be questioned on return.

15. Ms Anzani placed before me the latest Country Information and  Guidance
    for Sri Lanka dated May 2016, without objection from Mr Bramble. At 6.5
    under the heading Treatment of Tamil Returnees reads as follows:

           1.  "The  Society  for  Threatened  Peoples,  written  statement
              submitted by the  Society  for  Threatened  Peoples,  a  non-
              governmental organisation in special consultative  status  to
              the UN Human Rights Council, ongoing oppression of minorities
              in Sri Lanka, for September  2015,  stated  that:  "Returning
              Tamils from abroad continue being arrested  at  the  airport.
              The surveillance of the civil society in the North  and  East
              is remaining high".
           2. The Immigration and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada  reported  in
              February  2015  that:  "Sources   report   that   individuals
              returning from abroad are particularly subject to screening".
               A July 2015 International Truth and Justice  Project  (ITJP)
              Sri Lanka report on Sri  Lanka's  survivors  of  Torture  and
              Sexual violence 2009 to 2015 stated that: "A  security  force
              insider testified since the  presidential  election  in  2015
              that military intelligence officials from  Joseph  Camp  were
              actively looking for any Tamils returning home from aboard in
              order to  interrogate  them.  The  witness  stated  that  the
              intention was to abduct, detain and torture them."
           3. In May 2015 it was reported that at least 16 Tamil  men  from
              the Batticaloa  District  had  been  arrested  at  Katunayake
              International Airport over a period of around a hundred  days
              after  returning  from  working  abroad   at   Middle-eastern
              cuntries. TamilNet reported that, "Almost all victims were ex-
              LTTE members who had gone sl  military  "rehabilitation"  and
              released earlier" adding that: "Tamil National Alliance (TNA)
              Parliamentarians PON Selvarasa told journalists in Batticaloa
              that he had requested Sri Lankan Minister of Public Order  to
              release all  Tamils  who  had  been  subjected  to  long-term
              detention of the TID [Terrorist Investigation Department].
           4.  In  June  2015  30  year  old  Tamil  and   ex-LTTE   member
              Conesapillai Kugadasan  was  arrested  having  returned  from
              Bahrain and detained for rehabilitation.
           5. The International Crisis Group noted in  August  2015  report
              that: "Tamils returning from abroad continue to  be  arrested
              under the PTA [Prevention of Terrorism Act] on  suspicion  of
              old LTTE involvement. According to some reports, after police
              detention, many are sent to the  military-run  rehabilitation
              program"."

16. Ms Anzani pointed to the fact that this Appellant had not undergone any
    rehabilitation because he had not been identified as LTTE pre-flight.

17. Then turning to paragraph 168 of the Country Guidance of CJ, Ms  Anzani
    pointed to the following:

         "The 11,000 LTTE cadres  who  underwent  the  re-education  process
         known as "rehabilitation", were detained for at least two years and
         some for as long  as  four  years.  Mr  Hall  accepted  that  there
         appeared to be no statutory  underpinning  for  the  rehabilitation
         process: to the extent  that  "rehabilitation"  was  based  on  the
         detention powers in the PTA, even without any evidence of  physical
         or  sexual  abuse,  he  accepted  the  detention  without  judicial
         supervision for such lengthy period amounted to persecution".

18. For the Secretary of State, Mr Bramble submitted that  Judge  Mays  had
    not found what Ms Anzani was inviting me to imply. The starting  point,
    in Mr Bramble's submission was not paragraph 62  of  the  decision  and
    reasons but rather paragraph 61 which reads as follows:

         "The question which arises is whether the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
         would perceive the Appellant to be a risk to the integrity  of  Sri
         Lanka simply on the basis of his membership of the LTTE and due  to
         the activities which he carried out for  the  LTTE  in  Sri  Lanka.
         While the Appellant's name is not on a  stop  list  I  accept  that
         forced returnees can expect  to  be  asked  questions  about  their
         family's LTTE connections and sympathies (paragraph 308 of GJ)".

19. Paragraph 308 of GJ reads as follows:

         "During the re-documentation process in the United Kingdom,  or  at
         the airport on return, a forced returnee can  expect  to  be  asked
         about his own and his family's LTTE connections and sympathies".

    Mr Bramble's submission was that in the context of paragraph 308  which
    is all Judge Mays  was  referring  to,  that  was  the  extent  of  any
    questioning  that  is  to  say  the  family's  LTTE   connections   and
    sympathies. Judge Mays of course, quite properly had accepted that were
    the Appellant to be asked questions he could not be expected to lie but
    looking to the  remaining  part  of  paragraph  61  there  was  nothing
    sufficient in the findings of Judge Mays that entitled the Appellant to
    assert that Judge Mays had implicitly accepted  that  he  was  at  some
    risk. Paragraph 61 continues as follows:


         "I also accept that the Appellant cannot be expected to  lie  about
         his past involvement which includes his activities  with  the  LTTE
         and the fact that his father's cousin's brother was a senior figure
         in the LTTE. I find therefore  that  it  may  be  that,  if  he  is
         returned to Sri Lanka, the authorities would come to  know  of  his
         previous involvement with the LTTE. The  Appellant  has  not  taken
         part in any LTTE activities since he left Sri Lanka in 2009 and  he
         is not in contact with any LTTE members. The Appellant's  immediate
         family have no connection with the LTTE. The Appellant  has  a  Sri
         Lankan passport and so would not require travel documents".

20. The findings of Judge Mays are to seen in the context of  the  Guidance
    in GJ, helpfully is set out in a head note:

        "(1) This determination replaces all existing country  guidance  on
       Sri Lanka.

        (2) The focus of the Sri Lankan government's  concern  has  changed
        since the civil war ended in May 2009. The LTTE in Sri Lanka itself
        is a spent force and there have been no terrorist  incidents  since
        the end of the civil war.

        (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
        activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism  and
        to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state enshrined in  Amendment
        6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in 1983,  which  prohibits  the
        'violation of territorial integrity' of Sri Lanka. Its focus is  on
        preventing both (a) the resurgence of the LTTE or any similar Tamil
        separatist organisation and (b) the revival of the civil war within
        Sri Lanka.

        (4) If a person is detained by the  Sri  Lankan  security  services
        there remains a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or  harm  requiring
        international protection.

        (5) Internal relocation is not an option within  Sri  Lanka  for  a
        person at real risk from the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  since  the
        government now controls the whole  of  Sri  Lanka  and  Tamils  are
        required to return to a named address  after  passing  through  the
        airport.

        (6) There are no detention facilities at the  airport.  Only  those
        whose names appear on a "stop"  list  will  be  detained  from  the
        airport. Any risk for those in whom the Sri Lankan authorities  are
        or become interested exists not at the airport, but  after  arrival
        in their home area, where their arrival will be verified by the CID
        or police within a few days.

        (7) The current categories of persons at real risk  of  persecution
        or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka,  whether  in  detention  or
        otherwise, are:

          (a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to  the
          integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are, or are
          perceived to have a significant role in relation to post-conflict
          Tamil  separatism  within  the  diaspora  and/or  a  renewal   of
          hostilities within Sri Lanka.
          (b) Journalists (whether in print or other media) or human rights
          activists, who, in either case, have criticised  the  Sri  Lankan
          government, in particular its human rights  record,  or  who  are
          associated  with  publications  critical  of   the   Sri   Lankan
          government.
          (c) Individuals who have given evidence to  the  Lessons  Learned
          and Reconciliation Commission implicating the Sri Lankan security
          forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan authorities in alleged war
          crimes. Among those who may have witnessed war crimes during  the
          conflict, particularly in the No-Fire Zones  in  May  2009,  only
          those who have  already  identified  themselves  by  giving  such
          evidence would  be  known  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  and
          therefore only they are at real  risk  of  adverse  attention  or
          persecution  on  return  as  potential  or  actual   war   crimes
          witnesses.
          (d) A person whose name appears on  a  computerised  "stop"  list
          accessible at the airport, comprising a  list  of  those  against
          whom  there  is  an  extant  court  order  or   arrest   warrant.
          Individuals whose name appears on a "stop" list will  be  stopped
          at the airport and handed over  to  the  appropriate  Sri  Lankan
          authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant.

         (8) The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on  sophisticated
         intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
         diaspora. The Sri Lankan authorities  know  that  many  Sri  Lankan
         Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and also that everyone
         in the Northern Province had some level  of  involvement  with  the
         LTTE  during  the  civil  war.  In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,   an
         individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent  that
         it is perceived by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
         present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  the  Sri  Lankan
         Government.

         (9)  The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised   intelligence-led
         "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is  not
         reasonably likely to  be  detained  at  the  airport  but  will  be
         monitored by the security services after his or her return. If that
         monitoring does not indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist
         working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state or  revive  the
         internal armed conflict, the individual  in  question  is  not,  in
         general, reasonably likely to be detained by the  security  forces.
         That will be a question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any
         diaspora activities carried out by such an individual.

         (10) Consideration must always be given to whether, in the light of
         an individual's activities and responsibilities  during  the  civil
         war, the exclusion clauses are engaged (Article 1F of  the  Refugee
         Convention and  Article  12(2)  of  the  Qualification  Directive).
         Regard should be had to the categories for exclusion set out in the
         "Eligibility Guidelines For Assessing the International  Protection
         Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Sri Lanka", published by UNHCR  on  21
         December 2012."



21. In short Mr Bramble's submission was that there was no reason  why  the
    Appellant would be detained at the airport. It was not suggest that  he
    was on a stop list [see headnote 6 in GJ]. The Judge found at paragraph
    61 that the Appellant was not on a stop list and the Judge has  clearly
    had regard to the extent of the questioning.

22. The next question therefore is whether the authorities  would  see  the
    need further to investigate the Appellant. Judge Mays dealt  with  that
    point in the latter part of paragraph 62 in which she said:

         "I do not find, if the Appellant was detained at  the  airport  and
         questioned or later  visited  at  his  address  in  Sri  Lanka  and
         provided the information relating to his  past  activities  in  Sri
         Lanka, that the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  would  perceive  him  as
         currently being a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a  single
         State. He did not have a significant role in the LTTE  and  has  no
         significant role in  relation  to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism
         within  the  diaspora.  While  the  Appellant  may  be  subject  to
         monitoring by the Sri Lankan  authorities  on  his  return  to  Sri
         Lanka, this would not be sufficient to amount to persecution".

23. So it follows that any detention at the airport would be short-lived in
    the context of the sort of questions identified at 308 and it is  clear
    that Judge Mays found that there would be no reason for  the  Appellant
    to be taken into detention even if he were questioned  further  in  his
    home area.

24. I do not find that the interpretation which Ms  Anzani  invites  me  to
    place on the findings of Judge Mays leads to the inference  that  Judge
    Mays accepted implicitly by those findings that  the  Appellant  was  a
    risk of persecution because of some implicit risk of detention.  In  my
    judgment Judge Mays has considered the entirety of GJ by  her  approach
    to the decision not only by reference to the case but  because  of  the
    application of the relevant sub-paragraphs of the Country  Guidance  to
    the facts as found. Any inference to be drawn is that Judge Mays  found
    contrary to what is being submitted by Ms Anzani. The  Appellant  would
    not be detained but rather following GJ would be asked  some  questions
    at the airport, the answers to which would not be  sufficient  for  the
    Appellant  to  be  transferred  at  that  stage  into  detention.   Any
    subsequent questioning would again not  lead  to  the  Appellant  being
    detained. Those appear to me  clearly  to  be  the  findings  and  were
    findings that were open to Judge Mays.

25. As to paragraph 47 and the "2009" issue I find that  there  is  nothing
    material in that. The part of the grounds which points to the use of an
    agent and the prevalence of bribery is a little misleading though I  do
    not for one moment suggest that Ms Anzani intended it to be so  but  it
    was no part of the Appellant's case that he left  Sri  Lanka  by  being
    assisted through the airport by an agent. On the Appellant's  case  his
    parents have been interviewed, certainly his father, and  it  is  known
    that the Appellant left Sri Lanka in 2009. I appreciate that Judge Mays
    appeared nevertheless to have taken a  credibility  point  against  the
    Appellant in questioning whether the Sri Lankan authorities would  have
    had to attend upon his parents if in  fact  they  had  known  that  the
    Appellant had left Sri Lanka in  2009,  but  Judge  Mays  has  set  out
    sufficient other reasons for questioning the Appellant's credibility on
    the issue as to why suddenly, in 2012 the Sri Lankan  authorities  have
    come looking  for  the  Appellant.  Those  other  matters  set  out  at
    paragraph 48 in relation to the timing of the  provision  of  documents
    and inconsistencies in them, as well as there being no mention  of  the
    Appellant's  brother  requiring  treatment  in  the  letter  from   the
    Appellant's father, taken together with the  letter  from  the  village
    general staff servicemen, with observations made with respect  to  that
    letter dated 10th February 2016 was sufficient reasons in any event for
    the Judge to question the Appellant's credibility on that point of  his
    case.

26. Still further in questioning the overall credibility of  the  Appellant
    in those matters which were not accepted by Judge Mays, she  took  into
    account, as she was entitled to, the late application for International
    Protection as a refugee made only after his Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Leave to Remain application was refused  on  14th  November  2014.  The
    finding therefore at paragraph 54 that it was not established that  the
    Sri Lankan authorities attended at the Appellant's home in Sri Lanka in
    2012 looking for the Appellant with his LTTE membership card  in  their
    possession was a finding open to Judge Mays, as was her finding that it
    had not been established that her brother had been arrested or detained
    for five days nor beaten. Those findings  are  not  challenged  in  any
    event in the grounds.

27. There is no doubt whatsoever in my mind that even if Judge Mays had not
    had that "2009" point in her mind, given the other  reasons  which  are
    fully set out, she would inevitably have come to  the  conclusion  that
    the Appellant had not  established  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
    attended at the Appellant's home in Sri Lanka in 2012 looking for  him.
    There is simply no sufficient basis for me to  interpret  the  findings
    the way in which Ms Anzani would invite me  to  do  and  therefore  the
    question of "rehabilitation" does not arise. The Appellant would answer
    his questions and would go on way without being  detained.  Those  were
    the findings of Judge Mays and those were the findings that  were  open
    to her. There was nothing perverse or irrational in the findings. Those
    were findings that were available on the evidence and therefore in  all
    the circumstances this appeal falls to be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 1st June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

