

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11532/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons promulgated   |
|On 14 November 2016                       |On 25 November 2016              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     AEE

                       (Anonymity DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from a  decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Row)  promulgated  on  4  February  2016,
   dismissing his appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  of  11
   August  2015  refusing  to  grant  him  asylum  or  any  other  form   of
   international protection. I note in passing, though,  that  he  has  been
   granted  limited  leave  to  remain  under  Article  8  of  the  European
   Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) on the basis of family  life  but  that
   does not prevent him continuing to  argue  entitlement  to  international
   protection.

2. Permission to appeal was granted on 4 April 2016  and  the  Secretary  of
   State subsequently filed a response to the appeal as provided  for  under
   rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.  In  that
   response it was indicated that the appeal was not opposed.  Further,  the
   Secretary of State invited the tribunal to remit the case to  the  First-
   tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

3. The appeal was listed for a hearing  before  me.  At  that  hearing  both
   representatives urged me to follow the course of action suggested in that
   rule 24 reply. Both indicated that they were content for me  to  issue  a
   decision with only limited reasons bearing in mind the agreement  between
   them. In the circumstances,  I  will  simply  say  that  the  grounds  of
   application for permission to appeal have identified errors of law in the
   reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal such that  its  adverse  credibility
   assessment is unsafe. In particular, I would accept, as contended in  the
   first ground of appeal, that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  wrongly
   concluding that the appellant had only produced documentary  evidence  of
   oppositionist involvement after  his  claim  for  asylum  had  been  made
   bearing in mind that the Secretary of State had acknowledged, as noted at
   paragraph 25 of the reasons for refusal  letter,  he  had  produced  some
   photographs of his presence on demonstrations in Brussels and a copy of a
   political manifesto (albeit untranslated from the French)  which  it  was
   said had come into existence prior to the date of claim.

4. In light of the above, therefore, I do set  aside  the  decision  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal, I preserve nothing from that decision and I remit to
   a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be  re-
   made. The new First-tier Tribunal will make its own factual findings  and
   reach its own conclusions stemming from those findings  on  the  material
   before it.

Directions for the First-tier Tribunal

A.    There will be a full re-hearing of the appeal. It will take  place  at
the Birmingham hearing centre and will  not  involve  Judge  Row.  The  time
estimate  for  the  hearing  shall  be  three   hours.   A   French-speaking
interpreter shall be provided for the benefit of the appellant.

B.    Either party shall be at liberty to send to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
any  further  documentary  evidence  (including   witness   statements   and
background country material) upon which it intends  to  rely.  However,  any
such documentation must be filed in sufficient time for it  to  be  received
by the First-tier Tribunal at least five working  days  prior  to  the  date
which  will  be  fixed   for   the   re-hearing.   Such   material   should,
simultaneously, be sent to the other party.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law. That decision is set aside. The case  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal so that the decision may be re-made.


Signed:                           Date:


M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




Anonymity-rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
to both the Appellant and  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                           Date:


M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



To the Respondent

Fee award

Since no fee is paid or payable there can be no fee award.


Signed:                           Date:


M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
