
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11009/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 26th July 2016                             |on 16th August 2016          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    [H H]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr D Katani, of Katani & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant identifies herself as a citizen of Eritrea, born on  [  ]
    1995.  The respondent does  not  accept  her  claimed  nationality  and
    identity.

 2. The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  for  reasons
    explained in a letter dated 22nd July 2015.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  for
    reasons explained in his decision promulgated on 13th May 2016.

 4. The appellant's first ground of appeal to the Upper Tribunal is headed,
    "Error of Fact".

 5. Paragraph 16 of the decision says:

         "[The appellant] does not speak the first language of  her  claimed
         nationality because her  mother,  who  speaks  this  language,  was
         employed as a domestic servant in Sudan and did not  have  time  to
         raise her.  She was raised by a woman called Hayat.  The  appellant
         is  unaware  of  her  nationality.   Hayat  spoke  many   languages
         including  Arabic,  Amharic,  Tigrinya  and  Oromo.   In  her  oral
         evidence today [the appellant] tells me that [Hayat] spoke Tigrinya
         to her husband and children.  [Hayat] did not speak  this  to  [the
         appellant].  [Hayat] spoke Arabic to [the appellant].  This is  one
         of the main reasons [the appellant] is fluent in Arabic."

 6. At paragraph 20 the judge says:

         "What I find difficult to understand is why [Hayat] spoke  Tigrinya
         to her children and husband  and  not  to  the  appellant.   It  is
         possible ... that the language was used with the appellant and  she
         did not pick up on it.  However, it would and should have been  the
         language she was first introduced  to  from  birth  ...  the  first
         language of her mother and father.  The lack of explanation  as  to
         why she has little or  no  knowledge  of  this  language  mitigates
         against her credibility ..."

 7. The appellant says that the judge incorrectly noted her oral  evidence.
    She did not say that Hayat spoke Tigrinya to her husband  and  children
    but not to her.  The appellant says in her  grounds  that  Hayat  spoke
    Amharic and Arabic to her husband and children and to the appellant.

 8. At paragraph 17 the judge says that the appellant "...  tells  me  that
    the Eritrean community within which she lived in  Sudan  speaks  Arabic
    and Arabic".  The appellant says that he has incorrectly noted her oral
    response - she confirmed they spoke Arabic and Amharic.

 9. The judge said at paragraph 25:

         "... it is accepted that the majority of the questions put to  [the
         appellant]  regarding  Eritrea  were  answered  correctly  ...  the
         respondent submits that this is not  consistent  with  someone  who
         left the country at the age of 3.  I am compelled to  agree  ...  I
         considered that the answers given by the appellant ... at interview
         and ... today are reminiscent of someone who has  prepared  for  an
         examination and has learned answers to deal with all eventualities.
          I consider this conclusion inescapable.  The explanation  employed
         by the appellant lacks conviction and credibility."

10. The first ground argues that the appellant  was  found  incredible,  at
    least in part, on the basis of  evidence  which  was  misunderstood,  a
    material error of fact amounting to an error of law.

11. The second ground of appeal is headed, "Conjecture".

12. This ground argues that the judge engaged in speculation as to how  the
    appellant  acquired  her  knowledge,  and  "assumed  the  role   of   a
    behavioural expert.  No evidence was led ... that would allow the judge
    to arrive at such a conclusion".

13. Also under this heading the ground criticises paragraph 32,  where  the
    judge says:

         "[The evidence of the appellant is that in Italy and France] ... no-
         one offered her asylum when rescued.  However she acknowledges that
         she was taken to an appropriate camp, provided with  accommodation,
         water and food.  I am satisfied that other services would have been
         made available ... including ... facilities [to] claim asylum."

14. The ground says  that  the  judge  speculated,  there  having  been  no
    evidence led on the type of camp  to  which  the  appellant  was  taken
    beyond provision of accommodation, water and food.

15. The third ground is headed, "Failure to Give Appropriate Weight".

16. The judge found that the appellant ignored the opportunity to claim  in
    Italy and France with a view to "conducting a shopping exercise".   The
    ground submits that this ignores the appellant's explanation  that  she
    was under the control of an agent in Italy and in France.

17. Expanding upon the grounds, Mr Katani said that the first disclosed  an
    incorrect noting of the appellant's  evidence  in  a  way  which  later
    coloured the judgment.  If  the  judge  had  noted  the  evidence  more
    carefully, he would not have come to the conclusion  he  did.   It  was
    conjectural that the appellant might have  learned  her  evidence.   It
    would have been impossible for her to know in advance what to study  in
    order to answer questions when making an asylum claim years  or  months
    later.  There had been no evidence of the type of camp to which she was
    taken.  Particularly if it had been unofficial, there might  well  have
    been no information about claiming asylum.  Mr Katani accepted that the
    third ground does not strictly raise an issue about the weight given to
    certain evidence (which is not usually a matter of  law).   Rather,  it
    raises a criticism of failing to take evidence into account.

18. Finally, Mr Katani submitted that the errors in total required a  fresh
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

19. Mr Matthews submitted that the obvious explanation for the  duplication
    at paragraph 17 of the determination was that the judge intended to say
    "Arabic and Amharic" not "Arabic and Arabic".  That could  be  ignored.
    At paragraph 16 there was some muddling of the  evidence,  but  nothing
    material.  The essential point was that the  appellant  did  not  speak
    Tigrinya, allegedly the language of her mother and also spoken  by  the
    woman who brought her up, Hayat.  It was spoken by her parents  and  by
    those among whom she  lived  even  after  her  alleged  departure  from
    Eritrea.  The appellant was in real difficulty in explaining  away  the
    language point, quite apart from any error over the language spoken  to
    her by Hayat.  It was extraordinary that the appellant was able to give
    elaborate background information about Eritrea, a country she said  she
    left when aged about 3, but no  detail  about  the  background  of  her
    allegedly Eritrean parents.  She produced a witness  who  purported  to
    have first- hand knowledge of her Eritrean origins, but the  judge  for
    reasons which were not criticised found that witness not to be  one  of
    credit.  There was nothing  in  the  language  points  which  made  any
    difference.  The grounds cherry-picked at the evidence, and  failed  to
    deal with the determination  as  a  whole.   Whether  a  camp  was  run
    directly by a government or by a non-governmental organisation, it  was
    reasonable to suppose that information and advice about asylum would be
    available.  The appellant had not at all times been under  the  control
    of an agent.  Her residence in the  camp  and  her  departure  from  it
    showed that she had consciously decided not to claim asylum  in  either
    France or Italy.  In any event, it would make no sense for an agent  to
    insist on the appellant travelling on to the United Kingdom rather than
    making her claim in France or Italy.  That must have  involved  further
    trouble and expense, and there was no rational explanation of  why  any
    "agent" might behave in that way.  The judge might not  have  mentioned
    that feature of the appellant's evidence  specifically,  but  that  was
    immaterial.  The judge was entitled to conclude  as  he  did,  and  had
    given more than adequate reasons.

20. Mr Katani in reply argued that the judge at paragraph 31 said  that  he
    reached his decision "cumulatively", so that  implied  that  the  error
    about language played some part in it.  The  judge  did  not  say  that
    "even if" he was wrong at certain points, he  would  have  reached  the
    same conclusion, so the error must have been material.

21. I reserved my determination.

22. The grounds and submissions for the  appellant  have  sought  for  such
    error as may be found in the judge's decision, but in my  opinion  they
    have failed to disclose anything material.

23. The duplication at paragraph 17 is plainly a typographical  slip.   The
    paragraph should be read as Mr Matthews suggested.

24. Any error in recording the evidence at paragraph 16 does not  undermine
    the judge's reasons for finding that there was no sensible  explanation
    of why the appellant, if her background was as  she  claimed,  did  not
    speak Tigrinya.

25. The judge did not require  evidence  from  an  expert  to  justify  his
    conclusion that the appellant's level of knowledge  about  Eritrea  was
    incongruous.  This was not a case,  as  Mr  Katani  put  it,  of  being
    "damned if you do, and damned if you don't".  The judge was entitled to
    observe  that  she  had  a  detailed  general  knowledge  yet  gave  no
    convincing account of personal particulars.

26. It is a perfectly sensible observation that facilities and  information
    about claiming asylum would be available at any camp for refugees.   It
    would be extraordinary if such matters were not commonly discussed in a
    camp, whether run by the government or by another organisation.

27. The appellant's explanation of being under the control of an  agent  is
    no sensible explanation at all.  Any more explicit consideration of  it
    would not be favourable to her case.

28. The grounds do not amount to more than disagreement on the facts.  They
    do not show that the decision contains any legally material error.  The
    decision shall stand.

29. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




            [pic]


            15 August 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




