
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11405/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice,      |Decision & Reasons promulgated  |
|Belfast                                    |On 15 November 2016             |
|On 11 November 2016                        |                                |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                          SHARIF MOHAMUD ABDIRAHAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Appellant:    Mr S McTaggart, of Counsel, instructed by  RP  Crawford  &  Co
Solicitors
Respondent:   Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

Introduction

 1. The First  tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    (the "Secretary of State"), refusing the  Appellant's  application  for
    asylum. Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms:

         "In his grounds of appeal, the Appellant asserts that ... the Judge
         failed to give adequate reasons for his decision ...  The Appellant
         is entitled to know what parts  of  his  account  are  rejected  or
         accepted ...

         I find arguable merit in the grounds  ...  In  particular  I  think
         there is a lack of adequate reasoning why the Appellant's  evidence
         was rejected."

 2. In its decision, the FtT, inter alia, rehearsed  the  gravamen  of  the
    asylum case made by the Appellant when interviewed and  summarised  his
    evidence.  In the key section of its decision, the Tribunal  reproduced
    three lengthy paragraphs from  the  decision  letter.   These  passages
    focus on certain aspects of the Appellant's account, analyse  them  and
    reject them as not worthy of belief.  The Judge then stated:

         "I am not persuaded these reasons were engaged with in evidence and
         find that they have not been gainsaid.   In  the  circumstances,  I
         find them a persuasive analysis of the Appellant's evidence."

 3.  I  conclude  that  there  are  two  identifiable   and   inter-related
    shortcomings in the decision of the FtT.  First, there was a failure to
    make findings in respect of several key  elements  of  the  Appellant's
    case.   Second,  consequential  upon  this  failure,  the  decision  is
    inadequately reasoned.  See MK (Duty to give reasons)  Pakistan  [2013]
    UKUT 641 (IAC).



ORDER

 4. The decision of the FtT is vitiated by material error  of  law  and  is
    hereby set aside.  I remit the appeal to a differently constituted  FtT
    for rehearing and fresh decision.









                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                     Date:  11 November 2016
