
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11216/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 19 June 2013                               |on 20 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            NABIL DJAMAL LEGHMARA
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:       Miss N Weir, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This determination refers to parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

2) The appellant is a citizen of Algeria,  born  on  29  January  1975.   No
   anonymity order has been requested or made.

3) The appellant made a fresh application to  remain  on  asylum  and  human
   rights grounds.  The respondent rejected that by letter dated 11 December
   2012, declining to accept that the appellant was entitled  to  protection
   under the Refugee Convention  as  a  homosexual.   The  letter  does  not
   contain any consideration of Article 8 of the ECHR.

4) First-tier Tribunal Judge Agnew dismissed the Refugee  Convention  appeal
   under reference to HJ and HT v SSHD [2010] UKSC31.  She said at paragraph
   21:

    ... The appellant has not established ... that he would  act  otherwise
    in Algeria than he has in the UK, that is,  in  a  deliberately  chosen
    discreet manner  which  would  not  draw  attention  to  himself  as  a
    homosexual man ... The appellant would live discreetly as a  homosexual
    in Algeria not because he feared persecution but because that is now he
    chooses to live his life as a homosexual.


5) At paragraph 24 the judge found that the appellant  had  not  established
   that he met the requirements of "the new Immigration Rules introduced  on
   9 July 2012".  She turned to Article 8, referring to Razgar v SSHD [2004]
   UKHL 27 and to  Huang  v  SSHD  [2007]  UKHL  11.   She  found  that  the
   appellant,  who  has  been  in  the  UK  for  a  long  time,  has   close
   relationships in the UK with his brother,  his  sister-in-law  and  their
   children and that in his particular  circumstances  removal  would  be  a
   disproportionate breach of Article 8.

6) The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal on the following grounds:

   Ground one: Making a material misdirection of law

    1. The Tribunal considered the relevant Immigration Rules but made  its
       assessment on Article 8 by reference to case law which pre-dated the
       relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules and was established  in
       the absence of a clear expression of the public interest as set  out
       by the Secretary of State and endorsed by Parliament.  In  doing  so
       ... it misdirected itself in law.


    2. The Immigration Rules are a detailed expression of Government policy
       on controlling the  immigration  and  protecting  the  public.   The
       relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules take into  account  the
       public interest element of an assessment  of  proportionality  under
       Article 8.  They reflect the broad principles set out in  Strasbourg
       and domestic jurisprudence.  Therefore, when a Tribunal considers an
       individual appeal it should consider proportionality in the light of
       this clear expression of public policy; and the Secretary  of  State
       would  expect  the  Courts  to  defer  to  her  view,  endorsed   by
       Parliament,  on  how,  broadly,  public  policy  considerations  are
       weighed against individual family  and  private  life  rights,  when
       assessing Article 8 in any individual case.  The failure  to  do  so
       means that the decision the Tribunal made on Article 8 is incomplete
       and that it is also unsustainable  as  it  failed  to  apply  a  key
       element in the assessment of the case.

    Ground two: Failing to give reasons or adequate reasons for findings on
    a material matters


    3. ... At paragraph 28 the Tribunal have found that the  appellant  has
       established a private and family life in the  UK,  however  ...  the
       Tribunal has failed to provide any reasons as to why.  The  Tribunal
       has found at paragraph 28 that the appellant has close relationships
       with his brother, sister-in-law and their children, but has provided
       no reasons as to why and on what basis.   Kugathas  v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31 (21  January  2003)
       states that "Because there is no presumption of family life,  in  my
       judgment a family life is not established between an adult child and
       his surviving parent or other siblings unless something more  exists
       than normal emotional ties." ... the Tribunal had not  provided  any
       reasons as to why these close relationships amount to anything  more
       than mere emotional ties.  ... The appellant  could  continue  these
       relationships from Algeria via modern methods of communication.


    4. ... the Tribunal erred in law as they have also found  at  paragraph
       28 that the appellant has established a  private  life  in  the  UK.
       Whilst it is noted that the appellant has resided in the  UK  for  a
       lengthy time period it  is  not  considered  significant.   ...  the
       appellant was 26 years of age when he came to the UK and as noted by
       the Tribunal returned to Algeria for  3  months  ...  The  appellant
       could fully readapt to life in Algeria having  spent  his  formative
       years in Algeria and as he has demonstrated he can do  by  returning
       there for a lengthy period ... The Tribunal has failed  to  consider
       whether the appellant could return to Algeria and  placed  too  much
       weight on his length of residence here.

7) On 11 February  2013  a  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   granted permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  on  the  view  that
   while ground had  little  or  no  merit,  particularly  following  Izuazu
   (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC), the  second  ground  was
   arguable.

8) The appellant has filed a response to the grant of permission under  Rule
   24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   The  response
   firstly indicates that the appellant has an outstanding  application  for
   permission to appeal against the refusal of his appeal under the  Refugee
   Convention.  However, Miss Weir indicated that in light of recent country
   guidance the appellant no longer seeks to pursue that.    The rest of the
   response is as follows:

    ...The SSHD's first ground of appeal has  no  merit  in  light  of  the
    findings of MF (Nigeria) UKUT 00393 (IAC) and Izuazu (Article 8  -  new
    rules) [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC).


    In any event ... the appellant arguably meets the requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules having spent more than twenty years  outside  of  his
    country of origin and having no ties with that country.


    There is little merit in the second ground of appeal.  The SSHD  argues
    that the judge has failed to consider the issues identified in Kugathas
    v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  ... The judge's conclusion that the removal
    of the appellant to Algeria would be disproportionate was a  conclusion
    that was open to her on the information before her.  She did  not  find
    that there was a higher than normal level  of  dependency  between  the
    appellant and this brother and did not specifically find  that  he  had
    established a family life in the United Kingdom with  his  brother  and
    his  family.   Rather  the  judge's  findings  that  removal  would  be
    disproportionate seem to be impliedly based on the appellant's  private
    life in the United Kingdom.


    The argument is also made that the judge has erred in  law  in  finding
    that the appellant  has  established  a  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It is agreed that this is  the  implication  of  the  judge's
    findings, although  she  does  not  specifically  state  this  ...  The
    appellant has resided in the United Kingdom for a  period  of  over  11
    years during which time he has established  a  private  life.   He  has
    lived outside of his country of origin for over half of  his  life  and
    has no strong ties with that country.  Evidence was before the judge in
    support of the appellant's position that he has established  a  private
    life in the UK and insufficient reasoning has been given by the SSHD as
    to why this would not be the case.  The  findings  of  the  judge  that
    removal would be disproportionate were correctly made and open to  her.




9) Mrs O'Brien argued the case along the lines of the grounds of appeal.

10) I indicated that the appeal would not succeed.

11) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  were  only
   generic, but they did include the brief allegation that his rights  under
   the ECHR, including Article 8 would be breached were he  to  be  removed.
   Although the focus  of  the  hearing  was  whether  he  was  entitled  to
   protection as a homosexual, the case was also put under  Article  8,  and
   the evidence  emerged  upon  which  the  judge  relied  in  reaching  her
   conclusions in that branch of the case, as she was bound to do.

12) The first of the SSHD's grounds is not completely without merit, but  it
   depends upon hindsight.  It goes too far in saying that the courts are to
   defer to the SSHD's view that the "new Rules" are effectively decisive of
   Article 8.  The judge did not consider the extent to which the new  Rules
   are "designed to cover the considerations that are relevant to an Article
   8 claim in a normal case": see now MS v SSHD [2013] CSIH 52 at  paragraph
   30, where the Court went on to say that in most cases the new rules  will
   ensure that the assessment is properly carried out.  However,  the  judge
   would still have had to consider the appellant's submission that  he  was
   entitled to remain under Article 8, outwith the amended Rules.   In  this
   case she  can  scarcely  be  criticised  for  turning  directly  to  that
   exercise, when the refusal decision makes no mention of Article 8  either
   within or outwith the Rules, when it was accepted on both  sides  at  the
   hearing that the appellant could not succeed within the Rules,  and  when
   the SSHD made no further submissions upon the correct legal approach.

13)  The first ground of appeal shows no material misdirection of law.

14) On the second ground, it is plain that the judge's decision is based  on
   private life, including close relationships with  extended  family.   Any
   test laid down in Kugathas, as the appellant's submission points out, had
   no bearing.   The amount of weight to place on any individual factor  was
   very much a question for the judge.  The ground amounts  to  disagreement
   with the striking of the proportionality  balance  in  a  way  which  was
   rationally open to the judge and for which legally adequate reasons  have
   been given.

15) The SSHD's appeal to the UT is  dismissed.   The  determination  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal will stand.





                               [pic]
                                19 June 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


