

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11858/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 April 2014                              |On 23 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                      MASTER EVAN ABDULKARIM HAMAGHARIB

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, Counsel
For the Respondent:     Mr. S Whitwell, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The Secretary of State appeals with leave against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert OBE allowing the appeal of the
    appellant on asylum grounds and under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.
2.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born on 20 August 1995.
    His appeal was heard on 24 November 2011 by DIJ Peart and IJ
    Youngerwood and dismissed in a determination promulgated in December
    2011.   Mr. M Sowerby of Counsel lodged an appeal against the panel's
    decision.  Counsel argued in his third ground that the panel's finding
    at paragraph 15 that the threats to the appellant involved imputed
    political opinion contradicted their finding at paragraph 18 that the
    telephone calls and, possibly letters were not more than an attempt to
    obtain more money from the appellant's unfortunate family.  That
    contradiction was accepted by both representatives at the hearing
    before DUTJ Mailer on 6 July 2012 as constituting an error of law
    (paragraph 21).  For other reasons as well, DUTJ Mailer decided that
    the panel's decision should be set aside and remade on all issues.

3.   At paragraph 44 of his determination, FtTJ Herbert agreed with the
    panel's findings at paragraph 15.  In view of the finding by DUTJ
    Mailer that paragraph 15 contradicted paragraph 18, it was incumbent
    FtTJ Herbert to give reasons as to why he concurred with the panel's
    findings at paragraph 15.  I find that he did not do that.

4.   I do not accept Counsel's submission that the judge's acceptance that
    the appellant's brother was kidnapped and likely killed in the
    circumstances described supports the judge's finding at paragraph 44.
    Even though DUTJ Mailer sent the appellant's appeal back to be heard
    afresh on all issues, the panel's findings in respect of the
    appellant's evidence that his brother was kidnapped and killed and the
    threats made to the family thereafter have not challenged by the
    respondent and therefore stand. Accordingly, the judge was not making a
    new finding at paragraph 55.  He was in my opinion supporting the
    unchallenged findings of fact made by the panel.  What the judge needed
    to do was to make a clear finding as to whether those circumstances
    involved an imputed political opinion or an attempt to extort money
    from the appellant's family and to give reasons for his finding.  I
    repeat my earlier finding that the judge did not do that.

5.   For this reason the judge's decision cannot stand.  I set it aside in
    order for it to be remade by a First-tier Judge other than First-tier
    Judges Peart, Youngerwood and Herbert.


DIRECTION

Appeal is remitted to Taylor House for rehearing

Time estimate - one and a half hours

Kurdish interpreter required



Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
