
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11378/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th February 2016                 |On 15th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                    [H N]
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Mac, of Mac & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

  1. This is effectively a fresh hearing  following  the  Upper  Tribunal's
       decision to allow an appeal by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  a
       decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Foulkes-Jones  who,  on
       18th April 2015, allowed the asylum appeal of [HN] (the Appellant).

  2. The Appellant is a national of Vietnam, born in 1996. She  arrived  in
       the United Kingdom on 14th April 2011, aged 14,  and  claimed  asylum
       the next day. She claimed to fear individuals or a gang who were owed
       gambling debts accrued by her father, whom she last saw  in  February
       2007. Shortly after her father's departure from the Appellant's  life
       some four to five men came to her home,  where  she  lived  with  her
       mother and grandmother, and requested money to pay off the debt.  The
       Appellant is unclear as to who these men were and she  did  not  know
       whether the authorities were ever involved or were ever alerted.  The
       Appellant left school at a young age  and  instead  sold  vegetables,
       washed dishes, waitressed and tidied in small restaurants. Her mother
       died of natural causes in July 2009.

  3. At the beginning of 2010, as  a  result  of  issues  relating  to  the
       payment of the debt, the Appellant was stabbed  and  threatened  with
       abduction unless the debt was settled. Her grandmother ensured that a
       further ten months were given to enable the  debt  obligation  to  be
       met. Unbeknownst to the Appellant her grandmother then sold her house
       and arranged for  the  Appellant  to  leave  Vietnam.  The  Appellant
       arrived in this country and was placed in foster care. Soon after she
       was approached by a Vietnamese man in  a  public  library,  taken  to
       London and held against her will. She was subjected to ill-treatment,
       including being raped, and made to cook and clean the man's flat. She
       believed, at one stage, that she overheard other  men  talking  about
       her grandmother and her father's debt, but she could not be  sure  as
       they were talking a mixture of Vietnamese and Chinese. She managed to
       escape in September 2011  and  was  placed  with  a  separate  foster
       family. There have since been no further incidents of concern. At the
       time of the Respondent's  decision  refusing  her  asylum  and  human
       rights claim the Appellant maintained that she was in a  relationship
       with a Vietnamese national granted ILR and that they were expecting a
       child.

  4. There had been some significant delay by the Respondent in determining
       the asylum claim, the decision under appeal being 3rd December  2014.
       In her refusal letter the Respondent accepted the Appellant's account
       in full. The Respondent concluded  however  that  there  would  be  a
       sufficiency of protection available to the  Appellant,  alternatively
       that she could avail herself of the internal relocation alternative.

  5. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the Appellant's appeal  on  the  basis
       that there was conspicuous unfairness arising from  the  Respondent's
       failure to engage in her tracing obligations under  Regulation  6  of
       the Asylum Seekers (Reception Conditions) Regulations 2005. The First-
       tier Tribunal Judge found that the Appellant  had  been  deprived  of
       access to the best evidence with which to prove her case. The failure
       to engage to the full  extent  with  her  obligations  to  trace  the
       Appellant's grandmother meant that there was no further  evidence  as
       to whether the incidents with the  gang  had  been  reported  to  the
       authorities, or relating to the influence and reach of the  gang  and
       whether  the  gang  consisted  of  non-state  actors.  Applying   the
       principles  enunciated  in  Rashid,  R  (on  the  application  of)  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA  Civ  744  the
       appeal was allowed and the matter remitted to the Respondent in order
       for an appropriate period of leave to be granted.

  6. The Respondent was granted permission to  appeal  that  decision  and,
       shortly before the error of law hearing in the  Upper  Tribunal,  the
       Supreme Court handed down its decision in  TN  and  MA  (Afghanistan)
       [2015] UKSC 40.  At paragraphs 52 and 53  of  TN  the  Supreme  Court
       considered the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  EU  (Afghanistan)
       [2013] EWCA Civ 32.  In that  case  Sir  Stanley  Burnton  identified
       difficulties  with  the  Rashid  principle.   Sir   Stanley   Burnton
       acknowledged that the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department's
       breach of her tracing duty could have evidential  relevance  because,
       in assessing the risk to a claimant on return to his or  her  country
       of nationality, the lack of evidence from the Secretary of State  for
       the Home Department as to the availability of familial support was  a
       relevant factor.  At paragraph 53 of TN the Supreme Court said this:

           "On this approach, it is not for the Tribunal or the  Court,  in
           considering a  claim  for  asylum,  to  try  to  compensate  the
           claimant for some past breach of duty which does not affect  the
           question whether he is presently exposed to a risk entitling him
           to the protection of the Refugee Convention."

    7. At paragraphs 71 and 72 of TN the Supreme Court  indicated  that  the
       principles enunciated in Rashid were not to be followed.  At 72  Lord
       Toulson stated:

           "I would hold that the Ravichandran  principle  applies  on  the
           hearing of asylum appeals without exception, and  Rashid  should
           no longer be  followed.   The  question  whether  the  appellant
           qualifies for asylum status is not a question of discretion.  It
           is one which must be decided on the evidence before the Tribunal
           or court."

    8. In my decision promulgated on 15 July 2015 I was satisfied  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal did make a material error in law in allowing  the
       appeal  on  Rashid  principles.  There  had   been   no   substantive
       consideration as to whether  a  sufficiency  of  protection  was,  as
       maintained by the Respondent, available to the Appellant. Nor did the
       First-tier Tribunal consider the viability of internal relocation  or
       the Appellant's Article 8 claim in relation to her  partner  and  the
       lengthy delay by the Secretary of State.

    9. I decided however to adjourn the appeal in light of what the  Supreme
       Court said at paragraph 73 of its judgement in TN.

           "There remains the question how the Tribunal should approach  an
           asylum appeal where the respondent has  failed  in  her  tracing
           obligation. If the appellant believes  that  he  may  have  been
           prejudiced, it would be open to him to  ask  the  respondent  to
           attempt to carry out a tracing process and to ask  the  Tribunal
           to adjourn the appeal for that to be done. There would be  force
           in the argument that it should not make a difference whether the
           appellant has by then turned 18, since that would not remove  an
           obligation which had arisen under the  Reception  Directive  and
           the  effects  of  which  were  intended  to  last  beyond  their
           minority."

   10. I directed the Respondent to undertake her tracing  obligations  owed
       to the Appellant, to be completed before the adjourned hearing.  This
       was because there was a possibility that the grandmother, if  traced,
       could assist in determining a number of issues relevant to the  issue
       of sufficiency of protection and internal relocation. These  include,
       inter alia, 1) whether  the  debt  owed  by  the  Appellant's  father
       remains outstanding and the amount of the debt; 2) whether any of the
       debt owed to the gang was used to pay for the Appellant's journey  to
       the United Kingdom (although the Appellant was informed by  an  agent
       that her grandmother had sold the house she does not know this to  be
       the case for certain); 3) the scope of influence and  the  degree  of
       reach of the criminal gang, either  locally  or  nationally;  and  4)
       whether the criminal gang consists of  non-state  agents  or  whether
       there are state agents involved. All of these are factors relevant to
       the  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be  a  refugee.   I
       additionally  granted  the  Appellant  permission  to  file   further
       evidence for the adjourned hearing, both in  respect  of  her  asylum
       claim and in respect of her Article 8 human rights claim.

Further documents submitted

   11. I received a 'Family Tracing Report' dated  27  July  2015  from  the
       Respondent. From the Appellant I was provided  with  a  short  bundle
       consisting of a brief skeleton argument, a brief statement from [DH],
       the Appellant's partner, dated  02  February  2016,  a  copy  of  his
       immigration  status  document,  a  certified  copy   of   the   birth
       certificate relating to the Appellant's child  (indicating  that  the
       Appellant's partner was the father), some NHS correspondence relating
       to the registration of the Appellant and her child with a GP, and a 4
       page USSD report on the trafficking in persons in Vietnam,  dated  27
       July 2015.

   12. I have considered the above documents in conjunction with the  bundle
       of documents filed by the Appellant's representatives in  respect  of
       her appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  included,  inter
       alia, a statement from the Appellant dated 20 March 2015, educational
       certificates, character references, documents relating  to  her  then
       pregnancy, and photographs of the Appellant and her partner  and  her
       friends and her foster family, and the COIR report on  Vietnam  dated
       09 August 2013.

   13. At the adjourned hearing I  provided  both  representatives  with  an
       extract  from  the   Immigration   Directorate   Instruction   Family
       Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0B, Family Life  (as  a  Partner  or
       Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year Routes, published on August 2015.

The adjourned hearing

   14. Having satisfied myself that the Appellant understood the  Vietnamese
       interpreter, she adopted her statement of 20 March 2015 and was asked
       no further questions by way of examination-in-chief.

   15. In cross-examination the Appellant confirmed that she  did  not  know
       how to contact her grandmother. When asked whether her partner  would
       choose to settle in Vietnam the  Appellant  said  he  would  not.  He
       wanted the Appellant and their son to stay in the United Kingdom.

   16. In answer to questions from myself the Appellant said that  she  does
       not live with her partner as he resides in a  small  bedroom  outside
       London and he works outside London. Her son lived with her,  although
       she took him to see his father on weekends.

   17. [DH] adopted his statement. In it confirmed he  was  the  Appellant's
       partner. He  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  October  2002  as  an
       unaccompanied minor and was granted ILR on 18 January  2012.  He  met
       the Appellant in May 2014 and their relationship commenced in  August
       2014. He confirmed that the Appellant gave birth to their child on 23
       July 2015. The child is  therefore  a  British  citizen,  his  father
       having settled status at the  date  of  the  birth.  The  Appellant's
       partner confirmed that he and the Appellant were not living  together
       as he was working in Basingstoke and lodging with a friend in Woking,
       while  the  Appellant  was  residing   in   London   in   house-share
       accommodation provided by the social services. He confirmed  that  he
       saw his son every week and provided financial support.  He  indicated
       that he would like the Appellant and their son to remain with him  in
       the United Kingdom.

   18. There was no examination-in-chief. In cross-examination  the  partner
       said he would stay in the United Kingdom if his partner was  required
       to leave. He claimed he would be  unable  to  look  after  his  child
       without his partner and said  that  the  child  needed  to  have  his
       mother.

   19. I asked some clarificatory questions. The partner said he was a  nail
       technician. He was self-employed. He worked 4 days a week. There  was
       no-one who was capable of taking care of their 6 month old son  while
       he was working. The baby was  bottle  and  breast  fed.  The  partner
       entered the United Kingdom as a 15 year old.  He  had  no  future  in
       Vietnam and there were no human rights in Vietnam.

   20. Both representatives made submissions which I  have  recorded  in  my
       Record of Proceeding and in  respect  of  which  I  have  taken  full
       account.

The standard and burden of proof

   21. In respect of the asylum and Article 3 aspect of the appeal,  I  have
       considered the circumstances  as  of  the  date  of  the  hearing  in
       accordance with section 85(4) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002. The lower burden of proof is upon the  Appellant  to
       establish that there is a real risk of her suffering  persecution  in
       the country of return for one  of  the  reasons  cited  in  the  1951
       Refugee Convention or a breach of Article 3.

   22. The burden of  proof  in  respect  of  showing  compliance  with  the
       Immigration Rules and with establishing  the  factual  basis  for  an
       Article 8 claim rests on the Appellant and the standard of  proof  in
       this regard is the balance of probabilities.

Findings and reasons

   23. The Appellant maintains that she will be persecuted or  subjected  to
       serious ill-treatment sufficient to breach Article 3 if  returned  to
       Vietnam as the gang in respect of whom her father owed gambling debts
       would target her. The Respondent accepted the Appellant's account  of
       what occurred to her in Vietnam and of  her  journey  to  the  United
       Kingdom and the events that occurred after her entry  to  the  United
       Kingdom. The Appellant has been recognised as a victim of trafficking
       by the Competent Authority. The Respondent was not however  satisfied
       that the Appellant  would  be  unable  to  access  a  sufficiency  of
       protection from the authorities, and found, in any  event,  that  she
       could internally relocate (identify Ho Chi Minh City as an example of
       a place she could go to).

   24. There remains a significant amount of uncertainty  and  vagueness  in
       the Appellant's account of events in Vietnam. This is not  surprising
       given her age and I don't hold this against her. It  was  hoped  that
       further information could  be  obtained  following  the  Respondent's
       attempt to trace the  Appellant's  grandmother.  The  Family  Tracing
       Report however indicated that no trace had  been  found.  The  report
       noted the limited amount of information the  Appellant  was  able  to
       furnish, and all the appropriate avenues for seeking information were
       pursued. The Appellant herself  indicated  that  she  was  unable  to
       contact her grandmother and  there  was  no  other  evidence  of  any
       attempt on her part to trace her grandmother.

   25. There is nothing in the Appellant's account to indicate that the gang
       who sought payment for her father's debt were state agents,  or  that
       they had any  influence  with  the  authorities.  The  Appellant  was
       unaware whether her mother or grandmother ever reported the  gang  to
       the authorities. There is no evidence that any  protection  from  the
       authorities had ever been sought. The Appellant  relies  on  the  COI
       report of August 2013 (sections 8.02 and 8.03) indicating that police
       investigative capabilities were very limited, and that  training  and
       resources were inadequate. The same report however indicated that the
       police were generally effective in maintaining public order.  Relying
       on the same report the Respondent noted that the  police  in  Vietnam
       were arranged on regional lines and therefore any influence the  gang
       may hold in the Appellant's local area would not be deemed to  extend
       to the rest of the country.

   26. The Appellant relied on a USSD report on the trafficking  in  persons
       in Vietnam, but there is no evidence  that  the  Appellant  was  ever
       trafficked by a gang  within  Vietnam  or  that  her  departure  from
       Vietnam was an instance of trafficking. Although it is  not  entirely
       clear it seems very likely, having regard to the Appellant's account,
       that  the  Competent  Authority  recognised  her  as  a   victim   of
       trafficking as a result of  what  occurred  in  the  United  Kingdom.
       Although  she  does  not  know  for  certain,  the  person  that  the
       Appellant's grandmother used to send her  out  of  Vietnam  told  the
       Appellant that the family home had been sold in order to pay for  the
       Appellant's journey. Although the Appellant  thought  she  heard  men
       taking about her grandmother when she had been  abducted  in  London,
       she could not be sure as they were talking mainly in Chinese  with  a
       few words  of  Vietnamese.  Given  the  circumstances  in  which  the
       Appellant met QA (the person who befriended her in a library and  who
       forced her to cook and clean for him) I am not satisfied, even on the
       lower standard of proof,  that  the  individuals  who  kidnapped  the
       Appellant in London are related to those whom she fears in Vietnam.

   27. The USSD report on trafficking indicates that  Vietnam  is  a  source
       country for men, women and children subjected to sex trafficking  and
       forced labour within the  country  and  abroad.  Although  Vietnamese
       women are subjected to sex trafficking abroad, and men and women  are
       subjected to forced labour within the country, there  is  nothing  in
       the report to suggest that the  Appellant  herself,  if  returned  to
       Vietnam, faces a real risk of being  trafficked.  The  decision  also
       referred to the COIS report  (24.09  &  24.12)  indicating  that  the
       Vietnamese government were taking action against those placing others
       in  debt  bondage.  The  Appellant  has   some   qualifications   and
       hairdressing skills and  there  was  nothing  to  indicate  that  her
       partner would be unable to provide her with at least  some  funds  so
       that she would not be destitute.

   28. In any event, I am not satisfied that the Appellant would  be  unable
       to relocate to another part  of  the  country.  An  earlier  Tribunal
       decision (LB (Internal flight alternative - Article 3) Vietnam [2004]
       UKIAT 00331) found that  internal  relocation  was  a  viable  option
       notwithstanding the existence of the  ho  khau  registration  system.
       Furthermore, in  Nguyen  (Anti-Trafficking  Convention:  respondent's
       duties) [2015] UKUT 00170 (IAC) the Upper  Tribunal  found  that  the
       chances of an individual who left Vietnam in 2008 and  who  had  been
       trafficked,  coming  across  her  traffickers   was   'very   slight'
       (paragraph 51). The appellant in Nguyen was a single woman with three
       very young children. The Tribunal stated (at paragraph 52),  "It  has
       not been shown that the background evidence indicates that  returning
       without her partner and with the children would place her at risk  of
       breach of her Article 3 rights or that even if she is a member  of  a
       particular social group of trafficked women from Vietnam, she faces a
       real risk of harm on that account. It is speculative and no  more  to
       suggest that she would face a real risk of coming across her previous
       traffickers or that as a woman in  the  circumstances  in  which  she
       would return she faced a real risk of  being  trafficked  by  someone
       else." In light of the aforementioned factors, d  taking  account  of
       the fact that the Appellant left Vietnam in 2011 and not 2008,  I  am
       nevertheless not satisfied that her return to  Vietnam  would  expose
       her to a real risk  of  persecution  or  breach  of  Article  3  ill-
       treatment.

   29. I will now consider whether the Appellant's removal would  constitute
       a breach of Article 8, with respect to both the immigration rules and
       her free-standing Article 8 rights and those of her family.

   30. In her Reasons for Refusal Letter the Respondent noted the absence of
       information to support her claimed relationship with [DH]. I have now
       seen a statement from [DH], in which he  maintains  that  he  is  the
       partner of the Appellant and the father of her child. He attended the
       hearing and gave evidence. He held and played with the child for long
       periods and certainly gave the strong  impression  through  his  body
       language  and  demeanour  of  having   a   genuine   and   subsisting
       relationship with the Appellant and their child. The  genuineness  of
       this relationship was not challenged by the Presenting  Officer.  The
       brief evidence given by the Appellant and her  partner,  both  orally
       and  in  their  statements,  relating  to  their   relationship   was
       inherently plausible. In  these  circumstances  I  am  satisfied  the
       Appellant and [DH] are in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

   31. Having regard to the birth certificate (naming  the  partner  as  the
       father of the child)  and  the  absence  of  any  challenge  to  this
       relationship  from  the  Home  Office  Presenting   Officer,   I   am
       additionally satisfied that the Appellant's child is fathered by  her
       partner. The partner produced  in  evidence  his  immigration  status
       document confirming his grant of ILR in October 2012. I am  therefore
       satisfied that the partner was settled when the child  was  born  and
       that the child is a British citizen. This  was  not  disputed  by  Ms
       Brocklesby-Weller.

   32. The  Appellant  and  her  partner  have  consistently  and  plausibly
       maintained that they do not live together. He  works  in  Basingstoke
       and resides with a friend in Woking;  she  lives  in  social-services
       provided accommodation in London. The child lives with her,  although
       she takes him to see his father at weekends. This arrangement was not
       challenged by the Presenting Officer.

   33. I must first consider whether the Appellant meets the requirements of
       Appendix FM, that aspect of the immigration rules  giving  effect  to
       the Respondent's Article 8 obligations. I identified to the parties R-
       LTRPT (setting out the requirements for limited leave to remain as  a
       parent) as  being  relevant  to  my  decision.  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller
       indicated that she had also identified R-LTRPT as being relevant.

   34. R-LTRPT.1.1 indicates that the requirements for leave to remain as  a
       parent are, so far as it material, that -

           (a)    the applicant and the child must be in the UK;

           (b)    the applicant must have  made  a  valid  application  for
           limited or indefinite leave to remain as a  parent  or  partner;
           and either

           (c)    ...

           (d)

                (i)    the applicant must not fall for refusal under  S-LTR:
                Suitability leave to remain; and

                (ii)   the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs E-
                LTRPT.2.2-2.4. and E-LTRPT.3.1-3.2.; and

                (iii)  paragraph EX.1. applies.

   35. The Appellant and her child are in the United Kingdom.  According  to
       GEN.1.9 of Appendix FM the requirement to make  a  valid  application
       will not apply when the Article 8 claim  is  raised  as  part  of  an
       asylum claim. The Appellant raised her Article 8 claim as part of her
       asylum claim. It  was  not  suggested  by  the  Respondent  that  the
       Appellant fell for refusal under S-LTR.

   36. E-LTRPT.2.2 requires the child to be under the age of 18,  living  in
       the United Kingdom and a  British  citizen.  These  requirements  are
       clearly met. E-LTRPT.2.3. requires either that the Appellant has sole
       parental responsibility for her child  or  that  the  child  normally
       lives with her and not his other parent. As the child normally  lives
       with the Appellant and not his father, this requirement was  met.  Ms
       Brocklesby-Weller did not  challenge  this  contention.  E-LTRPT.2.4.
       requires the Appellant to provide evidence that  the  child  normally
       lives with her. The Appellant did provide such evidence in  the  form
       of GP registration documents and her oral and  written  evidence,  as
       well as that of the partner. This evidence  was  not  challenged.  E-
       LTRPT.2.4. additionally requires the Appellant  to  provide  evidence
       that she is taking, and intends to continue to take, an  active  role
       in her child's upbringing. Given that the 6 month old baby is  living
       with her mother, who still partially breast-feeds him, and  in  light
       of the interplay between the Appellant and her child at the  hearing,
       I am entirely satisfied that the Appellant  has  provided  sufficient
       evidence to prove that she is taking and intends to continue to  take
       an active role her the baby's upbringing. It was  not  disputed  that
       the Appellant met the requirements of E-LTRPT.3.1.  and  E-LTRPT.3.2.
       (relating to the Appellant's immigration status).

   37. In order to succeed under the immigration rules  the  Appellant  must
       also show that paragraph EX.1. applies.  For  the  purposes  of  this
       appeal the following parts of EX.1 are relevant:

           (a)

                (i)    the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental
                relationship with a child who-

                    (aa)   is under the age of 18 years, or  was  under  the
                    age of 18 years when the  applicant  was  first  granted
                    leave on the basis that this paragraph applied;

                    (bb)   is in the UK;

                    (cc)   is a British Citizen  or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                    continuously  for  at  least  the  7  years  immediately
                    preceding the date of application; and

                (ii)   it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                leave the UK;

   38. It was not disputed that the requirements of  EX.1(a)  were  met.  Ms
       Brocklesby-Weller however submitted that it was  reasonable  for  the
       child to leave the United Kingdom. This was so,  in  her  submission,
       given the very young age of the child and the fact  that  the  father
       could  conceivably  return  to  Vietnam  (despite  his   unchallenged
       evidence that he would not return).  With  reference  to  the  Family
       Migration guidance  published  in  August  2015,  and  in  particular
       11.2.3, it was submitted that this was designed to give effect to the
       Zambrano judgement and that the child could remain with his father.

   39. Given the relevance of section 11.2.3 of the guidance I set it out in
       full.

           11.2.3. Would it be unreasonable to  expect  a  British  Citizen
           child to leave the UK?

           Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not
           take a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer of  a
           British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be
           to force that British child to leave the EU, regardless  of  the
           age of that child. This reflects the European Court  of  Justice
           judgment in Zambrano.

           The decision maker must  consult  the  following  guidance  when
           assessing cases involving criminality:

                  .  Criminality Guidance in ECHR Cases (internal)

                  .  Criminality Guidance in ECHR Cases (external)

           Where a decision to  refuse  the  application  would  require  a
           parent or primary carer to return to a country outside  the  EU,
           the case must always be assessed on the basis that it  would  be
           unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child to leave  the  EU
           with that parent or primary carer.

           In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant  leave  to
           the parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the  UK
           with the child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence  of
           a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

           It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant  leave  where
           the conduct of  the  parent  or  primary  carer  gives  rise  to
           considerations of such weight as to justify separation,  if  the
           child could otherwise stay with another  parent  or  alternative
           primary carer in the UK or in the EU.

           The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

                  .  criminality falling below the  thresholds  set  out  in
                    paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules;

                  .  a very poor immigration  history,  such  as  where  the
                    person has  repeatedly  and  deliberately  breached  the
                    Immigration Rules.

           In considering whether refusal may be appropriate  the  decision
           maker must consider the impact on the child of  any  separation.
           If the decision maker is  minded  to  refuse,  in  circumstances
           where separation would  be  the  result,  this  decision  should
           normally be  discussed  with  a  senior  caseworker  and,  where
           appropriate, advice  may  be  sought  from  the  Office  of  the
           Children's Champion on the implications for the welfare  of  the
           child, in order to inform the decision.

   40. Although there is some force  in  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller's  submission
       relating to the underlying purpose of the guidance,  the  wording  of
       the  guidance  is  quite  clear.  Where  a  decision  to  refuse   an
       application would require a parent to return to a country outside the
       EU, the case must, according to the guidance, and  save  for  certain
       circumstances, "... always be assessed on the basis that it would  be
       unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the  EU  with
       that parent."

   41. The circumstances in which it would be appropriate to refuse to grant
       leave are not exhaustive but include, by way of example given in  the
       guidance,  criminality  falling  below  the  thresholds  set  out  in
       paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules, or a  very  poor  immigration
       history, such as where the person  has  repeatedly  and  deliberately
       breached the Immigration Rules. The Appellant has not engaged in  any
       criminality. Nor am I satisfied that she has 'a very poor immigration
       history'. The Respondent accepted the Appellant's claim in full.  The
       Appellant entered the United Kingdom  as  a  14  year  old  following
       arrangements made by her grandmother while  in  fear  of  a  criminal
       gang. I find the policy expresses the Respondent's view of  the  best
       interests of the child and the  relevant  weight  to  attach  to  the
       public interest considerations. The policy indicates, in the view  of
       the  Secretary  of  State,  where  the  public   interest   lies   in
       circumstances where, in order to remain as a family unit,  a  parent,
       such as the Appellant, of a British  citizen  child  is  required  to
       return to her own country.  In relation to the factual matrix of  the
       present appeal the policy tends towards a conclusion that  there  are
       no considerations of such weight as to justify separation between the
       Appellant and her child.

   42. I am, in any event, satisfied for other  reasons  that  it  would  be
       unreasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.  It  is
       clear the child has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  his
       father. The father, who has ILR, has indicated he will not leave  the
       United Kingdom. The genuineness of this assertion was not challenged.
       Given that the partner entered the United Kingdom as a minor and  has
       remained  here  for  over  13  years,  his  assertion  is  inherently
       reasonable. The removal of the child, even if only temporarily, would
       clearly have an adverse impact on the relationship between father and
       son. This is a matter of  common  sense,  and  is  supported  by  the
       evidence that the Appellant's partner sees his child  every  weekend.
       It is undoubtedly in the child's best interests to remain  with  both
       his parents. I additionally take account of the child's status  as  a
       British citizen, entitling him by right to  educational  and  medical
       services that he would be denied if he left  the  United  Kingdom.  I
       additionally take account of the fact that the Appellant  herself  is
       only 19 years old and has no network of support in Vietnam. In  these
       circumstances she is likely to encounter difficulties  in  supporting
       herself and looking after her child, even if the father  is  able  to
       remit funds, something that  is  clearly  not  in  the  child's  best
       interests.

   43. For all of the above reasons I am satisfied  that  it  would  not  be
       reasonable for the British citizen child to leave the United Kingdom.
       I am consequently satisfied the  Appellant  succeeds  in  her  appeal
       under R-LTRPT.

   44. If however I am mistaken in my consideration  under  the  immigration
       rules I will, as an alternative, consider  whether  she  can  succeed
       under Article 8 as a free-standing right.

   45. Following a long line of authorities, including R (Nagre) v Secretary
       of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin),  Singh  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74  and
       SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387, in order for the Appellant  to
       succeed  in  her  application  for  leave  to  remain   outside   the
       immigration  rules  I  must  be  satisfied   there   are   compelling
       circumstances not sufficiently recognised under those rules.  As  was
       stated in paragraph 44 of SS  (Congo),  "If  there  is  a  reasonably
       arguable case under Article 8 which has not already been sufficiently
       dealt with by consideration of the application under the  substantive
       provisions of the Rules (cf Nagre, para. [30]), then  in  considering
       that case the individual interests of the applicant and others  whose
       Article 8 rights are in issue should be balanced against  the  public
       interest, including as expressed in the Rules, in order  to  make  an
       assessment whether refusal to grant LTR or LTE, as the case  may  be,
       is disproportionate and hence unlawful by virtue of section  6(1)  of
       the HRA read with Article  8."  This  is  a  fairly  demanding  test,
       reflecting the reasonable relationship between the  rules  themselves
       and the proper outcome of the application of Article 8 in  the  usual
       run of cases (para 44 of SS (Congo)).

   46. I am additionally obliged to take into  account  Section  55  of  the
       Borders, Citizens and Immigration Act 2009 which requires me to  have
       regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare  of  children
       who are in the United Kingdom. In ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC  4
       the  Supreme  Court  held  that,  "In  making   the   proportionality
       assessment under article 8, the best interests of the child must be a
       primary consideration.  This  means  that  they  must  be  considered
       first." What is required by consideration of the  best  interests  of
       the child is an "overall assessment" and it follows that  its  nature
       and  outcome  must  be  reflected   in   the   wider   Article   8(2)
       proportionality assessment (MK (best interests of child) India [2011]
       UKUT 00475). E-A (Article 8 - best interests of child) Nigeria [2011]
       UKUT  315  (IAC)  indicated  that  the  correct  starting  point   in
       considering the welfare and best interests of a young child would  be
       that it is in the best interests of a  child  to  live  with  and  be
       brought up by his or her parents. I take into account that GEN.1.1 of
       Appendix FM indicates that the Appendix takes into account  the  need
       to safeguard and promote the welfare of children in the  UK  in  line
       with section 55, but I also note that in JO and  Others  (section  55
       duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC) it was  stated  that  the  duty
       imposed by section  55 requires the  decision-maker  to  be  properly
       informed of the position of a child affected by the discharge  of  an
       immigration etc function, that  the  decision-maker  must  conduct  a
       careful examination of all relevant information and factors, and that
       the question whether the duties imposed by section 55 have been  duly
       performed in any given case will  invariably  be  an  intensely  fact
       sensitive and contextual one.

   47. Having given careful consideration to the totality  of  the  evidence
       before me I am satisfied that there are, on the particular  facts  of
       this  case,  compelling  circumstances  sufficient  to   render   the
       Appellant's removal disproportionate under Article 8.

   48. I was not disputed at the hearing that the  Appellant  enjoys  family
       life relationships with her partner and with her child.  Nor  was  it
       disputed that the decision to remove her constitutes an  interference
       with that right sufficient to attract the protection of Article 8. In
       finding the existence of compelling circumstances I take  account  of
       the Respondent's guidance,  as  outlined  at  paragraph  37  of  this
       decision. The unambiguous wording of this guidance indicates that  it
       would be unreasonable to expect the Appellant's British citizen child
       to leave the United Kingdom. This guidance, as with other policies of
       the Respondent, is not merely a material consideration  to  be  taken
       into account by the decision-maker. Rather, given its clear terms, it
       triggers a duty to give effect to its terms, absent good  reason  for
       departure (e.g. R (on the application of Semeda) v Secretary of State
       for the Home Department (statelessness; Pham [2-15] UKSC 19  applied)
       IJR [2015] UKUT 00658 (IAC). As such,  the  Respondent's  failure  to
       follow her own guidance has the effect of rendering the  decision  to
       remove unlawful such  that  it  falls  foul  of  the  third  question
       identified by Lord Bingham in Regina v. Secretary of  State  for  the
       Home Department (Appellant) ex parte Razgar (FC) (Respondent)  Razgar
       [2004] UKHL 27 ('is such interference in accordance with the law?').

   49. Even if the decision were lawful, I find  the  significant  delay  in
       making the asylum decision a relevant factor  in  my  proportionality
       assessment. Even taking account the Appellant's kidnapping  in  2011,
       the Respondent still took 3 years to make a decision  in  respect  of
       her asylum claim. This  must  be  considered  in  the  context  of  a
       vulnerable minor. No  reasonable  explanation  for  this  significant
       delay was proffered by the Presenting  Officer.  It  was  during  the
       delay that the Appellant met her partner, an event that, in turn, led
       to the birth of her British citizen son. Had the delay not  occurred,
       the Appellant would not have established the private life rights that
       form the backbone of this appeal. I find, applying EB (Kosovo) [2008]
       UKHL 41, that the significant and unexplained delay does  reduce  the
       public interest in the Appellant's removal.

   50. I have additionally considered the public interest considerations  in
       sections 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  I
       take  account  of  the  fact  that  the  maintenance   of   effective
       immigration control is in the public interest. I note in  respect  of
       s117B(2) and s117B(3) that the Appellant has produced evidence of her
       proficiency in  English,  and  that  she  does  have  qualifications,
       suggesting she would be able to  seek  employment  as  a  hairdresser
       should she be given permission to do so. I remind myself however that
       an appellant can obtain no positive right to  a  grant  of  leave  to
       remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever  the  degree  of  their
       fluency in English, or the strength of their financial resources  (AM
       (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)). For the reasons given  above
       in paragraphs 40 to 42 I am satisfied it would  be  unreasonable  for
       the child to leave to United Kingdom, a  factor  of  relevance  under
       section 117B(6).

   51. Having holistic  regard  to  all  the  aforementioned  factors  I  am
       satisfied that  there  are  compelling  circumstances  sufficient  to
       support  a  claim  for  a  grant  of  leave  to  remain  outside  the
       immigration rules and in accordance with Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is allowed under  the  immigration  rules  and  under
Article 8 ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]    10 February 2016
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

