
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DH-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/11352/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25th November 2016                    |On 6th January 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                     B A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson of Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Iran born on 12th November 1968.  He
    first arrived in the UK with his dependent wife  and  two  children  in
    March 2014 and claimed asylum.  That application was  refused  for  the
    reasons given in the Respondent's letter  of  13th  August  2015.   The
    Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Butler (the Judge) sitting at Birmingham on 20th May 2016.  He
    decided to dismiss the appeal on asylum, humanitarian  protection,  and
    human rights grounds for the reasons given in his Decision  dated  27th
    June 2016.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and  on
    19th September 2016 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant claimed to be at risk on return  to  Iran  owing  to  his
    political activities in that country.  The Judge found this part of the
    Appellant's account to be lacking in credibility,  identifying  various
    inconsistencies and implausibilities in the Appellant's evidence.   The
    Judge also found the Appellant's credibility to be damaged by operation
    of Section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
    etc.) Act 2004.  This part of the Judge's decision was  not  challenged
    at the hearing before me.

 4. The Appellant also claimed to be at risk on return on  the  basis  that
    since his departure from Iran and following his arrival in the UK,  the
    Appellant had converted from being a Muslim to being a Christian.   The
    Judge also rejected the credibility of this  part  of  the  Appellant's
    account, finding that the Appellant had been born a Christian  in  Iran
    and had not converted from Islam in the UK.  In this respect, the Judge
    considered the evidence given at the hearing of  Reverend  Cobbin,  but
    found the Appellant's account of his evangelising not to  be  credible.
    At his interview,  the  Appellant  had  demonstrated  a  more  detailed
    knowledge of Christianity than Islam, and the Judge took  into  account
    his previous adverse finding as regards the Appellant's claims relating
    to his political activities in Iran.  Reverend Cobbin had not confirmed
    the Appellant's evangelising,  and  the  Judge  found  the  Appellant's
    evidence concerning this claimed activity not to be consistent.

 5. At the hearing  before  me,  Mr  Hodson  referred  to  the  grounds  of
    application and argued that the Judge had erred in law in his  decision
    that the Appellant was not a recent convert to Christianity.  The Judge
    had given insufficient reasons for this conclusion, and  there  was  no
    evidence before the  Judge  that  the  Appellant  was  of  Armenian  or
    Assyrian heritage  suggesting  that  he  had  been  born  a  Christian.
    Further, the Judge had failed to deal  with  the  Appellant's  marriage
    certificate which indicated in many  ways  that  at  the  time  of  his
    marriage in Iran,  the  Appellant  was  a  Muslim.   For  example,  the
    marriage certificate described the Appellant and his wife  as  Muslims,
    and referred to another identity document describing them as such.  The
    marriage certificate also  contained  details  of  a  dowry  and  other
    marriage conditions which were in compliance with Sharia law.





 6. In response, Mr Walker referred to the Rule 24 response  and  submitted
    that there was no such error of law.  The Judge had considered all  the
    evidence in the round when deciding the  Appellant's  credibility,  and
    the grounds of application amounted to no more than a disagreement with
    the decision of the Judge.

 7. I do find an error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  Judge  which  I
    therefore set aside.  In my view, the Judge gave  insufficient  reasons
    for his finding that the Appellant was born a  Christian  and  had  not
    recently converted to that faith from Islam.  The Judge did not err  by
    taking into account in this respect  his  overall  finding  as  to  the
    credibility of the Appellant, but considering paragraphs 74 and  75  of
    the  Decision,  the  only  express  reason  the  Judge  gave  for  this
    particular finding was that the Appellant appeared to display a greater
    knowledge of Christianity than Islam.  To say the  least,  this  is  an
    insufficient reason as there might be a number of circumstances whereby
    the Appellant knew more about Christianity than  Islam.   Further,  the
    Judge failed  to  deal  with  or  even  mention  in  this  context  the
    Appellant's marriage certificate which had been produced and was before
    the Judge.  As Mr Hodson argued,  the  marriage  certificate  contained
    significant information suggesting that the Appellant had been a Muslim
    at the time of his marriage.  The Judge's failure  to  deal  with  this
    particular part of the evidence amounts to a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision will be remade by the First-tier Tribunal  in  accordance  with
the provisions of paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements.  None of  the
findings of fact or as to credibility made by the Judge will be preserved.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

