
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11435/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 30 October 2017                   |On 13 November 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     p k
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, of Counsel, instructed by Duncan
                    Lewis and Co   Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national of Tamil ethnicity born on [
         ] 1986 who claimed asylum on 21 August 2014 having previously  been
         in the UK as a student in 2012-2013. She returned to Sri  Lanka  in
         May 2013 to attend her brother's wedding and claimed that  she  had
         been stopped  at  a  check  point  after  being  recognised  by  an
         informant who knew of her previous  work  for  the  LTTE.  She  was
         detained, tortured and raped but managed to escape after  an  agent
         was bribed. She returned to the UK on 1  June  2013  and  made  her
         asylum claim the following year shortly before the  expiry  of  her
         student leave.

      2. On 30 March 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Oliver  dismissed  her
         appeal against the respondent's refusal of 1 December 2014 to grant
         her protection in the UK. There had also been an earlier hearing in
         March  2016  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Robison  but  her
         decision was set aside. Following a hearing before me on 24  August
         2017, Judge Oliver's decision was also set aside  for  the  reasons
         set  out  in  my  determination  promulgated  on  25  August  2017.
         Essentially there were difficulties with his reasoning and  failure
         to properly apply country guidance. Although his  findings  on  the
         asylum  claim  were  challenged  and  set  aside,  those   on   the
         appellant's mental health were unchallenged and, therefore,  stand.
         The accepted findings  of  fact  are  set  out  in  Ms  Jegarajah's
         skeleton argument and are that:

           i) The appellant had been arrested, detained, tortured and raped
              by the authorities in Sri Lanka;

          ii) Detention commenced with her arrest on 25 May 2013 and came
              to an end with her release through bribery on 29 May 2013;

         iii) She had been identified by a former LTTE member who had
              disclosed her LTTE involvement;

          iv) She had smuggled weapons whilst in government controlled
              territory between 2002 and 2006;

           v) During her detention, the appellant had been asked whether
              she was still helping the LTTE and whether she had attended
              protest


      3. The appellant was not called to give oral evidence at  the  hearing
         before me on 30 October 2017 and I proceeded  to  hear  submissions
         from the parties. Ms Jegarajah confirmed  that  she  would  not  be
         pursuing an article 3 mental health claim nor was she  pursuing  an
         asylum claim based on the  appellant  being  a  female  head  of  a
         household. She clarified that she would, however, be relying on the
         medical evidence on the appellant's mental health in so far  as  it
         impacted upon how the appellant would respond to questioning by the
         authorities on return.

      4. Ms  Jegarajah  relied  on  the  draft  Counter  Terrorism  Act  and
         submitted that although it was not yet it force, it was  recognised
         by the international community and the UNHCR as  a  document  which
         set  out  the  government's  view.   It   demonstrated   that   the
         government's interest in diaspora activities was greater  than  the
         significant profile  category  envisaged  in  GJ  (post  civil  war
         returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319.  Ms  Jegarajah  also
         submitted that according to the respondent's own  evidence  on  Sri
         Lanka, returnees would be questioned about historic detention, LTTE
         activities and attendance at commemorative events  such  as  Heroes
         Day. She submitted that  the  GJ  categories  had  widened  in  the
         context of the new proposed act which targeted past activity.

      5. Ms Jegarajah relied on a redacted decision from the  respondent  as
         evidence that there had been a departure from GJ in that  case  and
         that the respondent had issued guidance to her case workers that in
         certain circumstances such a departure was appropriate.

      6. Ms Jegarajah relied on the appellant's  three  witness  statements.
         Although one was missing from the bundle, she undertook to  forward
         it to the Tribunal. It was subsequently received. She  pointed  out
         that the contents  were,  however,  summarized  in  Judge  Oliver's
         determination. She referred me to the screening interview where the
         appellant had said that:

           i) she had used a false identity to travel to the airport;

          ii) that her ID card had been retained by the Sri Lankan
              authorities;

         iii) that she had been arrested on 25 May 2013 following her
              identification by a former LTTE informant;

          iv) that she had been tortured.

         I was also referred to the substantive interview where the
         appellant stated that:

           i) she had willingly supported the LTTE;

          ii) she had suffered torture and gender related persecution;

         iii) her involvement with the LTTE had been disclosed to the
              authorities by an informer who had identified her by name;

          iv) she had been arrested because of the information provided by
              the informer;

           v) her diaspora activities were not her first involvement with
              the LTTE;

          vi) she had been involved in Tamil separatist activities at the
              time of the cease fire;

         vii) she had been transporting weapons;

        viii) the LTTE had been stock piling weapons during peace time;

          ix) she mentioned her informant's name;

           x) she had been handcuffed and taken to the military camp.


      7. Ms Jegarajah submitted that  whilst  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
         found that the appellant's  activities  were  not  significant,  in
         accordance with the guidance in GJ, what had  happened  to  her  in
         detention and the  type  of  questions  she  had  been  asked  were
         consistent with the government's objectives as  apparent  from  the
         proposed legislation. Reliance was placed on the  extracts  of  the
         COI report cited in the skeleton argument. It  was  submitted  that
         the respondent considered former leaders  and  those  who  provided
         weapons to the LTTE to have a significant  profile;  the  appellant
         fell into the  second  category.  Furthermore,  the  appellant  had
         attended commemorative events every year since 2012. She  had  also
         attended a protest in March 2014 against the visit to the UK by the
         Sri Lankan president. Her friend's witness statement explained  why
         she had gone to  the  protest  despite  being  unwell.  There  were
         photographs showing her holding banners.

      8. In response, Mr Tarlow relied on the decision letter and on GJ.  He
         submitted that the government used  sophisticated  intelligence  to
         identify those trying to destabilise the unity of the  country.  If
         the appellant had mental health issues then she was not  a  threat.
         Her involvement at the demonstration was at a low level. She  could
         return to Sri Lanka and live anywhere. The new  laws  had  not  yet
         been enacted.

      9. Ms Jegarajah briefly replied. She submitted that the  Human  Rights
         Watch report confirmed that there had  been  little  progress.  The
         position had evolved since GJ. Returnees were being  questioned  on
         return according to the COI report. The proposed Counter  Terrorism
         Act  was  deeply  problematic  as  it  was  prepared   despite   UN
         Resolutions  and  the  country  evidence  demonstrated  there  were
         serious concerns over its application. The  appellant's  activities
         would not be seen as minor by the government. Her mental health had
         to be factored into the  assessment  of  how  she  would  react  to
         questioning.

     10. That completed submissions. At the conclusion  of  the  hearing,  I
         reserved my determination which I now give.

     11. Conclusions

     12. I have assessed all the evidence before me with  care.  I  bear  in
         mind that the appellant has to make  out  her  case  to  the  lower
         standard. I have taken full account of the  submissions  that  have
         been made.

     13. There is a wealth of recent country material including two  reports
         from the  respondent.  The  relevant  passages  are  cited  in  the
         appellant's schedule to the bundle prepared for the hearing  on  24
         August 2017. From the Home Office Fact Finding  Mission  report  of
         July 2016, I note that former LTTE cadres are  still  followed  and
         monitored, that those of interest  are  abducted  without  a  paper
         trail rather than arrested, that those who are  taken  away  rarely
         return, that the authorities  are  anxious  to  stop  any  pro-LTTE
         activities outside Sri Lanka, that torture continues to be  carried
         out by the armed forces, that people returning to  Sri  Lanka  from
         the UK with a  previous  LTTE  connection  would  be  subjected  to
         torture and harassment, that those who return may be  arrested  and
         that people are investigated even if their involvement/offence took
         place decades ago.

     14. The Home Office Country Policy and Information Note on Sri Lanka of
         July 2017 reports that there is no  sufficiency  of  protection  or
         internal flight option for those who fear the authorities, that  in
         addition to the GJ categories,  a  grant  of  asylum  may  also  be
         appropriate in other cases, that the government  has  continued  to
         arrest  returnees  and  detain  them  despite  criticism  from  the
         international community, that there is no effective legal system to
         assist victims and that those who are suspected  of  links  to  the
         LTTE continue to be detained.

     15. The UNHCR report of July 2017 states that any person  suspected  of
         LTTE involvement, however indirect, remains at  risk  of  detention
         and torture. The 2016/2017 Amnesty  International  report  confirms
         the same, noting that the government pledge in 2015 to  repeal  the
         Prevention of Terrorism Act had still not been  implemented.  Other
         reports by organisations such as Human Rights Council  and  the  US
         State  Department  also  report  that  torture  remains  a  serious
         concern, that it is routinely  used  by  the  police  and  security
         officials, that procedures regarding the legality of detention  are
         not followed, that abductions continue, that those with a  real  or
         perceived association with  the  LTTE  at  any  level  and  whether
         current or historic  are  at  particular  ongoing  risk,  that  the
         authorities take a strong  interest  in  the  activities  of  Tamil
         diaspora in the UK, that hundreds of former LTTE cadres  have  been
         coerced into becoming informers and that there are detailed records
         held of every detention which are not deleted upon  release  either
         by bribery or otherwise.

     16. I have also had regard to GJ. Although it was decided in  2013,  it
         remains  country  guidance.  It  confirms  that  the   government's
         objective is to identify  Tamil  activists  in  the  diaspora  with
         London as  a  particular  hot  spot  and  that  disappearances  are
         increasing rather decreasing as are the  size  and  budget  of  the
         armed forces. I also have regard to the four categories of  persons
         at real risk of persecution or serious harm on return.

     17. I have had regard to the various medical reports,  the  appellant's
         witness statements, interview records and the supporting  statement
         from the appellant's friend.

     18. My conclusions are reached after  full  consideration  of  all  the
         evidence as a whole.

     19. Much of the appellant's account  was  accepted  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge and the findings of fact (as set out at paragraph  2
         above) stand. Notwithstanding Mr Tarlow's reliance on the  decision
         letter, which questioned the credibility of the  claim,  it  is  no
         longer in dispute that the appellant was  willingly  involved  with
         the LTTE, that she smuggled weapons for them, was identified by  an
         informer, detained and tortured until her release on payment  of  a
         bribe and that her scarring was not self-inflicted or inflicted  by
         proxy.  The only claimed fact on which there  was  no  finding  was
         whether the authorities had been to the  family  home  looking  for
         her. The appellant did not give oral evidence before me but I  have
         three witness  statements  from  her,  a  screening  interview  and
         substantive interview. Given that her account has been accepted  in
         all other respects and in the  absence  of  any  challenge  by  the
         respondent to  this  part  of  the  claim,  I  have  no  reason  to
         disbelieve it. It is certainly in keeping with the country material
         which  confirms  that  the  authorities  keep  suspects  and  their
         families under surveillance and have an  ongoing  interest  in  all
         those who have  had  LTTE  connections,  no  matter  how  historic.
         Moreover, given her escape from detention, it is unsurprising  that
         checks would be made for her at her home.

     20. The appellant  claimed  to  have  left  Sri  Lanka  using  her  own
         passport. Although the First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  this  was
         indicative of a lack of interest in her, it is plain  that  such  a
         finding  is  contrary  to  country  guidance.  The  Upper  Tribunal
         accepted in GJ that "it is possible to leave  through  the  airport
         even when a person is being actively sought".  I,  therefore,  find
         that her ability to leave Sri Lanka in this way has no  bearing  on
         the interest of the authorities in her or on the  risk  of  serious
         harm on return.

     21.  The  respondent's  case  essentially  appears  to  be   that   the
         appellant's activities were of  low  level  and  that  there  would
         therefore be no interest in her on return. This  stance  does  not,
         however, engage with the accepted facts of her  previous  detention
         and severe  ill  treatment  for  the  same  activities.  I  do  not
         understand why, if the authorities  were  so  interested  in  those
         activities in 2013 that they detained and tortured her, they  would
         suddenly have no interest in her at all. It seems to me, having had
         regard to the recent country material, that the authorities have an
         ongoing interest in those who have or have had  any  kind  of  LTTE
         involvement, even if it is perceived, and given  that  records  are
         kept of all detentions it would be a simple task to  discover  that
         the appellant was a person whom they had previously  detained,  who
         had been identified by an informer as  smuggling  weapons  for  the
         LTTE through army checkpoints and who, therefore, would still be of
         interest. It is very likely in my view that she would be seen to be
         someone who constituted a threat to the unity and stability of  the
         Sri Lankan state. I do not see that her mental  health  would  have
         any bearing on the approach taken by the authorities. I refer  also
         to the respondent's March 2017 report which  indicated  that  those
         who provided weapons to the LTTE  were  perceived  to  have  had  a
         significant role. I do not find  there  is  much  of  a  difference
         between smuggling weapons through a check point  and  in  providing
         weapons. Either way the guns were destined for the LTTE.

     22. I accept that the appellant has been attending LTTE events  in  the
         UK. She has been consistent in this  claim  and  I  have  seen  the
         supporting statement from her friend, which was  unchallenged,  and
         the photographs of the appellant holding banners.  On  return,  she
         would certainly be questioned about her sur place  activities  and,
         as she cannot be expected to lie she, would have  to  disclose  her
         activities. The evidence  shows  that  the  Sri  Lankan  government
         continue to question persons about attending Heroes Day and similar
         commemorative events.

     23. Ms Jegarajah relied heavily on the Counter Terrorism Act drafted by
         the Sri Lankan government. This has not yet been implemented but  I
         accept that its contents demonstrate the ongoing objectives of  the
         government and make it plain that their  interest  in  former  LTTE
         activists and supporters is far from over.

     24. In conclusion, then, the  appellant's  claim  is  credible  in  all
         respects. I find that her activities cannot  be  described  as  low
         level or insignificant given that they involved  smuggling  weapons
         through security check points and given that  they  attracted  such
         brutal treatment in the past. I find that there is  no  reason  why
         that interest would have dissipated now and, indeed, it is possible
         that it would be  even  greater  given  her  assisted  escape.  The
         absence of evidence of an arrest warrant  does  not  diminish  that
         risk nor does the lack of charges brought against her in a  country
         where legal procedures and niceties appear not to  be  followed.  I
         find that the  visits  of  the  authorities  to  her  home  further
         demonstrate an  ongoing  interest.  I  find  that  the  appellant's
         ability to travel on her own passport to the UK does not indicate a
         lack of interest in her. I find that the three medical reports  all
         confirm that the  appellant  is  a  vulnerable  woman  and  further
         support her claim of ill treatment.

     25. For these reasons, I conclude that the appellant has made  out  her
         case to the lower standard.

     26. Decision

     27. The appeal is allowed on asylum and article 3 grounds.

     28. Anonymity

     29. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.

    Signed












       Upper Tribunal Judge
       Date: 10 November 2017
