
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11409/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th May 2013                                |On 21st June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                     F M
                           (ANONYMITY order MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Sills, Counsel instructed by JD Spicer & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Afghanistan whose age was originally
    disputed.  He entered the UK illegally on 13th  May  2009  and  claimed
    asylum six days later.  That application was refused  for  the  reasons
    given in the Respondent's letter of 1st October 2009.  However owing to
    his age the Appellant was granted discretionary leave to  remain  until
    21st September 2010.  On 15th August 2010  the  Appellant  applied  for
    further leave to remain.  This was refused for the reasons given in the
    Respondent's letter of 5th December 2012.  The Appellant appealed,  and
    his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Howard  (the
    Judge) sitting at Hatton Cross on 17th January  2013.   He  decided  to
    allow the appeal on  both  asylum  and  Article  3  ECHR  human  rights
    grounds.  The Respondent sought leave to appeal that decision,  and  on
    22nd March 2013 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.  The  Judge  found  that
    the Appellant was born towards the end of 1992  and  was  therefore  17
    years and 9 months of age at the time of the hearing in  January  2013.
    Otherwise the Judge found that the Appellant's account of  his  reasons
    for fearing return to Afghanistan was not credible.  The Appellant  was
    no more than a 17 year old Afghan from Kabul who in the past  had  sold
    newspapers.  He had not come to the adverse attention of  the  Taliban.
    However, the Appellant had lost contact with his family in Afghanistan,
    and therefore qualified for asylum applying the  decisions  in  HK  and
    Others (minors  -  indiscriminate  violence  -  forced  recruitment  by
    Taliban - contact with family members) Afghanistan CG [2010]  UKUT  378
    and the unreported decision of AA (a child) v SSHD  AA/14362/2009.   At
    the hearing, Mr  Nath  referred  to  the  grounds  in  support  of  the
    application for leave and argued that the Judge had  erred  in  law  in
    finding that a youth of the characteristics of the Appellant  would  be
    at risk on return to Afghanistan.   This  was  because  the  Judge  had
    failed to consider the Appellant's circumstances in the  light  of  the
    decision in EU and Others (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 32.   As
    the Appellant's account of events in Afghanistan had been  disbelieved,
    he was at the extreme and wholly unmeritorious end of the  spectrum  as
    described by Maurice Kay LJ in EU.  The Appellant would now  return  to
    Afghanistan as an adult, and according to paragraph 82 of  the  refusal
    letter, the Respondent had discharged his duty to trace the Appellant's
    family in Kabul.  The decision in KA and Others  (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1014 imposed only an obligation to attempt to find  the
    Appellant's family, not to actually find them.

 3. In response, Mr Sills argued that there was no such error of  law.   EU
    did not establish any new legal principle, and in any  event  had  been
    decided after the Judge had made his decision.  The Judge had  accepted
    some of the Appellant's account and therefore the Appellant was not  at
    the far end of the spectrum.  No details had been provided  as  to  the
    attempts made by the Respondent to discharge  her  duty  to  trace  the
    Appellant's family.

 4. I do find an error of law in the decision of the Judge.   It  is  clear
    from the Determination that the Judge allowed the appeal  on  the  sole
    basis that the Appellant was a young man nearly 18  years  of  age  who
    would return to Kabul.  He had lost  contact  with  his  family  there.
    However, the jurisprudence indicates that more  than  that  has  to  be
    considered.  This is clear from the decision in KA  reinforced  in  the
    subsequent decision in EU, decided after the Judge heard  this  appeal,
    but stating the law as it was at that time.  I decided  to  proceed  to
    consider if the decision of the Judge should be set aside on the  basis
    of the findings of fact and as to credibility made by the  Judge  which
    were not impugned in the grounds seeking leave to appeal.

Set Aside

 5. At the hearing I again heard submissions on behalf of both parties.  Mr
    Nath was content only to say that  as  a  consequence  of  the  adverse
    credibility findings in respect  of  the  Appellant,  and  taking  into
    account the decision in EU, the Appellant was not at risk on return  to
    Kabul.

 6. In response, Mr Sills reminded me that the Judge  had  found  that  the
    Appellant had lost contact with his family in Kabul.   That  being  the
    case he was at risk on return following the decision in AA  (unattended
    children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC).  The decision  in  EU
    did not indicate to the contrary.  The Appellant  had  just  turned  18
    years, but as established in  the  decision  in  KA  (Afghanistan)  and
    Others v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ  1014  there  was  no  bright  line  rule
    excluding the Appellant from the protection he ought to  receive  under
    AA.

 7. The relevant facts in this case are  very  simple  and  are  as  stated
    above.  My starting point in considering those facts is the decision in
    HK and Others (minors - indiscriminate violence - forced recruitment by
    Taliban - contact with family members) Afghanistan CG [2010]  UKUT  378
    (IAC) where it was held:

         "1.   Children are not disproportionately affected by the  problems
             and  conflict  currently  being  experienced  in  Afghanistan.
             Roadside blasts, airstrikes, cross-fire, suicide  attacks  and
             other war-related incidents do not impact more  upon  children
             that upon adult civilians.

         2.   While forcible recruitment by the Taliban cannot be discounted
             as a risk, particularly in areas of high militant activity  or
             militant control, evidence is required to show that  it  is  a
             real risk for the particular child concerned and  not  a  mere
             possibility."

    HK then  went  on  to  consider  the  principles  to  be  applied  when
    considering the credibility of any claim  by  the  Appellant  that  his
    family in Afghanistan cannot be contacted.  I do not  have  to  concern
    myself with those principles because it was held by the  Judge  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  that  in  Afghanistan  the  Appellant   has   "no
    discernible family to care for him."

 8. This position was approved  in  AA  where  it  was  emphasised  that  a
    distinction had to be drawn between children who were living  with  the
    family and those who were not.  There it was decided inter alia that:

         "However, the  background  evidence  demonstrates  that  unattached
         children returned to Afghanistan, depending upon  their  individual
         circumstances and the location to which they are returned,  may  be
         exposed to risk of serious harm, inter  alia,  from  indiscriminate
         violence, forced recruitment, sexual violence,  trafficking  and  a
         lack of adequate arrangements for  child  protection.   Such  risks
         will have to be taken into account when addressing the question  of
         whether a return is  in  the  child's  best  interests,  a  primary
         consideration when determining a claim to humanitarian protection."

    On that basis, and notwithstanding that the Appellant has no  political
    profile in Afghanistan and that he has never come to the  attention  of
    the Taliban, I find that the Appellant  will  be  at  risk  on  return.
    Following the "bright line"  rule  of  Maurice  Kay  LJ  stated  in  KA
    (Afghanistan) and Others I find that it is of no consequence  that  the
    Appellant may now be just 18 years  of  age.   I  also  find  that  the
    judgment in EU does not mean that it will be safe for the Appellant  to
    return to Kabul.  It is true that the Judge did not find  much  of  the
    Appellant's account to be credible, but he did accept  the  Appellant's
    evidence that he had no family to return to.  My decision therefore  is
    that the decision of the Judge is not set aside.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.   I  continue  that
order.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
