
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA114352014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 May 2016                                |On 15 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     P K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegurajah, Counsel, instructed by A & P
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the respondent.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because

 2. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Sri Lanka who challenges the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss  her  appeal  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State on  1  December  2014  refusing  her
    asylum and refusing her leave to remain.

 3. There are features of this case which are regrettably not  uncommon  in
    appeals by  Tamils  from  Sri  Lanka  but  nevertheless  remained  very
    disturbing.  The appellant has clear evidence of scarring on the inside
    of each of her thighs and on her back and there is clear evidence  that
    she has been psychologically  disturbed  and  in  the  opinion  of  the
    psychiatrist this could be as a result of sexual assault.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal has considered the evidence carefully and conscientiously
    but is criticised in the grounds particularly  for  making  credibility
    findings in an unlawful way.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge directed herself that  this  was  a  case
    where credibility is likely to be crucial and I wholly  agree.   It  is
    therefore more  than  ordinarily  important  that  adverse  credibility
    findings if they are made are made for good legal reasons.

 5. The gist of the criticism is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not
    look at the evidence holistically but looked at  the  evidence  without
    reference to the medical reports and then asked if the medical  reports
    should make a difference.  Clearly there are directions indicating  the
    contrary.  The judge refers to making  the  decision  holistically  but
    paragraph 83 is particularly troublesome.  The judge said:

         "This was a  difficult  case,  given  the  extent  of  the  medical
         evidence and the fact that I had two psychiatrists' reports as well
         as a report on the physical injuries.  I have given  these  medical
         reports very careful consideration.  However,  I  formed  the  very
         clear view that the appellant's account  was  implausible  and  her
         evidence was not credible for all the reasons  set  out  above  and
         therefore in the light of that clear assessment, I was not prepared
         to rely on the  medical  reports  as  an  accurate  and  definitive
         assessment of her credibility or of the appellant's account."

 6. Mr Avery rightly says the judge was entitled not to rely on the medical
    reports.  It was the judge's job to make her own assessment.   However,
    the assessment had to be made lawfully.  The reasons given  essentially
    are reasons based on inconsistency and implausibility.  What the  judge
    does not appear to have done and it certainly cannot  be  seen  in  her
    Decision  was  to  look  at  the  medical  evidence,  particularly  the
    psychiatric evidence, and consider how, if  at  all,  that  could  have
    impacted on the appellant's ability to be an accurate historian.

 7. Mr Avery has submitted realistically and succinctly that the directions
    are basically correct and the judge has done the judge's task which  is
    to form her own view on the evidence.  I have reflected on that  but  I
    cannot  be  satisfied  in  this  case  that  the  judge  has  made  her
    credibility findings  with  proper  regard  to  the  medical  evidence.
    Rather, it seems to me that the judge has  detached  herself  from  the
    medical evidence when considering credibility  and  thought  about  the
    medical evidence afterwards to see if it makes  any  difference.   This
    analysis would explain the wording at paragraph 83.

 8. In the circumstances I have to set aside the decision because I am  not
    satisfied it has been done correctly.  Rather, I have decided  that  it
    has not been done correctly.  As credibility goes to the very  root  of
    the case and there has not been a proper hearing on that point the case
    must go back to the First-tier Tribunal to be redecided.   That  is  my
    decision.



Notice of Decision

    The Appellant's appeal is  allowed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is set aside. The appeal must be decided again in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 15 June 2016                   |


