
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11049/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18 April 2016                         |On 28 April 2016                    |
|Prepared 18 April 2016                   |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    [v T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Hassan Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of  Sri  Lanka,  date  of  birth  [  ]  1982,
    appealed against the Respondent's, decision dated 29 November 2013,  to
    refuse leave to remain based upon an asylum  claim.   His  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge A W Khan who on 10 July 2015 dismissed
    the appeal on Refugee Convention, Humanitarian Protection and Article 3
    ECHR grounds and with reference to  a  private  life  rights  claim  to
    remain.

2.   Permission to appeal that decision was granted, following a High  Court
    decision on 7 January 2016, by Vice President, Mr C M G Ockelton  on  1
    March 2016.

3.   Provided at the hearing were  the  observations  from  the  High  Court
    which were as follows:
         "There is no reference to the DVDs in the decision  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Khan if they  were  relied  on  and  there  was
         equipment to play them at an  earlier  hearing,  which  had  to  be
         adjourned, it may well be unfair to deprive the claimant of them at
         the effective hearing.  This is especially  so  when  the  claimant
         bore the burden of demonstrating a well-founded fear of persecution
         and Judge Khan found against him on the basis  that  there  was  no
         evidence that he would be known  to  the  authorities  as  anything
         other than a 'hanger on'.  If the DVD shows him  being  interviewed
         at a demonstration or taking to the stage as a speaker it may  have
         helped him discharge the burden he bore."


4.   It would appear that in the evidence in support of the judicial  review
    application which came before Cheema-Grubb J that the evidence had been
    proffered but refused by the judge Khan: The judge taking the view that
    the evidence in  this  form  was  not  acceptable.   Mr  Tufan  rightly
    accepted, in light of the  High  Court  judge's  remarks,  the  judge's
    actions opened the door to the conclusion that the credibility findings
    upon the Appellant's claim both in relation to risk in  Sri  Lanka  and
    sur place activities were unreliable. It also followed  the  assessment
    of the medical evidence  provided  may  similarly  be  tainted  by  the
    judge's conclusions on credibility and reliability of evidence; bearing
    in mind the evidence produced as to the Appellant's mental and physical
    health.

5.   I agreed with Mr Tufan, and it seemed to me that the judge  has  failed
    to provide a number of reasons for some of the issues raised, not least
    a shortage of any analysis of  the  photographs  taken  in  the  United
    Kingdom which identify the Appellant.  As did  the  assessment  of  the
    activities potentially giving rise to risk.  I  express  no  view  upon
    their likelihood of the Appellant succeeding in respect of a sur  place
    claim but also the  somewhat  superficial  assessment  of  the  medical
    evidence being advanced, not least a psychiatric  report  from  Dr  Raj
    Persaud of 29 July 2014.  Whatever may be the  merits  of  the  Persaud
    report, it did not seem to me that the report from a  person  qualified
    to give expert opinion could be broadly dismissed on the basis that  it
    is largely related to the history which the  Appellant  had  given  the
    doctor.  As to whether the report lacks  substance  and  detail  as  to
    clinical findings is a matter of comment which ultimately was  for  the
    judge to determine but to do  so  with  proper  and  adequate  reasons.
    Accordingly, I  find  that  those  issues,  together  with  some  other
    complaints about the nature of the assessment of the  evidence,  raises
    the real doubt that there has been a proper assessment of the claims.

6.   Even now there is neither a narrative nor description of  the  contents
    of the DVD item nor is there a comprehensive list  of  the  photographs
    which were said to have  identified  the  Appellant;  which  the  judge
    dismissed.

7.   I am satisfied  the  Original  Tribunal  decision  cannot  stand.   The
    matter will have to be returned for a proper consideration in the First-
    tier Tribunal.

8.    I  also  have  considerable  concerns  in  relation  to  the   judge's
    assessment, not least in the light of the  decision  in  Danian  [1999]
    EWCA Civ 3000 as to the assessment of a real risk arising  through  the
    Appellant's claimed sur place activities.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the extent that  the  appeal  is  returned  to  the
First-tier Tribunal to be remade.



Directions
    (1)  List for hearing at Taylor House not before F-t TJ A.W.Khan.
    (2)  Time estimate - 3 hours.
    (3)  A Tamil interpreter required.
    (4)  The Appellant to provide a narrative or other description  of  the
         contents of the DVD. Any other online matters relied upon  and  the
         Appellant to provide an analysis of the dates and places of each of
         his appearance in the photographs which he relies upon.
    (5)  Any further documentation relied  upon  by  other  parties  to  be
         served on themselves and upon the IAC First-tier Tribunal not later
         than 10 working days before the date of further hearing.
No anonymity direction is made because none is required.


Signed                                  Date 25 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

