
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/11292/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 January 2019                            |On 8 March 2019               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                Hany Youssef
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, instructed by Birnberg Peirce &
                    Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr A O'Connor QC, instructed by the Government Legal
                    Department

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This matter comes to us by way of remittal from  the  Court  of  Appeal
    following our earlier decision involving the same parties in  which  we
    dismissed  Mr  Youssef's  appeal  against  the  respondent's   decision
    excluding him from reliance  on  the  benefit  of  the  United  Nations
    Refugee Convention 1951 on the basis that his activities satisfied  the
    test in Article 1F(c) of  the  Convention  as  being  "guilty  of  acts
    contrary to the purposes and principles of the  United  Nations".   The
    specific ambit of the remittal  is  for  us  to  consider  whether  the
    gravity or seriousness of Mr Youssef's conduct is such as to bring  him
    within Article 1F(c).

History

2.   The brief history of the proceedings is set out at paragraph 2  of  the
    Court of Appeal's judgment at [2018] EWCA Civ 933.  Mr  Youssef  is  an
    Egyptian national who has been in the United Kingdom  since  1994.   In
    our decision of 12 April 2016  we  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision of 27 November 2012 that  his  activities
    excluded him from the protection of the Refugee Convention.

3.   We decided that the actions of the appellant  in  encouraging  jihadist
    terror in themselves amounted to acts sufficient to justify  exclusion.
    A key issue in the appeal before the Court of Appeal was  whether  acts
    might be sufficient to satisfy the threshold  for  exclusion  from  the
    Convention under Article 1F(c) where those acts were neither themselves
    completed or attempted terrorist acts, nor could they be shown to  have
    led to specific completed or attempted terrorist acts by others.

4.   The appellant advanced three grounds  to  the  Court  of  Appeal.   The
    first was as follows:

         "The Upper Tribunal erred in finding that individual responsibility
         for acts falling within Article 1F(c) can arise solely  by  way  of
         implicit or explicit encouragement of such acts, in the absence  of
         evidence that an offence has  been  committed  or  attempted  as  a
         consequence of anything said or done by the Applicant."

    Ground 2 read as follows:

         "The  Upper  Tribunal  erred  in  finding  that  the  elements   of
         individual responsibility are not the same under all three  'limbs'
         of Article 1F."

    Ground 3 read as follows:

         "In the alternative, if (as  is  argued  by  the  SSHD)  the  Upper
         Tribunal held that HY was excluded not on the  basis  of  secondary
         liability but on the basis of his own  conduct  in  publishing  the
         speeches and sermons [...]  was  sufficient  in  itself  to  engage
         Article 1F(c), the Upper Tribunal erred  in  failing  to  make  any
         findings:

         (a)  on whether mere speech could in  itself  be  contrary  to  the
             purposes and principles of the United Nations; and/or


         (b)  about how HY's speech in itself (i.e. divorced from any impact
             it may have  had  on  others)  had  the  requisite  impact  on
             international peace and security."

5.   The appellant was unsuccessful on grounds 1 and 2, as  is  set  out  in
    the conclusions at paragraphs 78  and  79  of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    judgment.

6.   With regard to ground 3, the court said the following:

         "81. Youssef's ground 3 is broader.  It is  not  concerned  with  a
             technical requirement for crime in international law, but with
             the seriousness of Youssef's conduct in a  larger  sense.   No
             point can be taken  about  the  international  nature  of  his
             exhortations  and  incitement:  that  requirement  is  clearly
             satisfied.  The question is whether  the  Tribunal  considered
             sufficiently closely and fully the seriousness and  impact  of
             the Appellant's conduct, and reached proper conclusions on the
             point."


7.   For reasons to which we shall return in some detail  below,  the  Court
    of Appeal granted permission on ground 3, in summary on the basis  that
    UTIAC was clearly aware of the guidance in Al-Sirri  and  the  need  to
    consider the "high threshold defined in terms of the gravity of the act
    in question".  Though UTIAC dealt fully with the argument  that  crimes
    must be proved and did so  correctly,  there  was  no  passage  in  the
    UTIAC's reasons which demonstrated that thereafter the  Tribunal  stood
    back and considered the gravity or seriousness  of  Youssef's  conduct,
    once that argument was disposed of.  The matter was  remitted  on  that
    basis.

The Law

8.   In Al-Sirri v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]  UKSC
    54 the Supreme Court provided guidance on the meaning of Article  1F(c)
    of the Refugee Convention.  Article 1F makes  provision  for  exclusion
    from the provisions of the Convention of certain categories  of  people
    and  the  category  with  which  the  Supreme  Court  was  particularly
    concerned in Al-Sirri was those falling  under  (c),  that  is  to  say
    persons in respect of whom there are serious  reasons  for  considering
    that they have been  guilty  of  acts  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
    principles of the United Nations.

9.   In its conclusions as to the general approach  to  Article  1F(c),  the
    Supreme Court concluded as follows at paragraph 16:

         "16. In our view, this is the correct approach.  The article should
             be interpreted restrictively and applied with caution.   There
             should be a high threshold 'defined in terms of the gravity of
             the act in question, the manner in which the act is organised,
             its international impact and  long-term  objectives,  and  the
             implications for international peace and security'.  And there
             should be serious reasons  for  considering  that  the  person
             concerned bore individual  responsibility  for  acts  of  that
             character."

    At paragraph 40 the Supreme Court emphasised that the test was  whether
    the resulting acts have the requisite serious effect upon international
    peace, security and peaceful relations between states.

10.  In the Court of Appeal decision remitting the specific matter  back  to
    us, the court considered the guidance laid down by the Supreme Court in
    Al-Sirri, noting that at paragraph 36 there was confirmation  that  the
    phrase "acts contrary to the purposes  and  principles  of  the  United
    Nations" must have an autonomous meaning and confirmed at paragraph  37
    that there was a requirement  of  an  international  dimension  to  the
    terrorism in question.  The Court of Appeal summarised the guidance  in
    Al-Sirri as follows:

         "83. ...  There  is  a  high  threshold  before  Article  1F(c)  is
             triggered.   The  activity  must  be  capable   of   affecting
             international  peace  and  security.    However,   the   Court
             concluded that 'inducing terror in the civilian population  or
             putting such extreme pressures upon  a  government  will  also
             have the international repercussions referred to  ...'.   That
             is clearly an issue for specific consideration by the relevant
             court  or  tribunal.   Finally,  the  question  whether   such
             international repercussions may be  established  by  a  person
             plotting in one country to destabilise another is  a  question
             of fact.  The question is whether the 'resulting acts have the
             requisite serious effect'.  In short,  do  the  relevant  acts
             have the necessary character and the necessary gravity?


         84.  In considering that guidance it is worth bearing in mind  that
             the decision in Al-Sirri pre-dated the 2014  Security  Council
             Resolution.   I  have  set  out  the  relevant  terms  of  the
             Resolution in paragraph 41 above.  The terms of the Resolution
             underscore the State's obligation to 'prevent terrorists  from
             exploiting technology, communications and resources to  incite
             support for terrorist acts' and 'to ensure  ...  that  refugee
             status is not abused by  the  ...  facilitators  of  terrorist
             acts',  in  all  cases  acting   'in   conformity   with   ...
             international refugee law'.  This Resolution is very direct in
             its call to action.


         85.  It may be helpful to consider separately the  quality  of  the
             acts in question, and their gravity or severity.  To adopt  an
             illustration which arose in argument, it is easy  to  conceive
             an immature  18  year  old  going  online  from  his  suburban
             bedroom, and  using  the  most  lurid  terms  in  calling  for
             international jihad.  The nature or quality of this would,  it
             seems to me, satisfy the requirements of  Article  1F(c).   It
             would  represent  active  encouragement   or   incitement   of
             international terror.  However, it would be unlikely,  without
             more, to be grave enough in its impact to satisfy the approach
             laid down in Al-Sirri.  That might well require more: evidence
             of wide international readership, of large-scale repetition or
             re-tweeting, or citation by those who were moved  to  join  an
             armed struggle, for example.


         86.  It is obviously right, for the reasons given  by  the  Supreme
             Court in Al-Sirri, that careful consideration is given to  the
             gravity or impact of any acts relied on.  This is  the  answer
             to the Appellant's arguments as to  the  vital  importance  of
             protection of refugees, and that such protection should not be
             lost for 'mere speech'.  Freedom  of  speech  is  a  qualified
             right under the United Nations Convention, as under  the  ECHR
             or the European Charter."

11.  We  have  summarised  at  paragraph  1  above  the  relevant  parts  of
    paragraph 87 of the Court of Appeal's judgment setting out the ambit of
    our task on remittal.

Submissions

12.  In his  submissions  Mr  O'Connor  QC  developed  points  made  in  his
    skeleton argument.  The issue that had been remitted involved the  need
    for a value judgment concerning the appellant's conduct where it passed
    a particular threshold as required  under  Article  1F(c).   It  was  a
    necessary but not sufficient requirement that it was  contrary  to  the
    purposes and principles of the United Nations.  It  went  beyond  that,
    giving rise to issues of gravity, seriousness, severity, impact.

13.  Mr O'Connor argued that there were two issues  in  play  in  particular
    from Al-Sirri, the first being the question of whether the conduct  had
    the necessary international dimension or  character  such  as  to  come
    within Article 1F(c) and the  second  being  whether  the  conduct  was
    sufficiently grave or serious to warrant exclusion under Article 1F(c).
     These were related but discrete questions.

14.  It was clear from what had been said at paragraph 81 by  the  Court  of
    Appeal that no point could be taken about the international  nature  of
    the appellant's  exhortations  and  incitement:  that  requirement  was
    clearly satisfied.  The appeal concerned the second issue.

15.  Mr O'Connor emphasised the  importance  of  paragraph  16  in  Al-Sirri
    which we have quoted above.  This recognised and asserted the threshold
    of a degree of gravity.  Paragraphs 36 to 40 of Al-Sirri  set  out  the
    Supreme Court's discussion and conclusions on the relevant issues.   It
    could be seen there that there was a discussion of whether there was an
    international dimension and what  was  needed  to  be  shown  and  also
    language referring back to paragraph 16 and the gravity question.

16.  As noted above, the Court of  Appeal  had  accepted  the  international
    element  at  paragraph  81.   The  remaining  issue  was  that  of  the
    seriousness and impact of the appellant's  conduct.   Essentially  what
    had been remitted to the Tribunal was the issue raised at paragraph  16
    in Al-Sirri.

17.  In this regard Mr O'Connor argued that what was said  at  paragraph  19
    of Mr Mackenzie's closing  submissions  was  wrong.   This  involved  a
    confusion and elision of the two questions and narrowed the question to
    be decided which was in fact  the  paragraph  16  issue  together  with
    paragraphs 38 and 40 from Al-Sirri.  The case was not  concerned  about
    the international impact but was broader than that.  Under paragraph 16
    in Al-Sirri there was a series  of  considerations  to  be  taken  into
    account to lead to a value judgment.  The international element was one
    issue only of these.  Paragraph  16  of  Al-Sirri  required  it  to  be
    considered separately from the gravity point and  it  was  not  just  a
    question of international impact.  Equally it was wrong to say  as  was
    set out at paragraph 2 of Mr Mackenzie's closing submissions  that  the
    ultimate issue was the impact of the appellant's acts of publishing  on
    international peace and security.  This again  involved  an  artificial
    narrowing of the issues and did not  reproduce  what  was  set  out  at
    paragraph 16 of Al-Sirri.

18.  It was also argued by Mr O'Connor that Al-Sirri had to  read  as  being
    of its time.  It was clear from what was said by Irwin LJ at  paragraph
    84 of [2018] EWCA Civ 933 that the decision in  Al-Sirri  predated  the
    2014 Security Council Resolution (which he set out in full at paragraph
    41) expressing concern over the increased use by terrorists  and  their
    supporters of communication technology for the purpose of  radicalising
    to terrorism, recruiting and inciting others to commit terrorist  acts,
    including through the internet, and calling upon States to ensure  that
    refugee status is not abused by the facilitators of terrorist acts,  in
    all cases acting in conformity with international refugee law.

19.  It was also relevant to note that the cases in play  in  Al-Sirri  were
    ones where a terrorist act had actually taken place following what  had
    been done by the appellant.  They were not cases such  as  the  instant
    one where nothing had occurred, and the absence of such a  consequence,
    as had been held, did not preclude an  upholding  of  the  decision  to
    exclude.  Al-Sirri therefore had to be read as of its time.  The use of
    the term "impact" at paragraph 16 could  be  seen  as  referring  to  a
    context where something had actually happened.  It  was  not  suggested
    that Al-Sirri was wrong, but paragraph  16  referred  to  international
    impact as one of a series of factors to be taken into account  and  the
    facts there should be contrasted with the facts of this case.   Neither
    case said that there had to be impact as a formal  act  to  fall  under
    Article 1F(c).  It was necessary to look at the range of considerations
    at paragraph 16.  It was not a necessary element, but it was a  factor.
    It was to do in Al-Sirri with the international dimension which it  was
    not necessary to consider in this case, and was  one  of  a  number  of
    factors and it did not have to be shown to have led  to  a  final  act.
    There was in any event evidence to which Mr O'Connor would  turn,  from
    which impact could be inferred.

20.  Returning again to Mr Mackenzie's closing submissions,  it  was  argued
    that it was wrong to suggest as was said there that  the  "gravity"  or
    "impact" aspect was not assessed by looking at the contents of what the
    appellant had said.  If there was consideration of the gravity  of  the
    conduct it was all to do with what the appellant had done.

21.  Mr O'Connor then went on to develop the points  made  in  his  skeleton
    argument concerning the six features of the appellant's  conduct  which
    he said, assessed cumulatively, led to the conclusion that the  Article
    1F(c) threshold was passed.

22.  The first of these was  the  nature  and  content  of  the  appellant's
    sermons.  The Tribunal was referred back to its own  findings  in  that
    regard.  It was argued that the timing was significant and there was  a
    deliberate planned campaign to emphasise the  Al-Qaeda  message.   With
    reference to the chronology it  could  be  seen  that  there  were  two
    sermons on the day on which Osama bin Laden was killed, and again  only
    two weeks after  the  death  of  Al-Awlaki  and  again  on  the  second
    anniversary of the 9/11 bombings there was a sermon and on  the  second
    anniversary of Osama bin Laden's death in May 2013.  The point was made
    that the appellant did not post just a single sermon inciting  violence
    by Al-Qaeda but posted a whole series  of  such  sermons  over  a  long
    period of time and several of them as set out were  timed  to  coincide
    with moments when interest in the Al-Qaeda message might be presumed to
    be at its strongest.  This clearly contrasted with the single  post  by
    the teenager cited by Irwin LJ.  In that regard, Mr  O'Connor  accepted
    the point made in Mr Mackenzie's closing  submissions  that  it  was  a
    spectrum and that more needed to be shown by  the  Secretary  of  State
    than simply that the appellant's case was more serious than that of the
    teenager.

23.  The second factor concerned the way in which  the  appellant  portrayed
    himself as a scholar and a man of intellectual authority.  Mr  O'Connor
    referred to paragraph 14 of the Court of Appeal's judgment setting  out
    some elements of this self-portrayal.  In the bundle could be found the
    detailed contents of the appellant's biography  published  on  the  Al-
    Maqreze website, alongside his speeches and sermons.  He was  of  great
    seniority within the jihadi movement.  This went to the gravity of  his
    conduct.  The implications for international peace  and  security  were
    therefore far more serious than those posed by the  teenager  in  Irwin
    LJ's  example.   The  implications  were  there  from  the   point   of
    publication and could not just be said to be religious writings.   This
    was a man who wished that he had met Osama bin Laden and described  him
    as a lion of Islam.

24.  The third factor was the use of the internet itself, in  light  of  the
    UN Security Council Resolution.  Irwin LJ in the Court of  Appeal  made
    particular note of this point at paragraph 84.  The appellant had  used
    the internet in the way precisely condemned by  the  Security  Council.
    It was also a paragraph 16 in  Al-Sirri  issue.   It  referred  to  the
    manner in which the act was organised and it was not a Hyde Park speech
    to a few people but had  been  put  on  the  internet  along  with  the
    appellant's biography and this went to the gravity and  the  manner  of
    organisation.

25.  The fourth point was similar, referring to the length  of  time  during
    which the incitements to acts of terrorism had been made  available  on
    the internet.  They had not simply been posted and deleted but had been
    placed and left, in the case of some of his sermons, for years.

26.  The fifth factor was the evidence that his postings  in  fact  received
    an extremely wide readership.  The evidence before the  Tribunal  which
    emanated from the UN material was that his website  had  obtained  hits
    ranging from 12,000 in a week to 80,000 over an undefined period.  This
    was the evidence before the Tribunal.  Mr Mackenzie  might  argue  that
    there were other possible types of evidence that were  not  before  the
    Tribunal but it had to deal with the case on the  evidence  before  it.
    It was true that the ombudsperson had used a different test: the  issue
    before her was whether the appellant was still to be on  the  sanctions
    list, and that did not  affect  this  factual  point.   If  there  were
    anything wrong with the figures  one  could  expect  the  appellant  to
    correct them.  It was his  own  website  after  all  and  it  could  be
    inferred that he had access to all the metadata and could identify  the
    number of visitors and the number of hits.  Although it was not  argued
    on behalf of the Secretary of State that impact was relevant, it should
    be noted that the only evidence from the appellant was a statement made
    in 2010 in respect of different proceedings.  He had put no evidence in
    for these proceedings.  What he said  about  not  being  involved  with
    terrorism went directly contrary to the Tribunal's findings and he  had
    not challenged those findings.  Also  where  he  had  referred  in  the
    statement to him wanting a court hearing to clear his name he  had  not
    produced any evidence at all.  If he were not  able  to  challenge  the
    evidence then he could have said that he was so unable.  It had  always
    been open to him to  respond  to  this  evidence.   Impact  was  not  a
    decisive or necessary consideration but there was evidence that tens of
    thousands of people had seen this material.

27.  The sixth factor was the international dimension and/or impact  of  his
    conduct, which had been recognised as such by the Court  of  Appeal  at
    paragraph 81.

28.  In his submissions Mr Mackenzie at the start said that he  was  unaware
    of any restrictions, i.e. any order restricting internet use,  etc,  on
    what the appellant could say, with regard to the point as to whether or
    not he would have been able  to  say  anything  about  any  ability  or
    inability he had to comment on the number of visitors to his website or
    what material was viewed.

29.  Mr Mackenzie argued that the issue was relatively straightforward.   It
    was a question of  whether  the  Secretary  of  State  could  show  the
    appellant's actions had a serious impact on international security  and
    whether that was shown on  the  evidence  available.   There  were  two
    questions posed by Irwin LJ, the value  and  quality  of  the  acts  in
    question and their gravity/impact.  It was  accepted  that  impact  and
    significance were relevant to bear in mind in answering that  question.
    They  were  signposts  to  the  ultimate  question   of   the   serious
    effect/impact on international peace and security bearing in  mind  the
    high threshold as set out at paragraph 16 in Al-Sirri  which  laid  out
    the restrictive approach.  It was said at paragraph 37 that  above  all
    the  principal  purposes  of  the  United  Nations  were  to   maintain
    international peace and security, to remove threats to that  peace  and
    to develop friendly relations among nations.  The test as  set  out  at
    paragraph 40 in  Al-Sirri  was  whether  the  resulting  acts  had  the
    requisite  serious  effect  upon  international  peace,  security   and
    peaceful relations between states.   What  Mr  Mackenzie  argued  about
    impact was a precis of that.  There was no need  for  a  direct  causal
    relationship, but it had to be shown to be an impact on people  in  the
    real world.  Nature and quality had been made out as found by the Court
    of Appeal, and there was an inherent level of  seriousness  in  Article
    1F(c).  There had to be an attack on the  basis  of  the  international
    community and its coexistence and these were serious matters.

30.  If one looked at paragraph 85 of the Court of Appeal's  judgment  there
    was an indication there of the kind of evidence necessary: "Evidence of
    wide  international  readership,  of  large-scale  repetition  or   re-
    tweeting, or citation by those who are moved to join an armed struggle,
    for example".  Impact did not necessarily  involve  specific  acts  but
    actual people who had read, approved of and acted  on  the  words,  and
    indications of  public  endorsement/approval.   We  had  none  of  that
    evidence or anything of a similar character so even if this was  not  a
    checklist, there was nothing similar to what was set out  in  paragraph
    85 that had been provided by the respondent.  The respondent  had  been
    engaged with the appellant for 25 years where there  were  UN  sanction
    committee issues, security services assessments and  if  there  was  no
    evidence to  support  what  the  Secretary  of  State  argued,  it  was
    unbelievable that the Tribunal was asked to make  inferences.   It  was
    clear what kind of evidence was needed and it was  lacking.   Referring
    to ten items of evidence over a ten year period with pronouncements was
    not enough.  There was no expert evidence for example to say  that  the
    appellant  was  knowledgeable  about  terrorists  and  was  known   and
    regularly  cited,  and  there  was  no  police  or  security   services
    assessment.  If the respondent had  evidence  of  the  appellant  being
    regarded as an intellectual inspiration then the Tribunal had not  been
    told about  it.   There  was  no  statistical  evidence  of  any  great
    significance.  Though the figures were accepted it  was  unclear  where
    they went.  The size or type of audience could not be  determined  with
    any certainty.  At its highest a  number  of  people  had  visited  his
    website but his preaching  biography  cited  a  very  large  number  of
    sermons and it was unclear on what basis these ten items were the  ones
    that could be said to have received all the hits.  There was  no  basis
    for saying that.  It was not known whether anyone had encouraged  their
    followers to look at  his  sermons  or  that  they  were  cited  as  an
    inspiration.

31.  It was relevant that the way he expressed himself was rather dense  and
    a long way from the kind of thing to inspire someone to go to Syria  on
    jihad.  There was no evidence that anyone  saw  him  as  an  expert  on
    Islamic law other than what he said.  The six factors as set out by  Mr
    O'Connor related to the nature rather than the impact of his words.  On
    that basis the teenager referred to by Irwin LJ would be excluded.   Mr
    O'Connor's paragraph 33 raising his first factor was effectively double-
    counting as what was referred to there was already  part  of  the  non-
    applicable aspect.  The reference  to  the  use  of  the  internet  was
    equally applicable to the teenager.  The fact that the sermons had been
    online for a lengthy period of time did not show impact.   The  highest
    the Secretary of State's case could be  put  was  that  what  had  been
    posted had a potential and that was taken from  the  ombudsperson,  but
    that was not enough.  Again the teenager  would  be  excluded  on  that
    basis.  There was no evidence to make  out  the  Secretary  of  State's
    case.

32.  We reserved our decision.

Conclusions

33.  The point on  which  this  matter  was  remitted  to  us  is,  as  both
    representatives agreed, a relatively narrow one, but its context is  of
    importance.  Part of that context is the Court of Appeal's  conclusion,
    agreeing with our earlier finding, that individual  responsibility  for
    acts falling within Article 1F can arise solely by way of  implicit  or
    explicit encouragement of such acts in the absence of evidence that  an
    offence has been committed or attempted as a  consequence  of  anything
    said or done by the appellant.  The issue as raised  in  ground  3  and
    accepted by the Court of Appeal was as the Court  of  Appeal  noted  at
    paragraph 81, not concerned with a technical requirement for crime  and
    international law but the seriousness of the appellant's conduct  in  a
    larger sense.  The question was whether we had considered  sufficiently
    closely and fully the seriousness and impact of the appellant's conduct
    and reached proper conclusions on the point.  It is  relevant  to  note
    that the ground of appeal advanced in this  regard  contended  that  no
    findings had been made about how the appellant's speech in itself, i.e.
    divorced from any impact it may have had on others, had  the  requisite
    impact on international peace and security.

34.  In our view that is how the concept of "impact" in this context has  to
    be seen.  It clearly follows on from what was said at paragraph  16  in
    Al-Sirri, itself borrowing from the  UNHCR's  background  note  on  the
    application of the exclusion clauses (4 September 2003) at paragraph 47
    that the high threshold is to be defined in terms of the gravity of the
    act in question,  the  manner  in  which  the  act  is  organised,  its
    international impact and long-term objectives and the implications  for
    international peace  and  security.   It  is  in  that  sense  that  we
    understand the term "impact" to be used by the  Court  of  Appeal,  and
    indeed it is difficult to see how it can be used in any other sense  in
    light of the rejection of the appellant's ground  1.   There  does  not
    have to be shown any offence committed or attempted as a consequence of
    anything said or done by the appellant.  We agree with Mr O'Connor that
    bearing in mind the terms of paragraph 16 in Al-Sirri, it is not simply
    a matter of the international impact of the act or acts in question but
    also in play are issues concerning the gravity of the act,  the  manner
    in which it is organised, its long-term objectives and the implications
    for international peace and security.  As was  said  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal at paragraph 83, the test is whether the  "resulting  acts  have
    the requisite  serious  effect".   That  is  a  direct  quotation  from
    paragraph 40 in Al-Sirri.

35.  We  do  not  therefore  accept  that  it  is  necessary  to  show  that
    particular  people  have  been  influenced  by  the  writings  of   the
    appellant.  We see relevance to the points raised by Mr O'Connor in the
    context of the test which we have to apply.  We found, and the Court of
    Appeal did not disagree, that the language used  by  the  appellant  is
    such  that  it  can  properly  be  characterised  as  explicit   direct
    encouragement or incitement to acts of terrorism.  It  is  not  just  a
    matter of a single sermon unlike the situation of the teenager,  but  a
    whole series of sermons over a lengthy period of time.  We  also  agree
    that there is significance to the timing of the posting of  several  of
    these sermons for example on the day of the death of Osama  bin  Laden,
    in a tribute to Al-Awlaki two weeks after his death, and a  tribute  to
    Al-Libi, posted on the first anniversary of 9/11 and a tribute  to  Bin
    Laden posted on the second anniversary of his death.   The  timing  can
    properly be regarded as careful and  calibrated,  as  suggested  by  Mr
    O'Connor.

36.  The second factor  is  the  appellant's  self-description  as  being  a
    scholar and a man of  intellectual  authority.   The  Court  of  Appeal
    accepted that the context and  presentation  of  the  postings  was  of
    significance.  In relation to paragraph 14 the  website  presented  the
    appellant as a scholar and a  man  of  intellectual  authority  with  a
    Masters degree and a doctorate, both in respect of Islamic law, and the
    "character of Maqreze Centre for Historical Studies in London".  It  is
    reasonable to take his claims  to  seniority  and  authority  as  being
    intended to augment the impact of his incitements to  violence  on  the
    intended audience.

37.  As regards the third factor, the use of the internet, this  is  not  an
    irrelevant factor albeit that it is the device that would  be  used  by
    the teenager in the example.  The point here is that  the  concerns  of
    the Security  Council  in  its  Resolution  as  quoted  above,  involve
    increased use by  terrorists  and  their  supporters  of  communication
    technology for the purpose of radicalising to terrorism and  recruiting
    and inciting others to commit  terrorist  acts  including  through  the
    internet, must inevitably be a relevant factor.  In the absence of  the
    other factors it would of course not be determinative in  the  case  of
    the teenager or indeed in anybody's case, but the fact  that  it  would
    apply to him does not make it an irrelevant matter.

38.  The next factor is that of the lengthy period of time during which  the
    appellant made his incitements to terrorism available on the  internet.
    Not only were they posted, they were left on the internet, and that  is
    of relevance to the gravity of the appellant's conduct.

39.  The next point is the evidence  that  his  website  had  obtained  hits
    ranging from 12,000 in a week to 80,000 over an undefined  period.   We
    take Mr Mackenzie's point that it  is  unclear  who  was  reading  what
    during this period, but the  numbers  are  very  significant,  and  the
    appellant, as argued by Mr O'Connor, has not taken the  opportunity  to
    try and argue for example that he has been able (or unable) to identify
    sources of interest and/or the posts of interest, and to  say  to  what
    extent the sermons which have been found to be contentious were or were
    not read.  His silence on the point is not without relevance.  It comes
    back rather to the point we made earlier about the nature  and  meaning
    of the word "impact" in this context.  It does not seem to us that what
    is involved here is something that is measurable  or  quantifiable  but
    there is an abstract element to impact in this context and that is  the
    fact of what the appellant said  on  a  number  of  occasions  and  the
    longevity of those posts on his site  and  the  number  of  people  who
    visited his site and the implications of that for  international  peace
    and security.  Once it is clear that it does not have to be shown  that
    anybody ever in fact acted on the words of the appellant, there can  be
    little if any room for any argument that anything tangible  has  to  be
    seen to have been done.  The impact in question is a more abstract kind
    of impact and this further factor, like the others in our view, is part
    of the cumulative impact of the appellant's words.

40.  We return also to our point about the factors to  be  considered  under
    paragraph 16 in Al-Sirri.  The gravity of the acts in  question  is  in
    our view significant given the nature of the words and  the  fact  that
    they have been found to be contrary to the purposes and  principles  of
    the United Nations.  The manner of organisation has been the use of the
    internet through posts which have had a wide  reading.   The  long-term
    objectives have to be seen in the context of these matters  being  left
    on the internet for a long time and it is not  irrelevant  to  bear  in
    mind the  timing  of  some  of  the  postings.   The  implications  for
    international peace and security are clearly significant.   There  does
    not, as noted, have to have been action taken by anyone in the sense of
    committing  an  offence  or  attempting  to  commit  an  offence  as  a
    consequence of anything said or done by the appellant but the  implicit
    or explicit encouragement of such acts  is  sufficient.   In  our  view
    there are clear and adverse implications for  international  peace  and
    security as a consequence.

41.  In conclusion therefore we consider that the  gravity  and  seriousness
    of the appellant's conduct are such as to have  the  requisite  serious
    effect as required by Article 1F(c) and as interpreted by  the  Supreme
    Court in Al-Sirri.  Accordingly the Secretary of State's case  is  made
    out and the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]


Signed                                  Date 5 March 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
