
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
AA/11420/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Crown  Square,  Manchester                           Decision   &
Reasons Promulgated
On the 14th  March  2016                                                  On
11th April 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                                  MR S. K.
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Holt (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Miss Johnson (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Alis promulgated on the 9th February 2015, in which  he
      dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  grounds,  humanitarian
      protection grounds  and  on  human  rights  grounds,  both  under  the
      Immigration Rules and outside of the Rules.

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Burma who was  born  on  the  4th  April
      1980. It is the Appellant's case that he would be at a  real  risk  of
      persecution from the authorities in Burma, were  he  to  be  returned,
      such that he is entitled to asylum. The  Appellant's  previous  asylum
      claim was rejected by Immigration Judge Blair in  2009.  However,  the
      Appellant sought to argue before First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Alis  that
      between 2010 and 2014, he had attended, as a  member  of  the  Burmese
      Democracy  Movement,  at  least  51  separate  demonstrations,  public
      meetings or discussions and had stood  alongside  Ko  Aung,  a  famous
      political prisoner and Ben Rogers at political demonstrations and that
      he involved himself in 2012 with  the  Christian  Solidarity  Movement
      dealing with the persecuted minorities in Burma, the Chin  people  and
      Kachin ethnic issues and that as a result of his  Chin  ethnicity  and
      Christian beliefs, combined with his political activities, he will  be
      seen to be a threat to the stability of the regime and  Burmese  union
      because of his opposition to the government. It is his  case  that  he
      will at a real risk of detention, amounting to  serious  ill-treatment
      contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR and persecution/serious harm  within
      the meaning of the Qualification Directive, such that he falls  within
      the risk categories set out by the Upper Tribunal in the  case  of  TS
      (Political opponents-risk) Burma CG [2013] UKUT 00281.

   3. First-Tier Tribunal Judge Alis rejected the Appellant's  asylum  claim
      within  his  decision  promulgated  on  the  9th  February  2015.  The
      Appellant has sought to appeal that decision to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
      and permission to appeal has been granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
      on the 11th June 2015.

   4. Within the grounds of appeal it is argued, inter-alia, that the First-
      Tier Tribunal Judge made a mistake of fact and/or failed to  have  any
      proper regard to material  evidence  and  that  the  Judge  repeatedly
      stated that the Appellant activities ceased in January 2012, but it is
      argued that this is not correct and that the Appellant participated in
      events after January 2012 until February 2014. It  is  said  that  the
      document setting out the events he attended  between  March  2012  and
      February 2014 was omitted from the Appellant's bundle, but  was  filed
      separately at the hearing and that the  Appellant  participated  in  7
      events after January 2012, as set out in this document. It is said the
      Judge was wrong to say the  Appellant  had  not  participated  an  any
      events after January 2012 and had made a material mistake of  fact  in
      that regard and failed to have regard to the Appellant's evidence,  as
      set out within that second document. It is argued this was a  material
      error which affected the  Judge's  view  of  the  genuineness  of  the
      Appellant's political motivation and his risk upon return.

   5. Within the second ground of appeal it is argued that the Judge  failed
      to have regard to the risk factors cumulatively, when considering  the
      factors set out by the Upper Tribunal in the  case  of  TS  (Political
      opponents-risk) Burma CG [2013] UKUT 00281 (IAC). It  is  argued  that
      the Judge when considering cumulative risk failed to take  account  of
      the fact the Appellant to participated in events  in  2012,  2013  and
      2014 and failed to have proper regard to  his  activities  spanning  5
      years and 44 events, of which at seven it is said he made speeches. It
      is argued the Judge failed to  have  regard  for  the  fact  that  the
      Appellant was named in a publish news article and identified  as  Chin
      activist, who had publicly criticised the Burmese  government.  It  is
      also argued the Judge failed to have  regard  to  fact  the  Appellant
      mixed with high-profile figures and failed to  have  proper  Appellant
      belonged to an ethnic community that is considered to be a  threat  to
      the union of Burma and that the Appellant had public advocated for the
      rights of the Chin Community.

   6. Within the grant of permission to appeal, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blum
      stated that:


      "2. The grounds of appeal content that the Judge failed to  take  into
      account evidence  that  the  Appellant  had  been  politically  active
      between January 2012 and February 2014, which are relevant to both the
      Appellant's credibility and the assessment of any risk on return.  The
      Judge concentrated on the  Appellant's  activities  between  2010  and
      January 2012 [paragraph 44]  and  noted  that  Appellant's  "level  of
      activity" ceased after January 2012, which may suggest that the  Judge
      was aware that the Appellant continued to engage in  some  activities.
      However, at para 52 the Judge refers to "a total abstinence of support
      post January 2012"  from  the  Appellant.  It  is  apparent  from  the
      document dated 27/01/2015 received by the Tribunal on 30/01/2015  that
      the Appellant in fact engaged in 7 further activities of  a  political
      nature after January 2012. It is therefore  arguable  that  the  Judge
      failed to take account of relevant considerations.


      3. It is further submitted that the Judge failed to approach the  risk
      factors relevant to the Appellant cumulatively only in  light  of  the
      authority of TS (political opponents-risk)  Burma  (2013)  UKUT  00281
      (IAC). This ground is also properly arguable."

   7. Within the Respondent's Rule 24 reply dated the  3rd  July  2015,  the
      Respondent contends that the First-Tier Tribunal Judge properly direct
      himself, and when the determination is read in the round it  is  clear
      that the findings of the  Judge  amount  to.  It  is  said  the  Judge
      correctly noted that the Appellant had ceased attending demonstrations
      and that the findings at paragraph 52 had to be read in light of those
      at paragraphs 47 to 49 and the concept of "support" is to be  read  in
      that context. It is argued that Judge found  that  was  a  significant
      falling away of the Appellant's activities, such that any risk did not
      meet the required level to result in persecution upon  return.  It  is
      said the findings made were open to the Judge on the  evidence  before
      him and that no material error of law is established.

   8. In his oral  submissions,  Mr  Holt  argued  that  the  Judge  made  a
      fundamental error of fact when stating at [52] that the that there had
      been a "total abstinence of support post January 2012". He argued that
      at [47] the Judge found that the Appellant's  level  of  activity  had
      "ceased" after January 2012, to the extent of him not having  attended
      any public demonstration, rather than his activities  having  produced
      "reduced". Although  he  conceded  that  the  Judge  stated  that  the
      Appellant had attended meetings and on occasion had spoken, he  argued
      that no findings were made as to the dates of those meetings or  times
      when the Appellant  spoke  and  that  it  appeared  the  Judge  simply
      considered that there was no activity undertaken by the Appellant post
      January 2012. He argued that this affected the  Judge's  consideration
      of the credibility of the Appellant  and  also  the  question  of  the
      Appellant's risk in light of the risk categories set out within TS. He
      argued that not only attending demonstrations,  but  also  becoming  a
      prominent voice in political meetings was relevant  to  the  risk  the
      Appellant faced. He argued that the error was caused as  a  result  of
      the Judge only have been given the list of the  subsequent  activities
      post 2012 at the date of the hearing and that this had been missed out
      from the bundle itself.

   9. In respect of the second ground Mr Holt argued that  when  considering
      the  risk  factors  the  Judge  should  have   considered   the   same
      cumulatively. He argued that the Appellant was a Christian and a Chin,
      who has taken part in demonstrations and political meetings,  and  who
      did actually participate with people such as Ko Aung and  Ben  Rogers.
      He argued the Judge had failed to consider at all in  considering  the
      cumulative risk, the Appellant's  associations.  He  argued  that  the
      Appellant have been named in a Chinland Guardian newspaper,  but  that
      was not referred to by the Judge.

  10. In her submissions on behalf of the Respondent,  Miss  Johnson  relied
      upon the Respondent's Rule 24 reply. She argued  that  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge had set out at [35] that the Appellant had attended  at
      demonstrations, but that he had  not  attended  public  demonstrations
      since the 26th January 2012 and had gone on to make findings regarding
      the Appellants attendance at meetings and the fact he did occasionally
      speak at meetings at [51]. She argued that  the  Judge  had  not  make
      findings that the Appellant was a prominent voice  at  such  meetings.
      She said he was not said to chair the meetings or  to  have  organised
      such meetings. She argued that in respect of the question  as  to  who
      the Appellant mixed with, and that the article  purportedly  from  the
      Chinland Guardian naming the Appellant as an activist, the page in the
      Appellant's bundle did not indicate where that document came from  and
      if it was a webpage, she argued strange that there was no reference to
      the webpage details at the bottom of the page.  She  argued  that  the
      photograph at page 70 showing the Appellant sat  at  a  desk  did  not
      prove that he was a close associate with Ko Aung. She  further  argued
      that there was no evidence before the First-Tier Tribunal show that if
      the Appellant's name was Googled, it would show him as a Chin activist
      who was contrary to the  Burma  regime.  She  argued  the  Appellant's
      ethnicity and religion did not show that he was going to be seen as  a
      destabilising threat to the union and that the Appellant had been able
      to come to the UK on a Tier 5 visa.

  11. In reply Mr Holt argued that the Appellant had been prominent voice at
      meetings.

  12. I have also taken into account in consideration  of  this  appeal  the
      Appellant's Rule 25 response  to  the  Respondent's  Rule  24  notice.
      Within that Rule 25 response which  is  wrongly  entitled  a  Rule  24
      response, it is argued that the Appellant's passport expired  on  21st
      May 2010, which is said to be an important issue which  it  is  argued
      should be considered by the Tribunal along with the  Appellant's  post
      arrival activities. It is argued that the Appellant would need  to  go
      to the Embassy to renew his passport and would be questioned as to why
      did not renew his passport for nearly 5 years and that he  would  have
      to reveal that he participated in demonstrations and Embassy officials
      would have records of his participation.  However,  this  was  not  an
      argument that was said to have been raised before First-Tier  Tribunal
      Judge Alis and amounts to new evidence. No explanation as to why  this
      evidence was only being raised now was advanced at the appeal hearing.
      I therefore do not consider that this should be allowed to  be  argued
      at such a late stage, in terms of error of  law,  and  would  only  be
      relevant upon a remaking of the decision if a material error of law is
      found.

      My findings on material of error of law and materiality

  13. In a very thorough and detailed decision,  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Alis set out the entire background to the Appellant's case,  including
      the previous findings of Immigration Judge Blair on the  5th  November
      2009, and the subsequent history of the further submissions that  were
      lodged, the application for Judicial Review, and then  the  subsequent
      consideration of the Appellant's claim as a  fresh  claim.  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Alis further quite properly fully set out the  Law  and
      set  out  the  basis  of  the  Appellant's  claim  in  detail  between
      paragraphs [24 and 31] and set out the details of the evidence between
      [32 and 37] inclusive, before then fully setting out the  submissions,
      before going on to assesses the evidence between [40 and 57].

  14. At [29] First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  Alis  properly  set  out  how  the
      Appellant's case was that between 2000  and  2014  the  Appellant  had
      claimed that he had attended as a  member  of  the  Burmese  Democracy
      Movement at least  51  separate  demonstrations,  public  meetings  or
      discussions, as to how he  had  stood  alongside  Ko  Aung,  a  famous
      political prisoner and Ben Rogers at political demonstrations.  It  is
      clear that the Judge had fully considered not only the details of  the
      original demonstrations, but also the addendum list that was submitted
      on the day of the hearing, as  he  made  specific  reference  thereto.
      However, the Judge found that  "However,  since  2012  the  amount  of
      demonstrations have reduced so the the Appellant involved himself with
      the Christian Solidarity movement with the  persecuted  minorities  in
      Burma, the Chin people and Kachin ethnic issues". Judge Alis  went  on
      to consider at [35] the evidence  given  by  the  Appellant  in  cross
      examination  regarding  the   last   time   the   Appellant   attended
      demonstrations and how the Appellant could not recall whether  or  not
      there have been any demonstrations  commemorating  the  8888  uprising
      either in 2013 or 2014. He  noted  that  the  last  demonstration  the
      Appellant attended was on the 26th January 2012, outside  the  Embassy
      and that he had not attended any more as the amount of  demonstrations
      had decreased and the person he lived with had his own problems and he
      was unable to leave him.

  15. Although criticism is made of the findings of Judge Alis at  [47],  in
      my judgment, these findings cannot be criticised. The Judge stated  at
      [47] that "taking the Appellant's activities at its highest he pursued
      a vocal and active participation in the United  Kingdom  between  2010
      and 2012 in which he attended 37 demonstrations and meetings. However,
      for whatever the reason this level of activity  ceased  after  January
      2012, to the extent that he did not attend any public demonstrations."
      Although criticism was made by Mr Holt of the use of the word "ceased"
      rather than it having "diminished", the Judge makes  it  clear  within
      this paragraph that  he  simply  found  that  the  Appellant,  as  the
      Appellant himself stated in cross examination, had  not  attended  any
      public demonstration since January 2012. The Judge does not  make  any
      findings that the Appellant did not attend any public  meetings  after
      that date and made it clear that he was talking  about  the  Appellant
      not attending "public demonstrations". It is clear from [29] that  the
      Judge had in fact considered the addendum  list  with  the  additional
      dates of the meetings that the Appellant was said to have attended, as
      he specifically referred to it.

  16. Further, in respect of the Judge's findings at [52] that:


      "Whilst I take on-board his activities I agree with Mr Spence that for
      someone who claimed to be politically motivated a total abstinence  of
      support post January 2012 places the  Appellant's  political  position
      into some perspective"


      this paragraph has to be read in conjunction with the  other  findings
      of First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis, and  the  submissions  made  by  Mr
      Spence which were summarised at [38]. Mr  Spence  argued  specifically
      that whilst there was evidence of the Appellant attending a number  of
      events, it was significant that since 2012 he  had  not  attended  any
      political events and that this raised questions about the  Appellant's
      beliefs and intentions and that the Appellant was merely a "hanger-on"
      who had used his attendance at meetings in  the  years  following  the
      initial refusal to bolster what was a rejected asylum claim.


  17. When the whole of the decision of First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  Alis  is
      read, it is clear that the  reference  to  the  "total  abstinence  of
      support post January 2012" is referring to the  Appellant  not  having
      attended at political demonstration since January  2012,  rather  than
      attendance at meetings. At [51]  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  did
      state specifically that he was prepared to accept that  the  Appellant
      attended meetings and on occasions did speak. However, the Judge found
      that he was not a member of any committee that organised such  events,
      but attended as someone who claim to have an interest and that he  had
      chosen to attend such events following  the  refusal  of  his  earlier
      asylum claim and that he attended such events as he believed it  would
      raise his profile and place in one of the risk  categories  that  were
      originally envisaged in TL.


  18. Although criticism is made of the failure of Judge Alis to specify the
      dates of those meetings within [51], given the Judge made it perfectly
      clear  that  it  was  only  the  Appellant's  attendance   at   public
      demonstrations that ceased after January 2012 at  [47],  I  do  accept
      that the First-Tier Tribunal Judge  was  referring  to  attendance  at
      meetings during the period up until March  2014,  as  claimed  by  the
      Appellant.



  19.  The Judge properly considered the Appellant's attendance at meetings,
      but in any event found that on the findings  that  he  had  made  that
      although the Appellant had attended  meetings  and  on  occasions  did
      speak, as set out in paragraph 5 of the headnote of TS, "A person  who
      has a profile of  voicing opposition to the government in  the  United
      Kingdom  through participation  in  demonstrations  or  attendance  at
      political meetings will not for this reason  alone  be  of  sufficient
      concern to the Burmese authorities to result in detention  immediately
      upon arrival.  This is irrespective of whether  the  UK  activity  has
      been driven by opportunistic or genuinely held views and is regardless
      of the prominence of the profile  in  this  country."  It  was  stated
      within paragraph 7 of the headnote that whether there is a  real  risk
      that monitoring will lead to detention following return will  in  each
      case depend upon the Burmese authorities' view of the  information  it
      already possesses, coupled with what it receives as the result of  any
      post-arrival monitoring.  Their view will be shaped by (i) how  active
      the person had been in the United  Kingdom,  for  example  by  leading
      demonstrations or becoming a prominent voice  in  political  meetings,
      (ii) what he/she did before leaving Burma, (iii) what that person does
      on return, (iv)the profile of the people he or she mixes with and  (v)
      whether a person is of an ethnicity that is seen by the government  to
      be de-stabilising the union, or if the person's activity is of a  kind
      that has an ethnic, geopolitical or economic regional component, which
      is regarded by the Burmese government as a sensitive issue.


  20. The findings of First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  Alis  that  the  Appellant
      attended meetings  and  on  occasions  did  not  speak  would  not  be
      sufficient to mean that he had become a prominent voice  in  political
      meetings.  On this basis, even if First-tier Tribunal Judge  Alis  was
      wrong not specify the dates of those meetings, given his  findings  as
      to the limited role that the Appellant played in those  meetings,  any
      such error in this regard was not material.

  21. In respect of the second ground of appeal in which it is  argued  that
      the First-Tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider the risk factors  set
      out within the headnote at paragraph 7 of TS  cumulatively,  when  one
      reads [55, 56 and 57] in this regard, it is clear that Judge Alis  did
      consider the  factors  cumulatively.  The  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
      accepted that the Appellant had produced  photographs  and  videos  of
      rallys which he attended, but noted how the Tribunal  in  TS  made  it
      clear that merely voicing opposition did not mean that a person  would
      be at risk upon return, but the fact that he  had  not  attended  such
      demonstrations for over three years was an important consideration  in
      that regard. The Judge also noted how the Tribunal also made clear  in
      TS that the Appellant's activities before he left  Burma  would  be  a
      relevant consideration and he accepted and adopted  Immigration  Judge
      Blair's findings on that issue. Judge Alis found that the  Appellant's
      failure to take part  in  any  political  demonstrations  against  the
      authorities for three  years  coupled  with  the  findings  about  his
      activities in Burma meant that he did not find  it  reasonably  likely
      that he would take part in any such activities were he  to  returned".
      These were findings  open  to  him  on  the  evidence  and  have  been
      adequately and sufficiently reasoned.


  22. In respect of the Appellant's ethnicity and religious beliefs,  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Alis noted how Miss Smith on behalf the  Appellant
      conceded that on their own these would not  place  him  at  risk,  but
      specifically stated that even bearing in  mind  the  letter  from  the
      Christian Solidarity which had not  stated  what  risk  the  Appellant
      faced, Judge Alis found that "In light of my  other  findings  on  his
      activities I am satisfied that mere monitoring  would  not  amount  to
      persecution". I  therefore  do  find  that  Judge  Alis  has  properly
      considered the risk categories cumulatively.



  23. Criticism is made that the Judge has not set out the  profile  of  the
      people the Appellant mixed with, in terms  of  his  associations,  and
      failed to take account of the fact that  it  was  said  the  Appellant
      mixed with and knew Ko Aung and Ben Rogers. Although  Judge  Alis  has
      not stated the extent to which the  Appellant  associated  with  these
      individuals, on the evidence before him such omission does not  amount
      to a material error on the facts of this case. The photograph  of  the
      Appellant seated at a desk at page 70 the Appellant's bundle does  not
      in itself show the Appellant attended at that seminar with Ko Aung, or
      prove what role the Appellant had in that  seminar,  even  if  he  did
      attend. Photographs with Ko Aung or Ben Rogers does not show  that  he
      actually mixes with them on a regular basis, or to the extent that  he
      will be subject to monitoring by the  Burmese  authorities  likely  to
      lead to  detention.  The  Appellant's  evidence  in  this  regard  was
      insufficient in any event to establish a  real  risk  upon  retrn  and
      therefore any failure of First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Alis  to  consider
      the evidence regarding showing the Appellant with himself with Ko Aung
      and Ben Rogers was not material, even when considering the risk to the
      Appellant cumulatively pursuant to the country guidance case of TS.

  24. The decision of First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  Alis  therefore  does  not
      reveal any material error of law and is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision First-Tier Tribunal Judge Alis  does  not  contain  a  material
error of law and is maintained.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  McGinty                                  Dated
15th March 2016
