
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11183/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd November 2015                 |On 10th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr Duc Van Tran
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Pettersen (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms Manning (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the Appellant in this appeal to the Upper Tribunal  as
    the Secretary of State and the Respondent as the Claimant.  This is the
    Secretary of State's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,
    against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ford) to allow the
    Claimant's appeal against a decision of 2nd December 2014  refusing  to
    vary leave to remain.

 2. By way of background, the Claimant is a citizen of Vietnam.  The First-
    tier Tribunal recorded his date of birth as being 5th  June  1996.   He
    entered the UK on a date in June 2011 and, on  11th  October  2011,  he
    claimed asylum.  However, his application was refused on 4th  May  2012
    but, in view of his young age, he was granted discretionary leave until
    4th December 2013.  He  did  appeal  the  decision  refusing  to  grant
    asylum, notwithstanding the grant  of  discretionary  leave,  but  that
    appeal was dismissed on 21st June 2012.  He  subsequently  applied  for
    further discretionary leave to  remain,  within  the  currency  of  his
    previous leave, and that application was refused on 2nd  December  2014
    (see above).

 3. The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal concerning the  decision  of  2nd
    December 2014 was  heard  on  2nd  February  2015.   The  Claimant,  in
    pursuing that appeal, said that he had had an unhappy life in  Vietnam,
    had been abused by family members, and would have nothing  tangible  to
    return to in that country.  However, he said  that  he  had  done  well
    since coming to the UK and was  a  talented  student  who  excelled  at
    mathematics.  He had made many friends and had been looked after  by  a
    foster family to whom he remained close.

 4. The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  Claimant,  if  returned  to
    Vietnam, would not have any family or social support  there.   However,
    he would be able to maintain links  with  his  foster  family  and  his
    friends in the UK and might be sent some money from  the  UK.   He  had
    been aged 14 years when he arrived in the UK and  had  applied  himself
    consistently and conscientiously to his studies.   He  had  achieved  a
    high level of integration.  The First-tier Tribunal decided that he did
    not meet the requirements of any of the Immigration Rules,  its  having
    considered paragraph 276ADE in particular, but found it appropriate  to
    go on  to  consider  whether  he  might  benefit  from  the  provisions
    contained within Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights
    (ECHR) outside the Rules.  In this context, it said this;

         "34. The real issue in this case is whether the Appellant's  return
             to  Vietnam  at  this  point  in  his  life   will   lead   to
             disproportionate damage to his emotional and mental health and
             consequently his personal integrity.  I  have  looked  at  the
             reality of what the Appellant will face if removed to  Vietnam
             as at the date of the appeal hearing.  He would be denied  the
             opportunity to complete his A-level studies.  This would  come
             as a severe blow to the Appellant who would, in the  words  of
             his head teacher, not only be denied the qualification that he
             has worked so hard for, but lose the benefit of the four years
             of education he has undertaken in the United Kingdom.  He  was
             given the benefit of this education as part of  the  grant  of
             discretionary leave and I was surprised that the Secretary  of
             State had undertaken no consideration of  the  impact  on  the
             Appellant of denying  him  the  opportunity  to  complete  his
             secondary education, especially when the reasons  for  refusal
             letter makes express reference to his studies at paragraph 65.



         35.  I have no doubt that this young but  able  Appellant  will  be
             able to secure employment on his return to Vietnam  sufficient
             to meet the necessities of life.  But the  impact  on  him  of
             denying him his A-level  qualifications  will  be  severe.   I
             accept given the background evidence, that he will  be  unable
             to pursue further education in Vietnam as he will not have the
             money to do so.  I accept that he will  be  unable  to  pursue
             third level education there.  Unless he is sponsored to  study
             elsewhere (and this may be a possibility), I find that he will
             be unable to finance third level studies."

 5. And then;

         "40. I agree with the decision of the Secretary of State  that  the
             Appellant does not enjoy family life in the United Kingdom for
             the  purposes  of  Article  8  human  rights.   His  level  of
             dependency on his foster family is not such as to create  such
             family life.  They care for him a great deal and he for  them.
             But he is an adult and the dependency that does exist  between
             him and his foster family has arisen by reason  of  his  being
             granted discretionary leave and placed with them.   I  am  not
             satisfied  that  this  young  man  is  incapable   of   living
             independently.  He travelled on his own from  Vietnam  at  the
             age of 14.  He coped with the  loss  of  his  father  and  his
             mother and has shown the ability to  establish  strong  social
             ties in the UK.  He has  established  a  strong  private  life
             here.  He has shown a willingness  and  ability  to  integrate
             fully in the UK despite his natural reticence.

         41.  Following the five steps  set  out  in  Razgar,  whilst  I  am
             satisfied that the Appellant does not enjoy  family  life  for
             the purposes  of  Article  8,  I  am  satisfied  that  he  has
             established a  strong  private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom
             encompassing his foster family, his school and his friends.  I
             am satisfied that the decision impacts on that private life to
             an extent that engages Article 8.  This is particularly so  in
             the area of education.  I am satisfied that  the  decision  is
             justified  by  the  fact  that  the  Appellant   was   granted
             discretionary leave as a minor and he is now an adult  and  no
             longer in need of  protection  as  a  child.   But  I  am  not
             satisfied that this decision goes no further than is necessary
             to  protect  the  public  interests  engaged.   Those   public
             interests are  the  need  to  maintain  effective  immigration
             control, as well as the need  to  protect  the  public  purse.
             Education is not free.  Neither is foster care.  The Appellant
             has learnt to speak English well and write English  well.   He
             has made remarkable progress in his education.  Although I  am
             satisfied that the Appellant could survive and get on his feet
             if he was returned to Vietnam at the present time, I  am  also
             satisfied  that  this   decision   is   not   justified.    No
             consideration was given to  granting  the  Appellant  a  short
             period  of  further  leave  to  enable  him  to  complete  his
             secondary  education.   I  have  borne  in   mind   that   the
             Immigration  Rules  were  approved  by  parliament  and   this
             Tribunal should be very reluctant to depart  from  the  Rules.
             But in this particular case I am satisfied that  the  decision
             is unduly harsh on this Appellant.

         42.  I  have  applied  the  amended  Section  117A  and  B  of  the
             Nationality, Asylum and Immigration Act 2002 but this does not
             alter the outcome.  This decision does not  involve  a  proper
             balancing of the competing public and private interests and  I
             have concluded it amounts to a  disproportionate  interference
             with the Appellant's established private life in the  UK.   It
             would not  have  been  disproportionate  in  my  view  if  the
             Appellant had been granted a short period of further leave  in
             order to complete his A-level studies.

         43.  With those qualifications,  I  would  be  satisfied  that  the
             Appellant is  able  to  reintegrate  in  Vietnam,  secure  the
             necessities of life, maintain his own moral and  psychological
             integrity and with the  ongoing  emotional  and  psychological
             support from his foster family and friends in the  UK  make  a
             good life for himself.  He is a capable  young  man.   But  to
             deny him his A-level qualifications is in my view unduly harsh
             and serves no useful public purpose.  I accept that this  will
             entail some additional  public  expense  but  that  additional
             expense is limited and is in my  view  proportionate.   Having
             allowed the Appellant to form a strong  private  life  in  the
             United Kingdom through a grant of  discretionary  leave,  this
             decision does not in my view give sufficient respect  to  that
             private life, in particular the educational aspect of  it.   I
             am satisfied that the decision is disproportionate  and  there
             is a breach of the Appellant's  protected  Article  8  private
             life in this decision."

 6. The Secretary  of  State,  when  applying  for  permission  to  appeal,
    contended that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to have proper regard
    to the content of Section 117B and, in that context, had not considered
    the Claimant's financial independence or lack of it  and  had  attached
    significant weight to his private life whereas it was required, by that
    Section, to attach little weight to it.  Further, it was contended that
    it had erred by using  Article  8  as  a  "general  dispensing  power".
    Permission was granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal who said;

         "It is arguable that the judge has not properly factored  into  the
         decision the public interest factor set out in the 2002 Act and has
         not given effect  to  the  approach  set  out  in  the  authorities
         regarding persons who are not British citizens.   The  grounds  are
         arguable."

 7. Before me, Ms Pettersen relied upon the grounds as drafted.  There had,
    she said, been a failure on the part of the First-tier Tribunal to take
    into account the public interest in a  firm  immigration  policy.   The
    Claimant could never have had any expectation that he would be  allowed
    to remain beyond his initial grant of leave.  It had overstated matters
    in his favour concerning what it found to be potential  damage  to  his
    emotional and mental health and personal  integrity  which  would  flow
    from his not being permitted to remain in the UK  to  complete  his  A-
    level  studies.   It  had  used  Article  8  as  a  general  dispensing
    provision.

 8. Ms Manning, for the Claimant, submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had properly taken into account  financial  aspects  and  had  accepted
    there would be some public expense in his being permitted to remain  to
    complete his studies.  It had  carried  out  a  proper  proportionality
    balancing exercise.  This was a fact-specific case and all matters  had
    been taken into account.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal's determination is most certainly a careful and
    thorough document.  It is apparent that it has looked  closely  at  the
    competing arguments and all aspects of the case.  It was not  persuaded
    by arguments to the effect that paragraph 276ADE of the Rules  was  met
    or  that  the  Claimant  should  be  permitted  to  remain  in  the  UK
    indefinitely in reliance upon Article 8.  It had simply  concluded,  in
    effect, that the decision to refuse further  leave,  with  the  obvious
    risk  of  a  removal  decision  being  made  at  a  later   date,   was
    disproportionate  only  because  it  would  deny  the   appellant   the
    opportunity of  completing  his  A-level  studies.   I  was,  in  fact,
    informed by Ms Manning that he has now completed those studies, albeit,
    that he now wishes to pursue some further studies in the UK.

10. As to Section 117B, it is very clear that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    that provision in mind.  It expressly indicated it had applied that and
    Section 117A  in  reaching  its  decision  (see  paragraph  42  of  the
    determination).  As to 117B(3) it  did  not  make  a  specific  finding
    regarding the Claimant's financial independence but it seems to  me  it
    clearly did appreciate that he was not able to stand upon his own  feet
    financially.  It noted that he was not financing his  own  studies  and
    that, therefore, there would be some cost to the public purse in his so
    doing.  It said so at paragraph 38 of the  determination.   It  clearly
    knew, since it accepted that he was a student, he was not in  full-time
    employment.  As to Section 117B(5) it was not, on  my  reading  of  the
    determination, the case  that  it  was,  in  general  terms,  attaching
    significant weight to the private life he had built up in the  UK  but,
    rather, it was focusing upon the  discrete  point  that  his  education
    might simply, in effect, be wasted and that this, in turn, would have a
    strong emotional impact upon him.  Against that background,  therefore,
    and bearing in mind the specific reference to  Section  117B,  I  would
    conclude that it did have the relevant provisions of  that  Section  in
    mind and that it did not err in failing to properly apply them  as  has
    been suggested.

11. The second point is the one regarding its alleged use of Article 8 as a
    general dispensing power.  In this context reliance is placed,  by  the
    Secretary of State, upon the judgment in Patel [2013] UKASC  13.   Also
    relevant in this context is the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Nasim
    and Others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC).  In this context, it is
    certainly right to recognise that Article  8  of  the  ECHR  does  have
    limited utility in private life cases that are  far  removed  from  the
    protection of  an  individual's  moral  and  physical  integrity.   So,
    applications by students and others here for short purposes,  where  an
    extension is sought and the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  are
    not met, will face significant obstacles in succeeding under Article 8.



12. The decision in Nasim, though, does not shut  out  the  possibility  in
    certain circumstances of Claimants successfully relying upon Article  8
    in the context of further studies.  At paragraph 41 of its decision  in
    that case the Upper Tribunal made reference to the  judgment  in  Patel
    and its earlier decision in CDS  (PBS  "available"  Article  8)  Brazil
    [2010] UKUT 305 (IAC) and made this observation;

         "It would, however, be wrong to say that the point has been reached
         where an adverse immigration decision in the case of a  person  who
         is here for study or other temporary purposes can never be found to
         be disproportionate.  But what is clear is that, on  the  state  of
         the present law, there is no justification for extending the obiter
         findings in CDS, so as to equate a person whose course of study has
         not yet ended with a person who, having finished their  course,  is
         precluded by the Immigration Rules from staying on to do  something
         else."

13. Of course, unlike many of the litigants in Nasim, this Claimant had not
    come to the UK for the purposes  of  study  and  had  not  obtained  an
    initial grant of leave on that basis.  Nevertheless, he was engaged  in
    studies and the basis of the First-tier Tribunal's decision was that he
    had not yet completed what were then his current A-level studies.   The
    First-tier Tribunal had decided, in effect, that if he was not able  to
    complete those current studies his previous hard  work  would  come  to
    naught.  It had also decided that abandoning  his  studies  would  make
    things significantly more difficult for him in seeking to make  a  life
    for himself in Vietnam (see paragraph  38  of  the  determination)  and
    would  have  a  detrimental  effect  on  his  moral  and  psychological
    wellbeing.  Ms Pettersen was critical of  the  latter  finding  but  it
    seems to me that, in light of the Claimant's evidence, it was  open  to
    it to reach  such  a  conclusion  and  that  it  was  not  perverse  or
    irrational for it to do so.

14. I do not doubt that, viewed  from  some  perspectives,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision might seem a surprisingly generous one particularly
    bearing in mind what is now a  somewhat  tougher  climate  for  persons
    seeking to rely upon Article 8 in non-family situations, than was  once
    the case.  I can readily accept that many differently constituted First-
    tier Tribunals might well have reached a different  view  on  the  same
    evidence.  However, that is not the test  I  have  to  apply.   Putting
    everything together my conclusion is that the First-tier  Tribunal  did
    properly apply the relevant legislation, did not simply use  Article  8
    as a general dispensing power and did reach a decision which  was  open
    to it.  Accordingly, I conclude that it did not err in law and that its
    decision shall stand.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   I  make  no
order.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
