
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:   AA/11875/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th August 2015                          |On 6th October 2015           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     EU
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Benitez, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against the Decision  and  Reasons  promulgated  on
       24th April 2015 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Freer  ("the  Judge").
       The appeal was heard by the Judge on 10th April 2015 at Taylor House.
        The decision under appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  the
       decision of the respondent on 19th December 2014, that the  appellant
       had not established a well founded fear of persecution and so did not
       qualify for asylum.  The respondent  refused  the  claim  for  asylum
       under paragraphs 336 and 339M of HC395 (as amended).


    2. Broadly stated, the appellant's asylum claim is advanced on the basis
       that the appellant fears her father because fathers in Albania have a
       right to kill their daughters.  The appellant's father wanted her  to
       marry a rich man (B) who she describes as old,  being  then  some  45
       years of age. Her father told her this when she  was  aged  about  16
       years.  The appellant's father and B, worked in  the  same  business,
       selling livestock. The appellant left home without permission and she
       believes her father will force her to marry B, on return to  Albania.
       The appellant claims that when she refused to  marry  B,  her  father
       used to beat her up and shout at her.  He would  inflict  bruises  on
       the appellant from occasional beatings.


    3. The appellant claims that B also  had  a  bad  attitude  towards  the
       appellant. B slapped her on two  occasions  and  when  she  told  her
       father, she was told B was entitled to do that, as he is her  husband
       to be.


    4. The claim for asylum was refused by the respondent and in the reasons
       for refusal, the respondent stated that the Appellant is able to look
       to the police for protection in Albania and that  the  appellant  has
       not provided evidence to show that her father has the means to locate
       her, on return.


    5. The appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal.   Permission  to
       appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade.  In  granting
       permission First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade stated:


             "the grounds of application for  permission  to  appeal  that,
             inter alia, the judge made adverse credibility  findings  when
             the respondent had not, and when the appellant  had  not  been
             given an opportunity to respond.   This is an  arguable  error
             of law."


    6. The appellant's first ground of appeal is that there was  "procedural
       impropriety".   The  appellant  contends  that  the  factual  account
       advanced by the appellant was accepted  by  the  respondent  and  the
       appeal proceeded by  way  of  legal  submissions  on  the  issues  of
       sufficiency of protection and  internal  relocation.   The  appellant
       claims that no issue or objection was made either by the respondent's
       representative or the Judge and the Judge observed at the outset that
       he had expected the appeal to be "submissions only".  It is  said  in
       the grounds of appeal that the "first reference to  credibility  came
       during the respondent's submissions.".  At  the  hearing  before  the
       First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant,  in  reply,  appears  to  have
       submitted that credibility could not be an issue  as  the  historical
       account was accepted by the respondent, and the issues raised in  the
       refusal were ones of law.


    7. The background to the appeal is set out at paragraphs [2] to  [6]  of
       the decision and reasons promulgated on 24th April 2015.


    8. It is to be noted that at paragraph [5] of the  decision,  the  Judge
       records:


             "I heard no oral evidence from the appellant, who attended the
             hearing, as the issues were of law rather than fact. I  record
             that the appellant attended despite her health problems  which
             were  evidently  troubling  her  on  the  day  and   that   an
             interpreter was provided who explained to the  appellant  what
             was being said in her own language.  I  heard  submissions  on
             behalf of the Home Office and the appellant."


    9. There was at the hearing  before  me,  no  evidence  as  to  why  the
       appellant had not given evidence.   In  her  submissions  to  me,  Ms
       Benitez submitted that when counsel, James Collins,  who  represented
       the appellant at the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
       entered  the  hearing  the  Judge  had  indicated  that  this  was  a
       "submissions only case", and based upon that indication,  a  decision
       was reached that the appellant would not give evidence. That  appears
       to be the account set out in paragraph 8 of the  appellant's  grounds
       of appeal. There is neither any evidence before me from counsel  that
       had represented the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal  in  the
       form of a witness statement, nor any record of such an indication, in
       the record of proceedings.


   10. In an appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, as set out at  paragraph
       [8] of the decision, the burden of proof is  on  the  appellant.   In
       refusing the claim for asylum on 19th December 2014,  the  respondent
       set out at Annex A, attached to the  decision  letter,  the  detailed
       reasons for refusal of the claim.  The respondent was  not  satisfied
       that the reason given by the appellant for claiming  a  well  founded
       fear of persecution, was one that engages the UK's obligations  under
       the Refugee Convention.  However the respondent went on  to  consider
       the  claim  in  light  of  the  appellant's  claim  for  humanitarian
       protection.  The respondent accepted the appellant's nationality  and
       then stated:


         "12. Your claim  has  been  taken  at  its  highest  and  has  been
         considered as though the events  you  have  described  occurred  as
         claimed. However, even when taking your claim at its highest, it is
         considered that you have not demonstrated that you face a real risk
         of suffering serious harm in Albania because there is a sufficiency
         of protection available to you and internal relocation options  are
         available."


       The respondent then went on to consider the issues of "Sufficiency of
       Protection" and "Internal Relocation" at some length, and concluded:


          "30.     Therefore, it is not considered  to  be  unreasonable  to
         expect you to return to Albania and as such you do not qualify  for
         International protection."


   11. Insofar as the Article 8 claim is concerned, the respondent stated;


         "44. You state that you met your partner in Albania and have stayed
         with him since your arrival in the UK in  November  2012.  However,
         you  have  not  provided  any   evidence   to   substantiate   your
         relationship. When asked whether you have any documents to  confirm
         that you are living together, you made mention only  of  a  utility
         bill (AIR q46). However, this letter only confirms that you  reside
         at the address and does not state your partner's name.  It  is  not
         considered that you have provided enough evidence to show that  you
         are in a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  your  partner.
         Therefore you fail to fulfil the requirements of E-LTRP.1.2 -  1.12
         and E-LTRP.2.1."


   12. In preparation for the appeal, the  appellant  had  filed  a  witness
       statement signed by her and dated 13th February 2015.   That  witness
       statement had been read to the appellant  in  the  Albanian  language
       before it had been signed, and there was a declaration to that effect
       upon the statement.  At paragraphs 5 to  7  of  that  statement,  the
       appellant responded to the respondent's conclusions as to sufficiency
       of protection, and at paragraphs 8 to 12, the appellant responded  to
       the respondent's conclusions as to internal relocation. At  paragraph
       13, the appellant deals with the respondent's decision that  she  was
       not satisfied that the appellant and her partner are in a genuine and
       subsisting relationship.


   13. It must have been plain to the  appellant  that  in  considering  the
       issues before  the  Tribunal,  including  issues  of  sufficiency  of
       protection, internal relocation and the Article 8 claim,  the  First-
       tier  Tribunal  would  be  required  to  consider   the   appellant's
       particular circumstances. It could only properly do so  by  reference
       to the evidence given by  the  appellant,  but  whether  or  not  the
       appellant and her partner gave evidence, was ultimately a matter  for
       the appellant and her representatives.  It must have been plain  that
       any failure on the part of the appellant and or her partner  to  give
       evidence, might mean that the Judge rejected the evidence  served  in
       reply to the reasons for refusal and that there remained  unexplained
       gaps in their evidence, that might result in adverse  findings  being
       made by the Judge.


   14. However, the grounds of appeal do not end there.  At  paragraph  [31]
       of the decision, the Judge refers to the chronology and notes;


         "...However it is not explained why she did not claim asylum for  a
         long time. This must damage her credibility. The  history  is  more
         consistent on its face with economic migration. A great  number  of
         Albanians have migrated to other countries  for  economic  reasons,
         which is consistent with the overall trend of a steady fall in that
         country's population over some decades to the present date."


       The appellant submits that this was an issue that was neither  raised
       in the interview, nor  in  the  respondent's  refusal  letter.   That
       appears to be correct.


   15. The appellant's grounds of appeal proceed upon the basis  that  there
       are a series of material errors within the decision of the Judge,  on
       the basis  of  which,  individually  and  collectively,  the  Judge's
       decision is unsustainable.   The appellant submits that the reasoning
       provided by the  judge  is  littered  with  speculation,  conjecture,
       generalisation and in places, with bizarre comments. In paragraph  11
       of the appellant's grounds of appeal,  the  appellant  identifies  no
       less than 14 such matters.


   16. The principles relating to the impact upon proceedings of  unfairness
       arising from error of fact were reconsidered by the Court  of  Appeal
       in R & ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  The  Court  of  Appeal
       held that before the Tribunal can set aside a decision of a Judge  on
       the grounds of error  of  law,  it  has  to  be  satisfied  that  the
       correction of the error would have made a material difference to  the
       outcome, or to the fairness of the proceedings. A finding might  only
       be set aside for error of law on the grounds of perversity if it  was
       irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or one  that  was
       wholly unsupported by the evidence.


   17. I have carefully read through the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Freer and noted the many criticisms cited at  paragraph  11  of
       the appellant's grounds of appeal.   Although I am not satisfied that
       all of the criticisms that are referred to in  paragraph  11  of  the
       appellant's grounds of appeal are made out, I am satisfied that  some
       of the findings made by the Judge are unreasonable in the  Wednesbury
       sense, or wholly  unsupported  by  the  evidence.   Similarly,  I  am
       satisfied that in many places, the Judge appears to have made adverse
       findings against the appellant upon matters that were not  raised  in
       the reasons for refusal letter, or  at  the  hearing  of  the  appeal
       before the First-tier Tribunal.  They are matters therefore, that the
       appellant had no opportunity of properly  addressing  either  in  her
       witness statement or in reaching a decision as to whether or not  she
       should give evidence. I do  not  therefore  deal  with  each  of  the
       criticisms that are made by the appellant, but propose give  examples
       of those criticisms that I reject, and those that I find amount to an
       error.


   18. At the hearing of the appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
       appellant relied upon an expert report prepared  by  Miranda  Vickers
       and dated 2nd April 2015.  Insofar as that report is  concerned,  the
       Judge notes at paragraph 24 of his decision:


         "The expert report is very specific. In the Kukes area,  where  the
         entire  extended  family  of  the  Appellant   lives,   Kanun   law
         predominates.   A  girl  may  not  disobey  her  father  under  any
         circumstances. People are easily traced d once registered, so it is
         not viable to relocate. The Gorani community is very small; at  the
         size of some 60,000 it makes her easy to trace. The only  protector
         the Appellant has is her partner and being  Serbian  he  cannot  go
         there himself."


   19. I reject the criticism that is made at paragraph 11(i) of the grounds
       of appeal, of the comment by the  Judge  at  paragraph  [31]  of  the
       decision that "A great number of Albanians  have  migrated  to  other
       countries for economic reasons...".  Ms Benitez submitted  on  behalf
       of the appellant that the Judge's comment is pure speculation on  the
       part of the Judge and without any evidential foundation at  all.    I
       disagree. The expert report of Miranda Vickers that was  relied  upon
       by the Appellant states [at page 2]:


         "The Gorani are a Slavic Muslim people  who  traditionally  inhabit
         the Gora region.....They number around 60,000 people  and  speak  a
         distinct South Slavic dialect.....Livestock farming has been  their
         only form of livelihood and whenever possible le, Gorani  men  have
         left the region in search of work  elsewhere.  The  Gorani  region,
         including  Kukes,   has   always   been   economically   depressed,
         undeveloped and its inhabitants are amongst the poorest  people  in
         the Balkans"


   20. Criticism is made at paragraph 11(ii) of the grounds  of  appeal,  of
       paragraph [33] of the decision and in particular the  speculation  by
       the Judge as to what the Applicant may  or  may  not  decide  in  the
       future.  On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Clarke  submitted  that  the
       criticism made is not one that  that  is  material,  and  capable  of
       affecting the outcome of the appeal.  I agree.  At  paragraph  33  of
       the decision, the Judge deals with "Victims  of  Human  Trafficking",
       but it is uncontroversial that it has never  been  any  part  of  the
       appellant's claim that she is the victim of trafficking.


   21. Criticism is made at paragraph 11(iii) of the grounds of  appeal,  of
       paragraph [36] of the decision in which the Judge states "I find that
       as there are only 60,000 Gorani people it should  be  easy  to  avoid
       them..".  Ms Benitez submits that this finding is irrational.  First,
       the appellant does not fear the Gorani people generally and to expect
       the appellant to avoid the Gorani people would be to  expect  her  to
       disassociate  herself  with  her  Gorani  ethnicity.   Secondly,  the
       finding is contrary to the expert evidence that was before the First-
       tier Tribunal.  The expert  evidence  of  Miranda  Vickers  that  was
       relied  upon  by  the  Appellant  states  that  insofar  as  internal
       relocation is concerned:


         "...Over the past twenty-odd years  the  largest  concentration  of
         internal migrants, including Gorani people from Kukes have  settled
         in the cities of Tirana and Durres.....Despite having been  brought
         up in Fier, the Appellant's northern Gorani background  would  make
         it difficult for her to settle anywhere  in  the  south,  with  its
         different dialect, and few job  opportunities  in  Socialist  Party
         strongholds such as Gjirokaster, Vlore and Saranda,  with  many  of
         their inhabitants belonging to the  Christian  Orthodox  faith  and
         ethnic Greek minority population. But also, if she was to  try  and
         settle  in  the  Tirana  Durres  conurbation,  she  would  find  it
         difficult to avoid people from her family's district of Kukes.


         If her father wanted to find the Appellant, were she to relocate to
         the capital or other surrounding towns, it would be relatively easy
         for him to do so. If the Appellant relocated to any town or city in
         Albania, she would be officially obliged to register  herself as  a
         resident under the Civil Registration  system  (as  every  Albanian
         citizen must)....... The Appellant would not be able  to  obtain  a
         compulsory Identity card without registering. Also, she would  need
         to register under this system in order to gain employment,  further
         her education, or access any social funding.  As  soon  as  she  is
         registered she will be easily traced by anyone wishing to find her.
         The Civil Register is kept in all local municipality and  community
         offices and can be accessed by  anyone,  much  like  the  electoral
         register in the UK."


   22. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Clarke submitted  that  at  paragraph
       36, the Judge was in effect, stating the obvious.  That  is,  Albania
       is a country where the appellant  should  be  capable  of  relocating
       without coming to the attention of her family.  That submission is at
       odds with the expert report that was before the Tribunal that  states
       "Albania is, however, a very small country with  a  surface  area  of
       just 11,100 square miles and a population (in 2013) of 2,773,620".


   23. It seems to me that the finding of the Judge  at  paragraph  [36]  is
       based upon a mistake as to fact, and appears to be  contrary  to  the
       matters set out in the expert evidence and  thus  has  no  evidential
       basis.  The Judge appears to proceed upon the  mistaken  belief  that
       the appellant fears the Gorani people and wishes to  avoid  them,  or
       should reasonably be expected to do so, upon return to Albania.   The
       appellant does not seek  to  disassociate  herself  with  the  Gorani
       people, but her fear is that she is  at  risk  of  serious  harm  and
       possible honour killing by reason of her  refusal  to  enter  into  a
       forced marriage.


   24. There are also various passages in the decision that were not  relied
       upon in the decision of the respondent or raised at  the  hearing  of
       the appeal and thus appear to have no evidential basis, and are based
       upon speculation or conjecture;


        a. The comment at paragraph [39] that "the reality of life is  that
           around the world "blue-collar" jobs are often  taken  by  people
           who do not speak much or any of the main language  of  the  host
           country",  and  at  paragraph  [40]  that   "It   is,   arguably
           reasonable,  to expect the partner  to  learn  a  smattering  of
           commonly used Albanian expressions and to seek employment  in  a
           "blue-collar" job is so as to support the appellant which may be
           hindered by ethnic and religious tensions  but  this  is  by  no
           means an insuperable problem."


        b. The finding at paragraph [64] that the appellant's  partner,  if
           still  with  her  could  protect  her,  or  alternatively,   the
           appellant may find a new partner who will protect her.


        c. The finding at paragraph  [66]  that  the  option  for  internal
           relocation is open to the appellant if she is accompanied by the
           partner whose details  are  given  in  her  own  interviews,  or
           alternatively, if she arranges a marriage with an as yet unknown
           Albanian gentleman, using modern means  of  communication  or  a
           religious advisor of her faith.


        d. The finding at paragraph [67] that the appellant is already free
           to take a new name and it is not shown by any evidence that  she
           would  be  recognisable  in  the  register,  if  she  did  that.
           Similarly, the finding at paragraph [68] that there is no  legal
           requirement for the appellant to keep her birth name  on  return
           to Albania and that in patriarchal societies, it is very  common
           for women to take a man's  name.   These  are  material  to  the
           conclusions of the Judge in light of what is said  at  paragraph
           [77] of the decision that there is no evidence she is  traceable
           by her father, provided she  uses  the  name  of  a  partner  or
           husband, which is legally permissible.


   25.  It seems to me that reading the decision as a  whole,  many  of  the
       criticisms that are made in paragraph 11 of the grounds of appeal and
       that I have referred to in paragraph [24] above, can be  traced  back
       to the underlying criticism that the Judge has made adverse  findings
       against the appellant, in respect of matters that were neither raised
       in the reasons for refusal letter, nor  at  the  hearing  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal.  They were therefore plainly  matters  that  the
       appellant could not have contemplated as being in issue, and  had  no
       opportunity to address or respond to.


   26. In MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT  00105  (IAC)  the  Upper
       Tribunal held that where there  is  a  defect  or  impropriety  of  a
       procedural nature in the proceedings  at  first  instance,  this  may
       amount to a material error of law requiring the decision of the First-
       Tier Tribunal (the "FtT") to be set aside.  The authorities  referred
       to by the Upper Tribunal in MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014]  UKUT
       00105 (IAC) make it clear that upon  an  appeal  such  as  this,  the
       criterion to be applied is  fairness  and  not  reasonableness.   The
       Judge's conduct of  the  hearing  and  his  decision  is  not  to  be
       evaluated by reference to a test of  reasonableness  or  fault.   The
       judge cannot in any way be criticised for the appellant's failure  to
       give evidence before him. Whether or not evidence  is  called  in  an
       appeal before the First-tier Tribunal is entirely a  matter  for  the
       appellant and his or her representatives.


   27. The judge considered the evidence that was before him, but had to  do
       so acknowledging that there were a number of gaps  in  the  evidence.
       If those gaps had been limited to matters raised in the  reasons  for
       refusal letter, and that had not adequately  been  addressed  by  the
       appellant in her statement or by calling evidence,  the  judge  could
       not be criticised for reaching adverse findings.   However  when  the
       decision is read as a whole, it is clear that in a number of respects
       the Judge made findings and reached conclusions  upon  matters   that
       had neither been raised in the reasons for  refusal  letter,  nor  it
       appears, were raised at the hearing of the appeal before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal.  To that end,  they  were  adverse  findings  made  in
       circumstances where the appellant  was  afforded  no  opportunity  to
       respond  to  any  concerns  that  the  Judge  had.    The   resulting
       unfairness to the appellant is apparent from the findings made by the
       Judge and the conclusions reached.


   28. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved
       in the making of an error on a point of law and the decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


   29. I must then consider whether to remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, or to re-make the decision myself.  As the  Upper  Tribunal
       did in MM (unfairness; E &  R)  Sudan  [2014]  UKUT  00105  (IAC),  I
       consider that where a first instance decision is  set  aside  on  the
       basis of an error of law involving the deprivation of the  appellants
       right to a fair hearing, the appropriate course will be to remit  the
       matter to  a  newly  constituted  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
       hearing.


Notice of Decision


   30. The appeal  is  allowed  and  the  appeal  is  remitted  to  a  newly
       constituted First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing of the appeal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


   31. An anonymity direction was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  is
       continued by me.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
       otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these
       proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or  any  member
       of his family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to
       the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead  to
       contempt of court proceedings.







Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


