
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11195/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21st November 2016                           |On 15th December 2016      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      deputy upper tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                         MOHAMMED FATHWE A EL ZAHAWI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Willoughby, Counsel instructed by Maya
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by Mr El Zahawi against the decision  of  a  First-tier
   Tribunal Panel (Judge Tobin and Designated Judge McClure) to dismiss  his
   appeal against refusal of his asylum and human rights  claims.  Anonymity
   was not directed by the First-tier Tribunal  and  I  see  no  utility  in
   directing it at this stage.

2. Mr El Zahawi's identity (and therefore his nationality) has  always  been
   accepted by the Secretary of State. The issue in the  asylum  appeal  was
   the credibility of his account of the reasons for him leaving  in  Libya.
   In essence, he claimed that he had had to leave Libya because he had come
   to the adverse attention of so-called 'Islamic  State'  (ISIS)  who  were
   active in his local area. Whilst the Tribunal accepted that Mr El  Zahawi
   may have undertaken some informal work for the Libyan Army  in  his  home
   area (Bengazi) it rejected his claim that this had  brought  him  to  the
   attention of ISIS.

3. Mr El Zahawi  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  this  aspect  of  the
   Tribunal's decision on the ground  that  it  had  not  provided  adequate
   reasons for that conclusion. However, Judge Fisher  concluded  that  this
   ground amounted to nothing more than a disagreement with  the  Tribunal's
   findings and an attempt to re-argue  the  matter.  He  therefore  refused
   permission to appeal on this ground and there has been no application  to
   renew it in the Upper Tribunal.

4. However, Judge  Fisher  did  conclude  that  it  was  arguable  that  the
   Tribunal had failed to consider whether there would be "very  significant
   obstacles" to the appellant's  reintegration  in  Libya  as  required  by
   paragraph 276 ADE (iv) of the Immigration  Rules.  He  therefore  granted
   permission to appeal solely on the ground that the Tribunal had  arguably
   erred in its consideration of the appellant's claim that the Secretary of
   State's decision was incompatible with Mr El Zahawi's  right  to  respect
   for private life  as  guaranteed  by  Article  8  of  the  1950  European
   Convention of Fundamental Human Rights and Freedoms.

5. The Tribunal's  limited  and  extremely  brief  consideration  of  Mr  El
   Zahawi's Article 8 claim is contained within the final paragraph  of  its
   decision:

    Where a claim is based on Article 8 it should be  considered,  pursuant
    to the Immigration Rules. The appellant failed to meet the requirements
    of paragraph 275 ADE(1)(iii) of the Immigration Rules  because  he  had
    not lived in the UK continuously for at least 20 years. There does  not
    appear to be any basis upon which the appellant could qualify  under  a
    partner or parent route. Therefore, we also dismiss this  limb  of  the
    appeal.

   As Mr McVeety readily conceded, this analysis was inadequate in  that  it
   wholly overlooked the possibility of Mr El Zahawi succeeding  under  sub-
   paragraph (vi); that is to say, where -

    ... the applicant .. has lived continuously in the UK for less than  20
    years ...  but  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    applicant's integration into the country to which he would have  to  go
    if required to leave the UK [emphasis added].

   The only issue that was argued before  me,  therefore,  was  whether  the
   Tribunal's failure to consider sub-paragraph  (vi)  of  paragraph  276ADE
   (and thus to apply the test of "very  significant  obstacles"  to  Mr  El
   Zahawi's integration on return) had affected the outcome of  the  appeal.
   That is the issue to which I now turn.

6. Mr Willoughby submitted that the Tribunal's  unchallenged  finding  that,
   "the appellant may have undertaken some work for the Libyan army",  ought
   logically to have led it to conclude that this  fact  would  present  him
   with a  "very  significant  obstacle"  to  his  reintegration  in  Libya.
   However,  that  argument   conflates   the   very   different   potential
   consequences which it is necessary for an applicant to establish in order
   to succeed in a claim that his removal would  be  incompatible  with  his
   right to respect for private life, as distinct  from  a  claim  that  his
   return to the country of origin would place the United Kingdom in  breach
   of its obligation to afford him international protection. In  the  latter
   case, it is necessary for the applicant to substantiate his claim that he
   would be at risk of serious harm. The  Tribunal  found  -  for  good  and
   sufficient reasons - that, in relation to this issue, Mr  El  Zahawi  had
   failed to establish that there  was  any  such  risk.  By  contrast,  the
   question of whether Mr El Zahawi would face very significant difficulties
   to his reintegration on return to Libya  was  a  question  that  depended
   largely upon him establishing a lack of  remaining  social,  cultural  or
   family ties to that country. It is difficult to see how any work that the
   appellant may have undertaken for the Libyan army could have affected the
   existence of such ties, and I am fortified in this view by the fact  that
   no such argument appears to have been put before the First-tier Tribunal.



7. I therefore conclude that whilst the Panel undoubtedly erred  in  failing
   to consider the relevant  sub-paragraph  of  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
   Immigration Rules, this did not affect the outcome of the appeal.



Notice of Decision

8. The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity is not directed


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

