
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11056/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 March 2016                             |On 19 April 2016              |
|Prepared on 14 March 2016                    |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    S. R.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Warren, Counsel, instructed by Switalski's
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Libya who claimed  asylum  on  3  August
      2013, asserting that upon return to Libya by the Dutch authorities  he
      had suffered persecution, and that  he  would  face  a  real  risk  of
      further persecution should he be returned to Libya once more.

   2. On 12 November 2014 the Respondent refused the asylum claim, and  made
      a decision to remove him to Libya. The Respondent  was  not  satisfied
      that the Appellant had told the truth about his experiences.

   3. The Appellant's appeal against the removal decision was  heard  on  30
      April 2015 and was dismissed in a decision promulgated on 22 May  2015
      by First Tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly.

   4. The Appellant was granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  on  28
      September 2015 by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman on the basis  it
      was arguable the Judge had failed to engage properly with  the  expert
      medical evidence, and the relevant country  guidance  decision  of  AT
      (Libya) CG [2014] UKUT 318. Thus the matter comes before me.

   Error of Law?

   5. Ultimately both parties were agreed that the Judge had made  a  number
      of mistakes in his description of the expert medical evidence that was
      before  him  concerning  injuries  the  Appellant  claimed   to   have
      experienced in Libya  since  his  return  to  that  country  from  the
      Netherlands  in  2013.  Cumulatively  I  am   satisfied   that   these
      demonstrate that the medical evidence which lay at  the  core  of  the
      Appellant's case was not given the degree of careful attention that it
      deserved, and that there was an inadequate analysis of the weight that
      should be attached to it. That medical evidence went to the  issue  of
      whether the Appellant had told the  truth  about  his  experiences  in
      Libya after his return in 2013. It follows in my  judgement  that  the
      adverse findings of fact made in relation to the  Appellant's  account
      of his experiences in Libya after his return in 2013  are  unsafe  and
      must be set aside.

   6. I have in these circumstances considered whether or not to  remit  the
      appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for it to be reheard,  as  requested
      by the Appellant. In the circumstances of the appeal  I  am  satisfied
      that this is the correct approach, and I note Mr Kingham does not seek
      to suggest otherwise. In circumstances where it would appear that  the
      relevant evidence has not properly been considered by the  First  Tier
      Tribunal, the effect of that error of law  has  been  to  deprive  the
      Appellant of the opportunity for his case to be properly considered by
      the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of
      25 September 2012. Moreover the extent of the  judicial  fact  finding
      exercise is such that having regard to the over-riding  objective,  it
      is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to  the  First  Tier
      Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of  25  September
      2012. Having reached  that  conclusion,  with  the  agreement  of  the
      parties I make the following directions;

     i) The decision upon the  appeal  is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
        remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing. No  findings  of
        fact are preserved. The appeal is not to  be  listed  before  Judge
        Farrelly.

    ii) An Arabic interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.

   iii) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at the North
        Shields hearing centre after 1 April 2016.

    iv) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier  Tribunal
        is preserved.

Decision


   7. The decision promulgated on 22 May 2015 did involve the making  of  an
      error of law sufficient to require it to be set aside and  the  appeal
      to be reheard. Accordingly the decision upon the appeal is  set  aside
      and the appeal is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  with  the
      following directions;

     i) The decision upon the  appeal  is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
        remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing. No  findings  of
        fact are preserved. The appeal is not to  be  listed  before  Judge
        Farrelly.

    ii) An Arabic interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.

   iii) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at the North
        Shields hearing centre after 1 April 2016.

    iv) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier  Tribunal
        is preserved.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 14 March 2016
