








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11297/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 24 September 2015                 |on 19 October 2015                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                                   Mr N N
                        anonymity direction CONTINUED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms A Walker, counsel (instructed by Theva
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka,  born  on  17  May  1981.  He
    appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision to remove  him,
    having refused his asylum application.

 2. On 15 May 2015, Designated Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  McClure
    granted the appellant permission  to  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    Judge's approach to the medical evidence  was  flawed.  The  Judge  had
    questioned and then rejected parts of the doctor's report. In so doing,
    Judge McClure found that it was arguable that the Judge  erred  in  the
    approach. The same challenge was made against the Judge's  approach  to
    the psychiatric evidence, which was also held to amount to an  arguable
    error of law.

 3. Ms Walker, who did not represent the appellant at  the  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, relied on the grounds of appeal  submitted  in
    support of the application for permission.

 4. She submitted that the respondent had not challenged the  expertise  of
    Dr Martin who prepared the scarring report relating to  the  appellant.
    Dr Martin had been provided with copies of  the  appellant's  screening
    and substantive interviews prior to his assessment  of  the  appellant,
    which he confirmed in the report.

 5. Dr Martin found that the appearance of scars was  typical  of  injuries
    caused by being beaten with a narrow implement  "as  described  by  the
    claimant." These scars appeared to be mature and were  consistent  with
    the time span described by the  appellant.  Dr  Martin  ruled  out  the
    possibility of self  inflicted  injury  and  also  found  that  it  was
    unlikely that the scars and injuries were caused with  the  appellant's
    consent. He arrived at the conclusion on  account  of  the  numbers  of
    scars and the severity of his injuries.

 6. After applying the Istanbul Protocol, Dr Martin stated that he  had  no
    doubt that the injuries were caused by being intentionally injured.  It
    was the most likely explanation that he was tortured.

 7. Ms  Walker  submitted  that  notwithstanding  that  report,  the  Judge
    rejected the appellant's claim of having been tortured  and  criticised
    the medical report. In the event, he did not find that the  appellant's
    injuries were consistent with the causation given by the appellant,  as
    if he had  been  beaten  with  the  frequency  and  in  the  manner  he
    described, he would have expected his upper body to  have  been  almost
    entirely covered with scars. He accepted that it was unlikely that  the
    appellant inflicted those scars himself. However, he did not find it to
    be proved that they were inflicted by the Sri Lankan army [59].

 8. The Judge also noted that Dr Martin did  not  comment  on  whether  the
    number of scars is consistent with the appellant's statement  that  one
    day he was beaten with wire and pipes and kicked with heavy  boots  for
    the whole day. Nor did Dr Martin comment on whether the number of scars
    he found is consistent with the appellant's being regularly  beaten  in
    this fashion for either a period of one and a  half  months  or  for  a
    period of a week.

 9. She submitted that the Judge erred in rejecting  Dr  Martin's  evidence
    for the reasons he gave. That is because Dr Martin made it clear in his
    report that he was fully aware of the appellant's account as set out at
    page 4 of his report. He had also examined the appellant. His  findings
    in relation to the back and upper limbs are set out in detail  at  page
    4. As far as the injuries to his back are  concerned,  he  referred  to
    numerous hyper-pigmented linear scars. These are set out in his diagram
    contained at Appendix 1.

10. Dr Martin also identified the scars in the upper limbs, which  included
    linear scars on the left shoulder and upper third  of  the  left  upper
    arm. A photograph was produced of the injuries. Further, there were two
    oblique linear scars on the lateral aspect of the  right  shoulder  and
    upper third of the right upper arm as set out  in  these  diagrams  and
    photographs.

11. Dr Martin had set out the appellant's account as  to  how  these  scars
    were caused. This was as a result of being repetitively  beaten  during
    his detention in 2009. The  appearance  of  the  scars  is  typical  of
    injuries caused by being beaten with a narrow implement as described by
    him.

12. He stated that it is unlikely that the injuries could  have  been  self
    inflicted. It was likely to have been caused by other individuals. That
    was unlikely due to the numerous number of scars and  the  severity  of
    the injuries. From the inspection of the injuries,  he  found  that  it
    difficult to say if the injuries were caused by friends or foes as  the
    appearance of the  scars  would  have  been,  for  practical  purposes,
    indistinguishable. He found that the scars  appeared  mature  and  were
    consistent with the time span given by the claimant.

13. Ms Walker also submitted that the comment of the Judge at [57] that  Dr
    Martin did not comment on whether the number  of  scars  he  found  was
    consistent with the appellant being regularly beaten  in  this  fashion
    for a period of one and a half months or a  period  of  a  week  was  a
    material error of fact. From the interview of the appellant  (questions
    103-105) he did not in fact state whether the ill treatment had stopped
    once he had confessed.

14. She submitted that the Judge's  assumption  from  his  conclusion  that
    beating with boots, wire and pipes would lead to extensive scarring was
    made without any evidence. That, she submitted, was  a  conclusion  not
    available to the Judge who was not an expert. The  extent  of  scarring
    depends on the nature of the  beatings  sustained,  which  in  turn  is
    dependent on a number  of  'variables'  including  the  nature  of  the
    implements used, whether the skin was broken, and  so  on.  These  were
    matters which an expert could comment upon but not a lay person.

15. In  any  event,  she  submitted  that  the  Judge  acted  "procedurally
    unfairly" in that the respondent had not challenged the expertise of Dr
    Martin nor the contents of his report. Nor  did  the  Judge  raise  any
    concerns during the hearing when counsel expressly pointed out  to  him
    that the report had not been  challenged.  In  the  circumstances,  the
    Judge should have raised  his  concerns  on  the  report  so  that  the
    appellant's representative could address  them  and  possibly  seek  an
    adjournment to  enable  Dr  Martin  to  attend  and  give  evidence  in
    response, if required.

16. Before the Upper Tribunal the appellant gave  notice  as  part  of  his
    permission to appeal to be permitted to produce evidence from Dr Martin
    in response to the comment made by the Judge. A  copy  of  Dr  Martin's
    response was in fact attached.

17. During the course of the hearing however, I indicated that I would have
    no regard to that evidence, as it is not relevant to the error  of  law
    hearing.

18. Insofar as the psychiatric report of Dr Dhumad is concerned, Ms  Walker
    submitted  that  the  Judge  made  material  errors  in  rejecting  his
    diagnosis of PTSD and severe depressive episodes. His evidence  of  the
    appellant's mental health was unchallenged by the respondent.  However,
    the Judge failed to give proper reasons for rejecting and  disregarding
    it, as required by AM v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 521.

19. She submitted that the Judge had again acted procedurally  unfairly  in
    rejecting the psychiatrist's evidence, particularly as  the  respondent
    did not challenge the report or Dr Dhumad's expertise.  The  Judge  did
    not raise any concerns about the report during submissions. If  he  had
    concerns, the opportunity should have been given to  the  appellant  to
    address them, including the consideration of whether to apply  to  call
    Dr Dhumad to give evidence. The Judge behaved procedurally unfairly  in
    the circumstances.

20. In addition, she submitted that the Judge's criticism of the report  on
    the basis  that  the  full  medical  records  were  not  available  was
    unreasonable. Although Dr Dhumad did not have the benefit of  the  full
    medical record, he did have some evidence available to him as  set  out
    in the report, including the letter from the GP, prescriptions and  the
    letter from the psychological therapist, which was dated 16 May 2014.

21. Thirdly, the Judge erred in rejecting the  diagnosis  of  PTSD  on  the
    basis that as set out in Appendix III of the report, which stated  that
    the onset of PTSD follows the trauma with a latency  period  which  may
    range from a few weeks to months but rarely exceeds six months.

22. In this respect the Judge found at [69-74]  that  the  failure  by  the
    appellant to seek medical help for symptoms of PTSD shortly  after  his
    arrival in the UK or until 2012 showed that he was not  suffering  from
    PTSD.

23. In that regard, she submitted that  the  Judge  was  guilty  of  flawed
    reasoning, namely, in assuming that the onset of the appellant's trauma
    coincided with the time that he sought treatment.

24. Even though he may not have sought treatment within a short  period  of
    his arrival in the UK (and within six months of the trauma suffered) it
    was clear from Dr Dhumad's report that it  was  the  appellant's  claim
    that he was mentally affected by the  torture  suffered  following  its
    occurrence and that he had initially felt safe upon arrival in the UK.

25. The evidence was also that as a result of his mental state, he had been
    unable to continue with his studies.  Some  time  thereafter,  in  late
    2011, he sought treatment as set out in the screening  and  substantive
    interviews.

26. Accordingly, the appellant's case was that the onset of trauma followed
    the detention and torture. It did not follow  that  since  he  had  not
    sought treatment, this meant he was not suffering  from  PTSD  at  that
    time. Moreover, the doctor was aware that the appellant had not  sought
    treatment until late 2011 and  despite  this,  concluded  that  in  his
    expert opinion  he  was  suffering  from  PTSD  and  severe  depressive
    episodes.

27. There are other criticisms of the Judge's findings with  regard  to  Dr
    Dhumad's report and in particular that the Judge erred in "his complete
    failure" to have regard to the detailed assessment carried  out  by  Dr
    Dhumad based upon his clinical assessment and expertise.

28. Moreover, he failed to have regard to Dr Dhumad's opinion at 15(h) that
    it was extremely difficult to feign a full  blown  mental  illness  (as
    opposed to individual symptoms).

29. As a result of his conclusion that the appellant was not suffering from
    PTSD, the Judge failed to address the other issues on which  Dr  Dhumad
    gave his opinion, including the risk of suicide, deterioration  in  his
    mental health in the event of removal, and his inability to stand up to
    questioning by the authorities on return.

30. The third ground relied on relates to documentary  evidence,  including
    the evidence of a reputable attorney at law in  Sri  Lanka.  The  Judge
    erred in attaching no weight to such evidence on the  basis  that  they
    were from Sri Lanka, and his regard  to  the  ease  with  which  forged
    documents can be obtained there.

31. However, the appellant relied upon  documents  demonstrating  that  his
    parents complained to the police following his arrest and detention, as
    well as the detention of his father.   This  all  constituted  evidence
    that was contemporaneous to those events. He also relied  on  documents
    setting out his mother's complaint to the Human  Rights  Commission  in
    Sri Lanka. Those were all verified by a reputable  attorney,  Mr  Anton
    Punethanayahem.

32. In rejecting the evidence, the Judge found at [113]  that  he  did  not
    find the evidence reliable having regard to the ease with which one can
    obtain "official" documents in Sri Lanka, either by bribery or forgery.



33. In so doing, the Judge erred in his failure to have regard to the  fact
    that the attorney was a reputable lawyer whose  evidence  in  fact  had
    been accepted by the Upper Tribunal in the country guidance case in  GJ
    (Sri Lanka) and who had been expressly  contacted  by  the  appellant's
    solicitors to verify the documentary evidence produced.  She  submitted
    that that rejection puts into question not only  the  attorney  himself
    but the good faith of the UK lawyers who instructed him.

34. The Judge also found at [94] that the appellant's mother's name in  the
    attorney's letter did not match the name provided by the  appellant  in
    his visa application. In fact, the name on the visa application is  his
    mother's family name, whereas the name in the lawyer's letter and other
    documentation is her husband's name.

35. The Judge knew that the appellant did not complete the visa application
    form, which was done by his agent. The Judge erred in failing  to  take
    into account that there are often differences in spelling of names when
    they are spelt in the "Roman text" as compared to the  original  Tamil.
    These differences in spelling are due to differences in transliteration
    between the Tamil script and Roman script.

36. Ms Walker submitted that in the light of these errors, the Judge failed
    to assess the appellant's risk on return to Sri Lanka.  The  Judge  has
    thus failed to consider  the  appellant's  Article  3  claim.  In  that
    respect, Dr Dhumad had  expressly  considered  the  issue  of  risk  of
    suicide in the event of removal, or his ability to face questioning  by
    the Sri  Lankan  authorities  on  return  and  the  ability  to  access
    palliative care.

37. The Judge did not engage  with  or  deal  with  any  of  these  issues,
    notwithstanding the comments of the Upper Tribunal in GJ (Sri Lanka) at
    [450-456].

38. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Kandola adopted the Rule  24  response.
    The expert had to consider the credibility of the  appellant's  account
    as presented. The Judge has given  consideration  to  the  report.  The
    Judge had regard to the inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence. He
    was entitled to find that the appellant had not discharged  the  burden
    of proof regarding the contention that the scars were inflicted by  the
    Sri Lankan army.

39. The Judge also identified the shortfalls in the  psychiatric  evidence.
    This he considered in detail. He was entitled to refuse to  accept  the
    diagnosis given by the doctor.  All the appellant had said was that  he
    had not been sleeping well when  coming  to  the  UK.  He  referred  to
    paragraph 9(b) of Dr Dhumad's report. The report was a few years  later
    and this was accordingly a valid criticism.

40. With regard to Ground 3, he submitted  that  the  applicant's  mother's
    name in the letter did not match the name provided by the appellant  in
    his visa application.

41. He  submitted  that  overall  the  Judge's  determination  is  properly
    reasoned  and  was  engaged  with  the  evidence.  In  making   adverse
    credibility  findings  against  the  appellant,  he  had  in  mind  the
    appellant's sur place activities.

42. Once  the  Judge  rejected  the  appellant's  credibility,  the  issues
    relating to risk on return were irrelevant. Moreover,  with  regard  to
    the Article 3 claim, the Judge examined the  arguments  in  support  of
    those but found no substance in them. The threshold for  Article  3  is
    very high.

    Assessment

43. I find that the Judge committed errors of law in rejecting Dr  Martin's
    evidence. Dr Martin had made it clear in his report that he  was  aware
    of the appellant's account. The extent and nature of the  scarring  was
    in his opinion  consistent  with  the  claims  made  by  the  appellant
    including the claim  of  having  been  tortured  in  detention  on  one
    occasion and having been beaten for the whole day. The Judge's  reasons
    at [56-59] are, as submitted, based on inferences which  he  drew  with
    regard to what he would have expected the  appellant's  upper  body  to
    have revealed, namely that it would have almost entirely  been  covered
    with scars.

44. However, there was unwarranted speculation in that respect. There were,
    as submitted by Ms  Walker,  a  number  of  factors  which  might  have
    accounted for their absence after a lengthy period. That  included  the
    nature of the implements used as well as whether the skin was broken.

45. In the circumstances  he  ought  to  have  afforded  the  appellant  an
    opportunity to adduce  evidence  or  make  submissions  addressing  his
    concerns. This did not happen in the circumstances as these matters had
    not been raised during the course of the hearing.

46. Further, I find for the reasons already referred to, that the  approach
    to and the consideration of, Dr  Dhumad's  reports,  contained  various
    errors. The finding in particular  that  the  appellant  did  not  seek
    medical help for symptoms of PTSD shortly after his arrival in  the  UK
    showed that he was not suffering from PTSD is to assume that the  onset
    of the disorder coincided with the time when he sought treatment.

47. It was noted in Dr Dhumad's report however that the  appellant  claimed
    that he was mentally affected  by  the  torture  he  suffered.  He  had
    initially felt safe upon arrival in the UK  but  as  a  result  of  his
    mental state, he had been unable to continue  with  his  studies.  Some
    time thereafter, which was in late 2011, he sought  treatment.  It  did
    not follow therefore that the fact he had not sought treatment  shortly
    after arrival meant he was not suffering from the disorder at the time.
    Dr Dhumad concluded that despite this, the appellant was suffering from
    PTSD and a severe depressive episode.

48. Moreover, the Judge erred in  failing  to  attach  any  weight  to  the
    documentary evidence submitted simply because they  emanated  from  Sri
    Lanka. The documents upon which he  relied  had  been  verified  by  an
    attorney in Sri Lanka. One  of  those  documents  was  the  appellant's
    mother's complaint to the Human Rights Commission in Sri Lanka.

49. The letter was in the possession of the respondent. No attempt had been
    made to  verify  its  authenticity  and  reliability.  These  documents
    emanated from official sources.

50. The documents were retrieved by  a  lawyer  whose  integrity  had  been
    confirmed by the Upper Tribunal in the country guidance  case.  I  have
    also had regard to the Court of Appeal's decision in GJ (Sri  Lanka)  v
    SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1011.  In  the  event  potentially  significant
    evidence  relevant  to  the  credibility  of  the  appellant  had  been
    precluded without good reason.

51. I have also had regard to the  failure  by  the  Judge  to  assess  the
    potential risk that the appellant faced on  return  to  Sri  Lanka.  In
    particular, he failed to take into account evidence relating to his pro-
    Tamil activities in the UK. There were various  photographs  evidencing
    this as well as the appellant's own evidence.

52. In  that  respect,  Dr  Dhumad  had  concluded  that  the  exposure  to
    participation in such activities was  therapeutic  for  the  appellant.
    That is because the appellant would suffer  from  extreme  anxiety  and
    distress when exposed to the source of his fear outside the therapeutic
    setting. Although the Judge stated that he  could  not  understand  the
    logic behind that conclusion, it is consistent with  his  findings  and
    diagnosis of the appellant as suffering from PTSD.

53. In the circumstances, I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of material errors on a point  of  law.  I
    therefore set it aside. It is clear that there will have to be  a  full
    re-hearing. None of  the  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal are preserved. All the live issues identified from the refusal
    decision are in play.

54. Ms Walker submitted that this was an appropriate case to be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal. Mr Kandola did not make any submissions to the
    contrary.

55. I  have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  practice  statement
    regarding the remittal of appeals to the First-tier Tribunal. In giving
    effect to the approach, I am satisfied that the extent of judicial fact
    finding which is necessary in order for the decision to be re-made will
    be extensive. There will be a  complete  re-hearing  with  no  findings
    preserved. I have also had  regard  to  the  overriding  objective  and
    conclude that it would be just and fair to remit the case.

56. In the circumstances, I direct that the appeal be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal (Taylor House) for a fresh decision to be made.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of material
    errors of law and the decision is set aside. The appeal is remitted  to
    Taylor House for the making of a fresh decision

    Anonymity direction continued.






    Signed   Date 16 October 2015
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
