
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11111/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22 April 2014                                |On 30 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                            Mosunmola Bisi Yakubu
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Siddique, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mosunmola Bisi Yakubu, was born on 8 November  1980  and
    is a female citizen of Nigeria.  I have  remade  the  decision  in  the
    Upper Tribunal after Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor found an error of  law
    in the First-tier Tribunal determination.  Judge Taylor's decision  and
    directions were as follows:

 2. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Mensah
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 9th January 2013.



Background

 3. The Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Nigeria  who  was  accepted  by  the
    Respondent, in a letter dated 17th February  2011,  to  be  a  historic
    victim of trafficking from Nigeria to the UK.

 4. The judge recorded that the Border Agency now raised the issue  of  the
    failure of the Appellant to claim asylum within  six  years  after  her
    escape from her traffickers, and inconsistent evidence relating to  her
    claim to be an orphan  in  her  biodata  form,  to  resile  from  their
    previous position.  The judge said that she agreed that  those  matters
    undermined the Appellant's  credibility  and  she  concluded  that  the
    Appellant had failed to show that it was reasonably likely that she had
    told the truth about how she came to come here.

 5. The Appellant arrived in the UK in February 2006 and claimed asylum  on
    30th October 2012. She has a child, born on 29th May 2008, who  suffers
    from sickle cell anaemia which requires him to take a cocktail of drugs
    and to have a blood transfusion every four weeks.

 6. The judge relied on a COI document confirming  that  drugs  in  Nigeria
    were available but  expensive  with  "an  alarming  lack  of  essential
    medicines in the private sector." The report said that public hospitals
    will treat those who cannot pay  but  will  expect  payment  to  follow
    thereafter, and that there are some clinics  providing  free  drugs  to
    those who suffer from sickle cell and some equipment in a few States in
    Nigeria.  Nigeria ranks first as the sickle cell endemic country in the
    world with an average of 150,000 infants born every  year  with  sickle
    cell, and 8% infant mortality attributable to sickle cell death.

 7. The judge said that it was clear that treatment for the Appellant's son
    was available in Nigeria.  The issue was whether the Appellant and  her
    son could access the treatment but because she had failed to  establish
    that she was an orphan without family or support in Nigeria  she  could
    not establish that she would be unable to do so and the appeal on  that
    basis had to fail.

The Grounds of Application

 8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on three grounds.

 9. Firstly, at the Case Management Review hearing, the Appellant  made  it
    clear that reliance would be placed on a separate ground i.e. that  the
    decision was otherwise not in accordance  with  the  law  in  that  the
    Secretary of State had failed to comply with her duty under Section  55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009.   There  was  no
    reference to the arguments in the decision and the failure to determine
    the ground amounts to an error of law.

10. Secondly, the judge erred in respect of a failure to refer to the  best
    interests of the child, who  was born in the UK and had never  had  any
    treatment in Nigeria, in relation  to  the  Article  8  decision.   The
    medical evidence indicated that he required  specially  prepared  blood
    for transfusion every four weeks together with iron  chelation  therapy
    and there was no evidence that the treatment was available,  accessible
    or affordable.  The  COI  report  ignored  the  evidence  that  100,000
    children a year die from sickle cell disease in Nigeria.

11. Thirdly  the  judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  her
    conclusion that the Appellant was not a victim of trafficking.  It  was
    apparent from the fact that the competent authority decision  was  made
    in February 2011 that they  were  aware  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    claimed asylum after her escape but this did not cause  them  to  doubt
    the credibility of her claimed history.  Moreover the judge had  failed
    to take into account  the  Appellant's  explanation  for  the  supposed
    inconsistency in the biodata form in reaching her decision.

12. Finally, there was a lack of anxious  scrutiny  in  this  determination
    since the judge said that she dismissed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds but then said that she allowed it under Articles 2, 3 and 8.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Vaudin  d'Imecourt  on  13th
    February 2011 for the reasons stated in the grounds.

14. On 3rd April 2013 the Respondent served a Reply, in  essence  defending
    the determination and stating that the judge reached a conclusion  open
    to her on the evidence.

Submissions

15. Mr Siddique relied on his detailed grounds.

16. Mr Wardle stated that, with respect to ground  1,  the  Respondent  had
    properly considered the best interests of  the  child  in  the  refusal
    letter but otherwise simply relied on the Reply.

Findings

17. The judge did not engage with the argument that the decision was not in
    accordance with the law, which she ought  to  have  done,  but  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter dated 23rd November 2012 full  consideration
    was given to the Appellant's Article 8 claim and that of her  son.   At
    paragraph 58  of  the  letter  the  Respondent  states  in  terms  that
    consideration of the best interests of the child had  been  taken  into
    account when assessing leave under Article 8. The duty on the Secretary
    of State is to consider the child's best interests, which she says  she
    has done, and not to necessarily reach a decision  in  conformity  with
    what the  Appellant  claims  those  best  interests  to  be.  There  is
    therefore no proper basis for concluding that the decision is unlawful.

18. However the remaining  grounds  are  plainly  made  out.   The  judge's
    consideration of the complex issues in this case was not adequate,  and
    there was no consideration at all in the determination of  Section  55.
    Furthermore the brief credibility findings were reached without  regard
    to all of the relevant evidence.

19. The decision is set aside and the following directions are made.

20. This matter will be set down before a panel of  Upper  Tribunal  Judges
    after six weeks with a Yoruba interpreter with a time estimate of three
    hours.  The sole issue for determination  is  whether  the  Appellant's
    removal would be a breach of Articles 3 or 8 of the ECHR.

21. The panel will need to make  findings  of  fact  both  in  relation  to
    whether the Appellant is a historic victim of  trafficking  as  claimed
    and what support, if any, would  be  available  to  her  on  return  to
    Nigeria.

22. Both parties are to provide all evidence upon which they seek  to  rely
    seven days before the hearing.  The Appellant is also  to  provide  the
    best evidence available in relation to the  treatment  of  sickle  cell
    disease in Nigeria.

23. The burden of proof in the appeal is on the appellant and the  standard
    of proof is whether the appellant faces a real risk of Article  3  ECHR
    ill-treatment on return to Nigeria.  In the Article 8 ECHR appeal,  the
    standard of proof is the  balance  of  probabilities.   At  the  appeal
    hearing at Bradford on 22 April 2014 I heard brief  evidence  from  the
    appellant who spoke in Yoruba with the assistance  of  an  interpreter.
    She adopted her written  evidence  as  her  evidence-in-chief  and  was
    briefly  cross-examined  by  Ms  Pettersen.   After  hearing  the  oral
    submissions of the representatives  of  both  parties,  I  reserved  my
    determination.

Trafficking Decision

24. As Judge Taylor indicated in her error of  law  decision  [20],  it  is
    important for the Tribunal  to  make  a  finding  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's claim to have  been  an  historic  victim  of  trafficking.
    Competent authority decided  the  appellant  had  historically  been  a
    victim of  trafficking  from  Nigeria  to  the  United  Kingdom.   That
    decision was, in effect, reversed in a refusal letter which accompanied
    the decision rejecting the appellant's claim for asylum  and  directing
    her removal under paragraphs 8-10 of Schedule 2 of the Immigration  Act
    1971.  The later asylum decision (dated 23 November 2012) gave  reasons
    for the reversal of the decision in respect of trafficking at [29],  it
    was noted that,

         On both occasions that you submitted your FLR applications, despite
         being represented by the Immigration Advisory Service you raised no
         fear of return to Nigeria on the basis of a fear of Mrs Adjayi [the
         alleged trafficker].  Taking this into account together  with  your
         failure to claim asylum at  the  earliest  opportunity  it  is  not
         considered appropriate to give you the  benefit  of  the  doubt  on
         these issues raised at paragraphs 16 to 20.

25. Paragraphs 16-20 of the refusal letter  included  an  analysis  of  the
    account which the appellant had given of past events in Nigeria and her
    journey to the United Kingdom.   The  respondent  concluded  [20]  that
    "whilst this element  of  your  claim  [to  have  been  trafficked]  is
    internally  consistent,  it  remains  unsubstantiated  and  cannot   be
    corroborated externally."  I find that it was open to the respondent to
    reverse her decision [or rather that of  the  competent  authority]  in
    respect  of  the  appellant's  trafficking  claim.   By  the  time  the
    Secretary of State came to consider the appellant's asylum  claim,  new
    features of the case had arisen (the appellant's failure to mention her
    alleged trafficker in her  FLR  applications  and  also  her  delay  in
    claiming asylum) which had not been present at the time of the original
    trafficking decision in 2011.  In light of the change of circumstances,
    the new decision on trafficking was both possible and appropriate.

26. Even if I am wrong in that regard, and the appellant was trafficked  as
    she claimed, I accept Mrs Pettersen's submission that, upon  return  to
    Nigeria, there was no reasonable likelihood that her alleged trafficker
    would know that she has returned to the country and so  will  therefore
    not be in a position to threaten or harm her.

Article 3 ECHR

27. The appellant's child (born 29  May  2008)  suffers  from  sickle  cell
    anaemia.  As Judge Taylor noted in her error of law decision [4] it  is
    necessary for the child to "take a cocktail of drugs and to have  blood
    transfusions every four weeks."  I refer also to paragraphs 5 and 6  of
    Judge Taylor's error of law decision (see above).  In  considering  the
    Article 3 appeal, I am aware of the provisions of  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  which  provides  that  a
    decision-maker must consider the best interests of a child resident  in
    the United Kingdom as a primary consideration.  I have had regard  also
    to the relevant jurisprudence including the opinions of  the  House  of
    Lords in N [2005] UKHL 31.

28. I have no doubt at all that the appellant's child is very sick.  At the
    present time, his sickle cell anaemia is controlled by drugs and  blood
    transfusions administered here  in  the  United  Kingdom.   As  regards
    Article 3 ECHR, the difficulty for the appellant and her child is  that
    the treatment which is administered to the child in the United  Kingdom
    is also available, albeit at a cost, in Nigeria.   It  cannot  be  said
    that there is a complete or virtual denial of appropriate treatment  in
    the country of origin such that  the  appellant's  child  would  suffer
    inhuman or degrading treatment upon return.   Consequently,  I  do  not
    find that the Article 3 grounds are made out in the present case.

Article 8 ECHR

29. Both parties agreed that the appeal on Article 8 grounds turns  on  the
    question of proportionality.  The appellant asserts  that  her  child's
    moral and physical integrity would be disproportionately compromised as
    a consequence of returning to Nigeria.  I  acknowledge  that  different
    considerations may arise from those which  were  of  relevance  in  the
    Article 3 ECHR assessment.  I  have  considered  the  medical  evidence
    relating to the child carefully and I was assisted by the detailed oral
    submissions made by Mr Siddique, for the appellant.

30. Mr Siddique drew my attention to the medical evidence  which  indicates
    that the child's risk of suffering a stroke is increased by the  sickle
    cell  condition  and  that   blood   transfusions   may   be   required
    indefinitely.  Background evidence relating to Nigeria  indicates  that
    opiates are generally not available to outpatients and,  if  the  child
    cannot  access  monthly  blood  transfusions,  then  stroke  risk  will
    increase as a direct result.  There is also evidence to show that,  not
    having been born in  Nigeria  but  having  inherited  the  sickle  cell
    condition, the child will be at greater risk than  a  child  born  with
    same condition in Nigeria.  The medical evidence  indicates  that,  the
    greater the risk of complications including  stroke,  the  greater  the
    need for the child to access on a regular basis what may  prove  to  be
    very  expensive  medical  treatment.   The  background  evidence   also
    indicates that  blood  transfusions  are  not  routinely  screened  for
    malaria infection.  The child does not at the present time have malaria
    but may contract it as a result of the blood transfusions which he will
    undoubtedly need for the foreseeable  future  and  on  a  very  regular
    basis.  Mr Siddique made the  compelling  submission  that  these  were
    factors which were not related to  the  availability  of  treatment  in
    Nigeria or, indeed, the ability of the appellant or his mother  to  pay
    for such treatment.  They were, however,  factors  which,  whilst  they
    might not lead to serious illness or  death,  seriously  comprised  the
    appellant's moral and physical integrity in ways which would not  occur
    should he remain living in the United Kingdom.  The point  made  by  Mr
    Siddique  was  that  the  same  treatment  (drug  therapy   and   blood
    transfusions) which the appellant receives in the United  Kingdom  may,
    for the reasons indicated above, actually increase the dangers posed by
    the appellant's condition when delivered to him in Nigeria.

31. I find that these are  powerful  factors  weighing  in  the  Article  8
    analysis in favour of the appellant and her child.  The increased risks
    caused to the appellant upon returning to Nigeria  may  not  cross  the
    Article 3 ECHR threshold but they do weigh heavily  in  her  favour  as
    regards proportionality.  There is nothing the evidence  to  show  that
    alternative treatments  might  be  available  in  Nigeria  which  would
    diminish or remove the risk.  Problems would be caused not by  inferior
    treatment by the same treatment  delivered  to  the  appellant  in  the
    United Kingdom but which will affect  him  differently  on  account  of
    local conditions.

32. It is important that I should identify the  public  interest  concerned
    with the removal of the appellant and her child.  The appellant  claims
    to have been trafficked and has sought to  claim  asylum,  both  claims
    have failed.  The child cannot  however,  be  classified  as  a  health
    tourist since he was born more  than  two  years  after  the  appellant
    arrived in the United Kingdom and there was no evidence  to  show  that
    she was aware that he would be born with a serious medical condition .

33. The child's best interests are served by his remaining in  the  custody
    and under the care  of  his  mother.   Those  best  interests  must  be
    considered as part of the Article 8  proportionality  assessment.   The
    child's best interests are also to be addressed by  his  continuing  to
    receive appropriate treatment for his  medical  condition  but  I  have
    found that the same treatment which  he  is  receiving  in  the  United
    Kingdom, if administered in Nigeria, will cause him harm.  It  is  that
    unusual circumstance which I find tips the proportionality  balance  in
    favour of the appellant and her child.  In the normal course of events,
    his best interests would be addressed by remaining in  the  custody  of
    his mother and  returning  to  the  country  of  his  own  nationality.
    However, that  return,  for  the  reasons  I  have  given  above,  will
    compromise his moral and physical integrity disproportionately.   Since
    the child should not be separated from his  mother,  I  have  concluded
    that both the child and his mother should be granted a period of  leave
    to remain under Article 8 ECHR.



DECISION

34. This appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

35. This appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

36. The appellant is not entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.




Signed                              Date 20 June 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
