

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11446/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23 March 2016                       |On 12 April 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES

                                   Between

                                    [V A]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:            Mr S Ahmed (Amirthan and Suresh Solicitors)
For the Respondent:         Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of [VA], a citizen of Sri  Lanka  born  [  ]  1982,
      against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal of 21  September  2015
      to dismiss his appeal against the decision of the  Respondent  to  set
      removal directions against him under section 10 of the Immigration and
      Asylum Act 1999.


   2. He was granted leave to enter as a student on 3 February 2008 until 31
      August 2009, his leave being extended under Tier 4 until  29  February
      2012, a further extension application  being  refused  on  31  October
      2012. His asylum claim was based on the following account. During that
      stay in the United Kingdom he had attended rallies in April  2009  (to
      protest against the battle in Muliwaikal) and June  2012,  the  latter
      during the visit of the Sri Lankan President.


   3. He returned to Sri Lanka on  26  October  2012.  In  January  2013  he
      returned  to  Sri  Lanka  and  was  stopped  by  the  police   shortly
      thereafter; he was asked for his  identity  card  but  was  unable  to
      produce it, having lost it in 2008, and was then arrested and  briefly
      detained, being released the following evening.


   4. On 28 March 2013 he was arrested from his home and taken to China  Bay
      army camp, because they had been aware of his attendance at the latter
      demonstration, a photograph of his involvement there  having  come  to
      their attention; he was asked about his knowledge of  LTTE  supporters
      and members, his hands were tied behind his back,  chilli  powder  was
      sprayed in his eyes, his hands and back were beaten  by  a  baton  and
      with a thick wire, and his hand  cut  with  a  blade,  these  sessions
      lasting some 15-20 minutes a day for five days; he was released  on  2
      April 2013 subject to a requirement to report back to them on request,
      and on the third occasion he was again  detained,  accused  of  having
      links with the UK Tamil  organisation,  and  asked  again  to  provide
      details of LTTE supporters; he was beaten on his back and on the soles
      of his feet twice daily, hung upside down  and  had  his  head  placed
      inside a water-filled drum. He was released by the authorities  on  28
      May 2013 following the payment of a bribe  by  his  family  and  told,
      unofficially, never to return.


   5. The report set out  a  history  generally  consistent  with  that  put
      forward in the asylum claim, and went on to state that in  March  2013
      he detained for five days, beaten and kicked by men wearing boots, and
      sustained wounds; in  May  2013  he  was  beaten  and  kicked,  thrice
      immersed in water upside down, suffocated, tied to a bench and  beaten
      on his feet, and over the wounds previously suffered; "It appears that
      this second arrest caused the wounds to become more exaggerated or  an
      alternative could be he was burnt by  some  heated  material  but  the
      patient stated that the beating made weak and frail and  even  he  was
      unconscious. In any case there is no way I would or any  other  person
      could differentiate the scars as all appear the same at present."


   6. There were 10 scars that were diagnostic of burn wounds, "made with  a
      thin heated metal wire as stated by the  patient  ...  he  had  severe
      unbearable pain when they were inflicted ...  over  a  year  old."  He
      considered whether the scars were self-inflicted, concluding that they
      were not, as (some at least) were not reachable by him, and they  were
      not attributable  from  rituals  or  from  any  medical  condition  or
      surgical procedure, and nor did they emanate from accidents, wounds or
      childhood injuries, but there was nothing in his  history  to  suggest
      this was the case: "I consider self-infliction as only a  very  remote
      possibility  including  by  proxy."  He  had  not   investigated   the
      possibility of "mind scars" on the patient although given his asserted
      history a full psychiatric  assessment  might  be  needed  as  he  was
      confused and was slow to recollect events.


   7. The First-tier Tribunal found  that  his  account  was  not  credible,
      having noted the scars and Professor Lingam's report. Noting that  the
      report stated that the clinical  features  were  diagnostic  of  their
      claimed origin, it went on to observe that there were concerns  as  to
      its overall quality, given that it showed carelessness in stating that
      the scars were located in places where they could not reasonably  have
      been reached by the Appellant, which was contrary to the  self-evident
      fact revealed by the photographs that they included scars to  his  arm
      above the wrist and  on  the  calves  amongst  other  less  accessible
      injuries, and included no statement (unlike other reports seen by  the
      First-tier Tribunal) as to whether self infliction by proxy was likely
      having regard to the severity of  the  wounds  and  the  ensuing  pain
      albeit that he had clearly thought that there was no reason  to  think
      the injuries were caused  deliberately  to  mislead.  It  was  thought
      astonishing that the author would say that "I  have  not  investigated
      the mental health issues" and then two sentences later stated "he  may
      be having PTSD as well". Overall the First-tier Tribunal considered it
      surprising that Professor Lingam was apparently widely accepted as  an
      expert of renown.


   8. Considering his witness  statement  evidence  in  the  light  of  that
      report, the First-tier Tribunal noted that he had never  himself  said
      he had been burned, and that he had referred to being attacked with  a
      thick wire rather than a thin one as Professor  Lingam  had  recorded.
      His account of a return to Sri Lanka was  not  corroborated  with  any
      travel documentation, which was surprising given that it had not  been
      clandestine: he was represented and it  could  be  presumed  that  any
      carrier would have been forthcoming with travel  records  on  request.
      His statement that his travel arrangements had been handled by a third
      party was not backed up by any evidence from any such helper.  He  had
      provided   no   corroborative   evidence   of   his   attendance    at
      demonstrations. He had not claimed asylum on his return to the  United
      Kingdom but only some four months later.  He  had  previously  had  an
      appeal dismissed in relation to his student extension application on 4
      October 2012  and  had  given  varying  accounts  of  his  immigration
      history. All this raised doubts as to his credibility given he was  an
      intelligent and educated man who had come to this country to study. In
      these circumstances  the  medical  evidence  did  not  outweigh  these
      negative aspects of the case given the cursory treatment of causation.
      It was much more likely that the great  majority  of  the  scars  were
      inflicted by proxy as was shown possible by KV Sri Lanka.


   9. Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  14
      October 2015 on the basis of one of the grounds pleaded, in  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal at one point stated that Dr Lingam had made only a
      "partial diagnosis", and because there was a lack of contradictions in
      the account and undue attention may have been  given  to  whether  the
      scars could have been inflicted by a third party.


  10. A Rule 23 response  from  the  Secretary  of  State  argued  that  the
      findings of the First-tier Tribunal were within the  legitimate  range
      of  responses  to  the  evidence  and  were  in  no  way  perverse  or
      irrational. Before me Mr Ahmed developed his grounds  in  some  detail
      taking me to the relevant passages in the  expert  report;  Mr  Tarlow
      relied on the Home  Office  Rule  23  response,  contending  that  the
      decision was adequate and that the instant appeal  was  essentially  a
      challenge to the findings of fact that identified no relevant error of
      law.


  Findings and reasons


  11. This is a very finely balanced appeal that raises a single issue  (the
      majority of the grounds of appeal having been refused permission): the
      adequacy of the treatment of the medical report. In SA [2006] EWCA Civ
      1302 at [29] Potter LJ clarified that one role for a medical report is
      "to corroborate and/or lend weight to the account of the asylum seeker
      by a clear statement as to the consistency of old scars found with the
      history given", and that in general reports that follow  the  approach
      of the Istanbul Protocol will be especially impressive.  It  is  clear
      that the report in this case did apply those standards,  as  shown  by
      the reasoning therein in relation to the  choice  of  "diagnostic"  as
      best expressing the author's opinion  as  to  the  likelihood  of  the
      claimed attribution of a scar matching its presentation: that level of
      certitude is appropriate where "this appearance could  not  have  been
      caused in anyway other than that described."


  12. On balance it seems to me that the First-tier Tribunal  was  wrong  to
      discount the report to the extent it did, and  that  in  doing  so  it
      committed material errors  of  law  by  failing  to  take  account  of
      relevant considerations.


  13. Firstly, a mistake was  made  as  to  Mr  Lingam's  treatment  of  the
      possibility that the Appellant suffered  from  Post  Traumatic  Stress
      Disorder. On a close reading it is apparent that the  expert  did  not
      purport to express a concluded view on that issue based on a transient
      investigation; rather, he warned the reader that it might be  expected
      that a person with the Appellant's presentation might be  expected  to
      suffer from that disorder, and that further assessment was appropriate
      in order for his mental health to be properly evaluated.  That  was  a
      perfectly reasonable and measured stance to take.


  14. Furthermore, the First-tier Tribunal also failed  to  take  account  a
      material consideration, which is that whereas it might have been right
      to observe that there was an  inconsistency  between  the  Appellant's
      brief evidence at interview as to the nature of the ill  treatment  he
      had suffered and the account that he had given to Mr Lingam, only  the
      latter of which expressly mentioned the possibility of burns  as  part
      of his ill treatment, that ignores the  fact  that  Mr  Lingam,  as  a
      trusted rapporteur with clear expertise, was better placed to  take  a
      detailed history of the Appellant's full history.


  15. It is true that the  expert  did  not  in  terms  state  that  he  had
      considered the question of whether the pain that might ensue from  the
      Appellant's injuries might have been endured during its imposition  by
      proxy. However I note that in KV at [242] it is stated that the  Panel
      "was informed that  as  a  matter  of  course,  Professor  Lingam  who
      provides a number of reports on Tamils asylum seekers considers  [SIBP
      as a possible cause] without being specifically instructed to do  so";
      and this is not a case where Mr  Lingam  "decided  to  eliminate  some
      possible causes simply because  they  were  not  consistent  with  the
      appellant's narrative" [341], as he also referred to  the  Appellant's
      physical  presentation,  indicating  that  he  had  learned  from  the
      critique of his work in KV.


  16. I accordingly find that the decision must be set aside. This is not an
      appeal where there  are  meaningful  findings  upon  which  the  Upper
      Tribunal can build, and thus it is allowed to the extent  that  it  is
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh. This is not to
      say that  all  the  criticisms  of  the  Appellant's  credibility  are
      unsustainable: however they need to be considered in the context of  a
      lawful approach to the medical evidence. Doubtless any future decision
      maker will wish to give careful attention to what would seem the  most
      disconcerting omission from the Appellant's case so far, which is  the
      absence of corroborative evidence regarding the fact of his return  to
      Sri Lanka, a matter that would appear easily capable  of  verification
      for the reasons already stated below.


          Decision:

Remitted to First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.


       [pic]
Signed:                                            Date: 23 March 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes


