

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/11308/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Sent           |
|On 24 July 2013                               |On 12 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                     SMM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Reynold, instructed by South West Law
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in Somalia and most  recently  lived  in  Yemen.
    She travelled from Yemen to France, where she remained for  some  time,
    and from France to United Kingdom.  Soon after arrival here she claimed
    asylum.

 2. She said that she was of Somali nationality (only) and that she  had  a
    fear of persecution in Somalia as a member of the Reer Hamar clan;  she
    said she would also have difficulties if returned to Yemen  because  of
    familial abuse.   The Secretary of State did not accept  that  she  was
    from the Reer Hamar clan, but did accept that she could not be returned
    to Somalia without a breach of Article 3.  But the Secretary  of  State
    concluded that the appellant qualified for Yemeni nationality, and that
    even if she did not have it she had the right to apply  for  it.    Her
    account of her circumstances in Yemen was not accepted, and  she  could
    be returned there.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary
    of State's refusal of her claim.  The appeal came before Judge Davidge.
     She heard oral evidence from the appellant,  who  was  represented  by
    counsel.  The judge did not regard the appellant  as  credible  in  her
    account of her history and circumstances: the judge's conclusion was "I
    reject the appellant's  account  in  its  entirety".   The  judge  also
    declared herself satisfied to the balance  of  probabilities  that  the
    appellant is a national of Yemen.  As the appellant had not established
    that she was at any real risk  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment  from
    anyone if returned to Yemen, her appeal was dismissed.

 4. The grounds of appeal to this Tribunal were that, in the light  of  the
    material before her in relation to Yemeni nationality law, it  was  not
    open to the judge to find that the appellant was a national  of  Yemen;
    and that her conclusions on credibility were also not  rationally  open
    to  her:  in  particular,  she  was  not  entitled  to  find  that  the
    appellant's motive in marrying was to resolve her immigration status.

 5. So far as concerns the issue of the appellant's nationality, there is a
    risk of misunderstanding the task that the judge  performed.   She  did
    not attempt to constitute herself an expert on Yemeni nationality  law,
    nor did she attempt to discover whether  at  any  particular  time  the
    appellant met the  requirements  of  Yemeni  nationality  law.   It  is
    difficult in any event to see how she could have done  so,  bearing  in
    mind that that would have required her to accept the  appellant's  word
    about what documents she had or did not have at the relevant time,  and
    it is clear that the judge was not prepared to accept  the  appellant's
    word.  Thus, the judge did not attempt to decide for herself what would
    have  been  the  result  of  an  application  for  nationality  by  the
    appellant.   What  she  did  was  to  decide   that,   whatever   those
    requirements were, the appellant would have met them.  This is what she
    said:

         "25.  I noted that this point was not set out in  the  grounds  of
             appeal and  was  made  for  the  first  time  in  the  skeleton
             argument.  The only  discussion  arose  on  the  basis  of  her
             entitlement  through  marriage,  however  as  the  extract   of
             relevant law shows it is  not  the  only  method  of  acquiring
             nationality.  The Appellant had an aunt who  was  a  long  term
             resident of Yemen and her nationality is not described, nor  is
             there any evidence before me as to the position in  respect  of
             the appellant's grandparents.  Historically many Yemenis  moved
             from  the  Yemen  to  Somalia  and  settled,  marrying   Somali
             citizens.  Many have returned to the  Yemen  when  life  became
             difficult in Somalia.  The border is notoriously porous in both
             directions.  It is of course for an  Appellant  and  her  legal
             representatives to decide what evidence to call  to  support  a
             claim, it is not for the fact finding judge to embark on a  far
             ranging enquiry, but where, as here, it is made for  the  first
             time at a hearing, and the evidence is scant, the burden is not
             reduced, and is not satisfied by submitting partial evidence.


        26. I do not accept that the Appellant is not a Yemeni because  she
           could not have qualified to be one on the basis of her  marriage
           because of the various obstacles  to  obtaining  citizenship  by
           that route.  On the contrary on the factual chronology she would
           have  been  entitled  to  citizenship,   albeit   that   various
           administrative hoops would have to have been negotiated.   I  do
           not believe her when she says she never went through those hoops
           because it is clear from her account that she married  with  the
           intention of resolving her  immigration  status,  i.e.  for  her
           husband's passport.  She said  she  married  to  get  protection
           because of the difficulties with being an illegal  Somali  woman
           in Yemen.  She did not love  her  husband  but  saw  him  as  an
           opportunity to obtain a benefit.  In that context I find it very
           likely that she would have made sure  that  the  relevant  paper
           work  was  in  place  before  and  after  marriage   to   obtain
           citizenship.  Her evidence that she  then  did  not  pursue  the
           matter is  contrary.   The  Appellant  has  indicated  that  her
           husband wanted to marry her.  He is a Yemeni.  There is a  route
           for the foreign wives of Yemeni citizens to obtain  citizenship.
           The Appellant has borne him a son and been a dutiful  wife.   On
           the evidence put forward I find it very  likely  that  he  would
           have taken action to remedy any irregularity  in  her  position,
           particularly as she bore him a son.  The submission  that  there
           is no evidence of  permission  having  been  obtained  does  not
           answer the point.


        27. Nor did  I  find  her  evidence  that  the  religious  ceremony
           undertaken by a sheikh in the home meant that somehow theirs was
           not a properly constituted  marriage,  but  suffered  from  some
           irregularity so as to make it an informal  marriage  that  would
           not be recognised.  Sharia law was observed.   The  requirements
           of the state in terms of an application for nationality based on
           a four year marriage had nothing to do with the conduct  of  the
           marriage in the home or its validity".

 6. It seems to us that those conclusions could be attacked only by showing
    either that, on the evidence that the judge  accepted,  the  appellant,
    despite her wishes, could not have become a national of Yemen; or  that
    the judge's conclusions about the appellant's intentions, and therefore
    about what she in all probability did, were not open to the judge.  The
    former line of argument is obviously  hopeless  in  the  present  case.
    There is no expert evidence on the  circumstances  in  which  a  person
    married to a Yemeni national cannot obtain Yemeni nationality, and  the
    judge did not accept the appellant's evidence  as  credible.   We  turn
    therefore to whether the judge was entitled to make the assessment  she
    did about the appellant's credibility.  The relevant paragraphs of  the
    determination are as follows:

                  "29.  The  Appellant's  credibility  is  weakened  by  her
           failure to claim asylum until arriving in the UK, despite  ample
           opportunity to do so. Her explanation that she  did  not  do  so
           because it did not occur to her is undermined by the  fact  that
           previously she has said it was because  she  preferred  to  come
           here rather than claim in  France  because  she  did  not  speak
           French and preferred to learn English. I find that  she  has  no
           adequate explanation for failing to claim  in  France  and  that
           this undermines her credibility.

                    30. I considered the issue of  why  the  Appellant  left
           Yemen in the first place. In addition to the  matters  mentioned
           above there were a number of places where the Appellant's  claim
           lacked the ring of truth.

               i)            The Appellant was clear in her  evidence  that
                  she did not come to the UK intending to obtain asylum and
                  then bring her husband and child. She said that that made
                  no sense because she had no connection with her  husband.
                  He had divorced her. That is to ignore the fact that even
                  on her own account she was still married  and  very  much
                  connected with her husband when she left  the  Yemen  and
                  arrived here. She came with his blessing.

              ii)  The Appellant talks of not  being  allowed  out  by  her
                  parents in law. Yet when she is asked how she managed  to
                  get back in contact with her previous employers she  says
                  that she did so because she was still in contact with the
                  woman to whom she had given her job  as  their  domestic,
                  and  had  used   that   contact   to   re-establish   her
                  relationship with them.

             iii)  Her account that her in-laws  were  such  wicked  people
                  that  they  hid  her  aunt's  death  from  her  is   also
                  inconsistent with her  statement  that  they  did  it  to
                  prevent her from bearing too much sorrow because she  had
                  already lost her parents. However  her  claimed  lack  of
                  knowledge does not ring true because  in  any  event  her
                  husband could have told her.

              iv)  The Appellant said that she had left good employment  to
                  get married so as to  secure  her  status  in  the  Yemen
                  because her employers were  emigrating  to  America,  yet
                  years later they were still  there,  and  still  felt  so
                  attached to her that they  facilitated  her  obtaining  a
                  false passport.

               v)  I also note that her claim that her in-laws  refused  to
                  take her with them when they moved because of the  danger
                  locally,  is  inconsistent   with   her   evidence   that
                  culturally, as the wife of their son, she was entitled to
                  her place within the family home, so that in refusing her
                  they in effect threw  her  out.   It  is  also  in  stark
                  contrast to her account that, up to that point, they  had
                  found her so useful that  they  exploited  her  to  their
                  advantage. No explanation for the change in  attitude  is
                  given. That they "threw" her out can only  be  consistent
                  with the end of the marriage. Her evidence to me was that
                  the marriage remained very much alive, with  her  husband
                  remaining in close contact with her,  and  supported  her
                  decision to come to the UK, even seeing  her  along  with
                  their son, on the day  she  left,  and  that  the  couple
                  remained in contact after she arrived here.

                   31. The Appellant has not provided a  full  and  detailed
           statement  in  support  of  her  claim.  She  makes  significant
           omissions from her statement not just  about  the  fact  of  the
           divorce, but also failing to mention that  her  in-laws  had  in
           fact returned to the home where she had been living,  and  there
           is nothing about the detailed history  of  the  family  and  her
           aunt. On her own account the Appellant suffered a  tragedy  when
           her parents died in Somalia. The family background  and  history
           is not set out.

                   32. An aunt travelled from Yemen to  come  and  get  her.
           She benefited from living with this aunt, who apparently  set  a
           good example of a woman managing to live alone in the Yemen,  as
           the Appellant does not admit to other family members there.  The
           Appellant went to the Yemen when  she  was  only  nine,  and  so
           plainly there was adequate support for her for a number of years
           before she went to work  herself.  The  Appellant  rose  to  the
           challenge of finding work. She  was  outgoing  and  independent,
           travelling, with no mention of a chaperone, between her work and
           her Aunt's. She formed a friendship with a man, in  the  context
           of work. She introduced him to her Aunt herself.  She  chose  to
           marry him. Her account reveals that it was  she  who  wanted  to
           come to the UK, and that she discussed it  with  him,  that  she
           said to him that with his parents living away it was her chance,
           and she persuaded him, and he gave the plan his blessing.

                   33. I find that the Appellant's portrayal of  herself  as
           being a down trodden  exploited  victim  subjected  to  domestic
           abuse does not bear scrutiny. I am satisfied that she came  here
           because she thought she would have a better  life  and  she  has
           shown a marked resourcefulness.

                    34. Her account  of  the  actual  divorce  is  that  her
           husband explained to her that he has managed to obtain  work  in
           Saudi. As she is here, and living so far from him, and been away
           for so long he thought he should take another wife.  Islamic law
           does of course allow him to do so without divorcing  her  first,
           but the real point is that the  tenor  of  the  evidence  is  of
           explanation and of seeking permission, not of divorce. The  only
           evidence of divorce is the Appellant's bare  assertion.  In  the
           context of her general lack of credibility I  find  that  I  can
           give it no credence. I am satisfied that she remains married and
           can expect the continuing support of her husband and in-laws  on
           return to the Yemen and that her claim to be at risk  from  them
           is not established even to the lower standard".

 7. Not a word of that passage is challenged in the grounds of appeal.   It
    follows that the appellant and  her  representatives  accept  that  she
    simply was not telling the truth, and that her portrayal of herself was
    a fiction.  That is not a sound basis for attacking what the judge said
    in other parts of the  determination.   The  grounds  assert  that  the
    appellant's own evidence was not sufficient to allow the judge to reach
    the conclusions that she did, because she said  that  she  married  her
    husband only for protection, that his family were against it,  that  he
    did not really protect her, and that lone women in Yemen were at  risk.
    It seems to us that to require the judge to rely on this  part  of  the
    evidence of an appellant whose general credibility was low and who  had
    been misrepresenting herself  as  "down  trodden  [and]  exploited"  is
    unrealistic.  The judge was faced with an appellant who  was  lying  to
    her.  She was entitled to reach what conclusions appeared to her to  be
    appropriate about what the position actually was.  Her conclusion  that
    the appellant had by some means obtained Yemeni nationality is, in  the
    context of this appeal, unassailable.

 8. The consequence is that because she has not shown that she is  at  risk
    in both of the countries of which she has been found to be a  national,
    her claim is not made out, and this appeal must be dismissed.

 9. We note, however, that the question of her Yemeni nationality  has  not
    been subject to the acid test of whether she is accepted by the  Yemeni
    authorities.  If she cannot be returned to Yemen, it would appear  that
    she cannot be removed from the  United  Kingdom  without  a  breach  of
    Article 3,  on  the  Secretary  of  State's  own  position  as  to  the
    consequences of her  removal  to  Somalia.   If  (despite  the  judge's
    findings) there is good reason to suppose that she is not a national of
    Yemen, it may be that her case will have to be looked at again, in  the
    light of the judge's conclusions about her general credibility,  which,
    as we have noted, were not challenged before us.  So  far  as  concerns
    this appeal, however, there is no proper ground  for  saying  that  the
    judge erred in law, or, therefore, for setting aside her determination.



10. For the foregoing reasons the appeal to this Tribunal is dismissed.










                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 16 August 2013
