

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/11938/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18th September, 2017                   |On 25th September 2017            |
|Given ex tempore                          |                                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY


                                   Between

                              DIRAJ DEVANANDEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nathan of Counsel instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 9th  March  1988.   He
    has a long immigration history.

2.   On 29th December 2010, he entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant with leave until  30th  May,  2012.   On  5th
    March 2013, he then applied for leave to remain under  the  family  and
    private life provisions on the basis of having  been  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom for ten years.  That application was refused on 29th May
    2013, with no right of appeal.  The appellant was then detained on  9th
    January 2014, and served with  IS  151  as  an  over-stayer.   On  12th
    January 2014, the appellant claimed asylum and his case was referred to
    and accepted for detained fast track at Harmondsworth.  On 5th February
    2014, the  appellant's  asylum  interview  was  conducted  and  on  6th
    February  the  appellant's  representatives  forwarded  a  copy  of  an
    appointment letter for the Appellant to attend Helen Bamber  Foundation
    on 3rd July 2014.  He was therefore given temporary release.   On  18th
    August 2015, the respondent refused  the  appellant's  application  for
    asylum.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  His appeal
    was heard at Manchester on 7th February 2015,  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ransley who dismissed his appeal.

3.   The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  asserted  that  the  judge
    had failed to consider the appellant's vulnerability, in the  light  of
    the psychiatric report of Dr Lawrence and the Helen Bamber  Foundation,
    that the appellant suffered from  PTSD.   This  affected  the  negative
    assessment   of   his   credibility   based   on   discrepancies    and
    inconsistencies, and the medical evidence should have  been  considered
    holistically in accordance with the  approach  set  out  in  Mibanga  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367.  It  is
    also alleged that the judge failed properly to consider the appellant's
    classification as vulnerable in accordance with the Joint  Presidential
    Note No 2 of 2010.

4.   I indicated to the representatives that having  read  the  papers  this
    morning I was of the preliminary view that the determination could  not
    stand.  I emphasised that I was prepared to be persuaded otherwise  and
    that it was only a preliminary view.  Mr Diwnycz indicated to  me  that
    he was content that the matter should be remitted for rehearing by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I  set  aside  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ransley and remit this for  hearing  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  A Tamil interpreter will be required and three hours  should
    be allowed for the hearing of the appeal.





No anonymity direction is made.



Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


