
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11777/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 September 2016                 |On 15 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MS DN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Lams of Counsel instructed by Oaks Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against a  determination
    of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Holmes  who,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 23 May 2016 dismissed the asylum appeal of the Ms DN but
    allowed her appeal under Articles 8 and 3 of the  ECHR  and  also  with
    regard to humanitarian protection.  Although the Secretary of State  is
    the appellant before me I will refer to her as the  respondent  as  she
    was the respondent in the First-tier  Tribunal  and  similarly  I  will
    refer to Ms DN, as the appellant.

2.   The appellant is a married woman who is a citizen of Albania,  born  on
    17 November 1990.  She came to Britain entering clandestinely in August
    2013, accompanied by her husband, having spent time with him in various
    countries beforehand as he sought asylum.  The marriage  broke  up  and
    she formed a relationship with another man and had his child.  That man
    abandoned her.  The  basis  of  her  claim  was  that  she  would  face
    persecution from her own family and that of her husband if she returned
    to Albania because she had had a child who was not  the  child  of  her
    husband.

3.   The judge made various findings and concluded that the appellant  would
    not require to go back to her family, that they would not persecute her
    and nor would her husband.  In paragraph 26, having given  his  reasons
    for that conclusion, he  stated  that  he  found  the  removal  of  the
    appellant to Albania would not cause the United Kingdom to be in breach
    of its obligations under the Refugee Convention.

4.   He then went on to consider the issues of humanitarian  protection  and
    the  issue  of  Article  3  protection.    He   considered   background
    information and quoted  from the determination in TD and AD  CG  [2016]
    UKUT 92 (IAC)  where it was said   "Whilst  discrimination  and  stigma
    certainly  exist  they  will  not  generally  constitute    persecutory
    "serious harm" or breach Article 3, but this is nevertheless  a  factor
    to be considered cumulatively when assessing whether internal flight is
    reasonable for any given appellant". He stated that the only  emotional
    support that the appellant would receive would be in her home areas  of
    Burrel. He, however, considered that the appellant would be  an  object
    of suspicion and that that would make the appellant more vulnerable  to
    discrimination, sexual harassment or even the risk of  trafficking  and
    said that therefore she was entitled to humanitarian  protection  under
    paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules.  That is I  consider  a  clear
    error of law. Not only does he give no reason why this appellant  would
    be vulnerable to trafficking he clearly does not consider that there is
    a real risk of trafficking.  Moreover  not  only  does  his  conclusion
    ignore the conclusion in TD and AD but it is clear from the judgment of
    the Court of Justice of the European  Communities  in  Elgafaji  [2009]
    EUECJ C-465/07 that humanitarian protection is only  given  in  certain
    circumstances which are explained in the judgment as follows:

         "The existence of a serious and individual threat to  the  life  or
         person of an applicant for subsidiary protection is not subject  to
         the condition that  that  applicant  adduce  evidence  that  he  is
         specifically targeted  by  reason  of  factors  particular  to  his
         personal  circumstances.   The  existence  of  such  a  threat  can
         exceptionally be considered to be established where the  degree  of
         indiscriminate violence characterising the  armed  conflict  taking
         place assessed by the competent national authorities  before  which
         an application for subsidiary protection is made, or by the  courts
         of a Member State to which a decision refusing such an  application
         is referred,  reaches such a high level  that  substantial  grounds
         are shown for believing that a civilian returned  to  the  relevant
         country or, as the case may be,  to  the  relevant  region,  would,
         solely on account of his presence on the territory of that  country
         or region, face a real risk of being subject to that threat."

    That has simply not been shown by the  judge  to  be  the  case  and  I
    consider that it was an error of law for him to reach that conclusion.

5.   In paragraph 33 the judge makes a finding  that  there  would  be  good
    reason to conclude that the appellant's situation in Albania  would  be
    such as to expose her and her daughter to a real risk of  violation  of
    their rights under Article 3.  That is a broad assertion and  can  only
    be founded on the conclusions he came to in paragraph 31 where he found
    that the appellant, although not subject to  persecution  in  her  home
    area, would have difficulty such that  internal  flight  would  not  be
    possible for her or would create  difficulties  for  her.   That  is  a
    rather odd way of  going  about  a  decision  because  the  appropriate
    process would be to consider whether or not an appellant  had  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution in her home area and then to  consider  the
    issue of internal flight.  Instead however, having found that she would
    not have a well-founded fear of persecution he deals with the issue  of
    internal flight.  In paragraph 31 he says, "I  am  satisfied  that  the
    appellant would be an object of suspicion.  This in turn would tend  to
    make her more vulnerable to discrimination, sexual harassment  or  even
    the risk of trafficking" and he then goes on to deal  with  the  issues
    relating to the appellant's child  and  her  education.  However,  that
    discrimination to which he refers simply cannot be considered to  cross
    the threshold of Article 3 ill-treatment as is clear from  the  passage
    in TD and AD set out above. There is  nothing  in  his  reasoning  that
    Article 3 would come into play.  Accordingly, I consider  that  he  has
    made a material error of law in his consideration of the rights of  the
    appellant under Article 3.  I therefore set aside the determination  in
    that regard.

6.   The judge, however, allowed the appeal under Article 8 and  as  I  have
    said that decision is not challenged.

7.   I have therefore set aside the decision of the Judge in the  First-tier
    with regard to humanitarian protection and Article 3 ill-treatment  but
    his decisions dismissing the appeal on asylum grounds and allowing  the
    appeal on human rights grounds shall stand.

8.   It  is  appropriate  that  I  should  remake  the  decisions  regarding
    humanitarian protection and Article 3 ill-treatment.  For  the  reasons
    which I have set out above I do not  consider  that  the  appellant  is
    entitled to humanitarian protection.  I refer again to the judgment  in
    Elgafaji.  Similarly I do not consider that she is entitled to  Article
    3 protection as the   there is nothing to indicate that there is a real
    risk that she would suffer treatment that would cross the threshold  of
    Article 3: the  findings  made   simply  do   not  cross  the  relevant
    threshold.  I therefore re-make the decision dismissing the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds and under Article 3 of the ECHR.

Notice of Decision

9.   This appeal is allowed  on  Article  8  grounds  and  is  dismissed  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and Article 3 protection grounds.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy   15 September 2016
