
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11093/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 10 June 2015                      |On 22 June 2015                      |
|Prepared on 15 June 2015             |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    V. N.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Warren, Counsel instructed by Switalski's
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant says that she is a citizen of Albania. She claimed to
         have entered the United Kingdom illegally with her two children  on
         7 August 2014, and claimed asylum that day on the basis of  a  fear
         of violence from her husband.

      2. The Respondent refused the asylum claim on 28 November 2014 and  in
         consequence she made a decision of the  same  date  to  remove  the
         Appellant (with her children) from the UK as one  who  had  entered
         illegally.

      3. An appeal against that removal decision was heard and dismissed  by
         First Tier Tribunal Judge Fisher in a  Decision  promulgated  on  7
         April 2015. The majority of the Appellant's account was conceded by
         the Respondent but  the  Respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the
         Albanian authorities were unwilling or unable to  provide  adequate
         protection to citizens, and the Respondent  also  argued  that  the
         Appellant could avoid the risk of harm relied  upon  by  relocating
         within Albania.

      4. The Appellant applied to the First Tier Tribunal for permission  to
         appeal, and permission was granted by Judge Frankish  on  29  April
         2015, apparently on the basis that he understood the Judge to  have
         given no consideration to the best interests of the Appellant's two
         children.

      5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice on 11 May  2015.  She  argued
         that the grounds were misconceived.

      6. Thus the matter comes before me.

    Sufficiency of protection

      7. The second ground, which was argued first, asserts that  the  Judge
         fell  into  error  in  his  consideration  of  the  issue  of   the
         sufficiency of state protection. The third ground is tied  up  with
         the second, because it is an assertion that  the  Judge  fell  into
         error in his approach to the weight to be given to the evidence  of
         Dr Antonia Young, relied upon by the Appellant as  an  expert  upon
         Albania.

      8. Ms Warren argued before me, as set out in  the  grounds,  that  the
         Judge, wrongly, failed to attach any weight to the evidence  of  Dr
         Antonia Young. That is not however a fair  representation  of  what
         the Judge said was his approach to the evidence of  Dr  Young  [20-
         21]. His concluding words on the subject were "I accept  that  each
         report must be considered on  its  own  merits,  but  the  lack  of
         objectivity exhibited in Dr Young's report in this appeal leads  me
         to conclude that I cannot attach any substantial weight to it as an
         impartial guide  to  the  risk  to  this  Appellant  on  return  to
         Albania".  I do not accept the proposition, which was central to Ms
         Warren's argument, that the phrase "I cannot attach any substantial
         weight" is to be read as if it were "I attach no weight". The Judge
         is entitled to have his decision read as a whole, and to  have  his
         words given their ordinary meaning. There is simply  no  foundation
         within his decision for the proposition that he  declined  to  give
         any weight at all to the evidence of Dr Young. Indeed it  is  plain
         that he accepted only some of the criticisms levelled  against  her
         by the Respondent.

      9. As Ms Warren accepted, Dr Young's approach to the  presentation  of
         expert evidence in an earlier  appeal  concerning  a  woman  facing
         return to Albania, had been the subject of significant criticism by
         the Court of Appeal in MF v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 902,  and  by  the
         Upper Tribunal in their decision  that  was  the  subject  of  that
         appeal. It was accepted by the Court of Appeal that  Dr  Young  was
         obviously familiar with the current situation in Albania,  and  was
         therefore entitled to express an expert opinion, and that  she  was
         entitled to have considerable weight given to her evidence  insofar
         as it was based upon her experience. It  was  said  however  to  be
         unfortunate  that  she  had  allowed  herself  to  be  drawn   into
         expressing views on the  very  issues  that  the  Tribunal  had  to
         determine, and had done so on the basis of  her  general  knowledge
         rather  than  on  any  specific  information  she  had  about   the
         circumstances of the claimant. She had also allowed herself  to  be
         put in the position of an advocate, which inevitably had undermined
         her objectivity. In offering her opinions on the issue of  internal
         relocation she had ceased to act as an expert and had taken on  the
         role of an advocate. In those  circumstances  it  was  said  to  be
         unsurprising that the Upper Tribunal should have declined to  place
         much weight on that part of her report, and whilst  its  criticisms
         may have been couched in harsh terms, they were well founded.

     10. In this appeal  the  Respondent  had  not  sought  to  dispute  the
         Appellant's account of what had  occurred.  The  only  issues  upon
         which Dr Young's evidence was relied upon by the Appellant were  in
         relation to the Appellant's ability to avoid the risk of harm posed
         by her ex-husband by internal relocation, and  the  sufficiency  of
         the state protection available to her.  The  Judge  considered  the
         approach that was taken to Dr Young's evidence within MF [20],  and
         concluded that Dr Young had once again engaged in the same  conduct
         which had drawn the criticism of both the Upper Tribunal,  and  the
         Court of Appeal. In his judgement he gave adequate reasons for  his
         conclusion that in the context of this appeal her evidence had been
         expressed in terms that had demonstrated her  lack  of  objectivity
         [21].

     11. It was not argued before me that the Judge was incorrect to analyse
         Dr Young's evidence in the way that he did. Nor was it argued  that
         on a fair reading of her evidence she had not fallen into the  same
         conduct as had been criticised in MF.

     12. In all the circumstances I am satisfied that the decision discloses
         no error of law in the Judge's approach to the weight to  be  given
         to the evidence of Dr Young. Ground three is thus exposed as merely
         a disagreement with  the  Judge's  conclusion  on  the  appropriate
         degree of weight to give her evidence  on  the  issues  he  had  to
         resolve. I am satisfied that there is simply no merit in  the  bald
         assertion that the Judge gave Dr Young's evidence no  weight.  That
         is simply inconsistent with the terms of his decision.

     13. Before the Judge the Appellant's advocate  had  expressly  accepted
         the findings of the Upper Tribunal made in the course of  AM  &  BM
         (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80 concerning the general
         availability of protection from the  Albanian  authorities  against
         the criminal acts of non state agents. Ms Warren said that she  did
         not seek to depart from that position.

     14. It was the Appellant's case that she had been able to bring divorce
         proceedings against her husband on the basis of his behaviour,  and
         although he had not consented to her application for a divorce, she
         believed that those proceedings were now  complete  and  that  they
         were divorced.

     15. It was the Appellant's case that she had also been  able  to  bring
         evidence to the Albanian courts with the support of the police  and
         prosecutors against her ex-husband, with the result that  not  only
         had  he  been  successfully  prosecuted,   but   upon   conviction,
         imprisoned. He had then been released  from  prison  subject  to  a
         suspended sentence. (The claim made on the Appellant's behalf  that
         the Albanian authorities were unwilling to prosecute her ex-husband
         fell away in the face of her own admission that they  had  in  fact
         done so.)

     16. It was the Appellant's case that in recent years she  had  obtained
         not one, but  two,  Protection  Orders  from  the  Albanian  courts
         against her husband, arising out of his violence during the  course
         of the marriage, and in  reaction  to  her  initiation  of  divorce
         proceedings. The second had been issued  in  her  favour  upon  the
         expiry of the first, and this second order would not  expire  until
         16 June 2015 (well after the date of the  hearing).  There  was  no
         obvious reason why she would be unable to obtain a third order upon
         the expiry of the second.

     17. The Appellant accepted that she was able to bring  a  complaint  to
         the Albanian police of allegations of breaches  of  the  protection
         order, by him, which would then be  pursued  through  the  Albanian
         courts. She accepted that if breaches of  that  order  were  proven
         against him that he would  be  punished  by  the  Albanian  courts.
         Again, her ability to obtain  not  just  one,  but  two  protection
         orders, showed that the Albanian authorities were willing to assist
         her, and were willing to try to deter her ex-husband  from pursuing
         his past behaviour.

     18. It was however the Appellant's case that when she last went to  the
         police to make a complaint about breaches of the second  order  she
         was pressured into being dissuaded from pursuing the matter, whilst
         at the police station, by the godfather of her children. It was not
         suggested by her that on this occasion the police  had  refused  to
         assist her, or to process the complaint she was trying to make. The
         Albanian authorities cannot be  held  responsible  either  for  the
         actions of the children's godfather, or, for her own  decision  not
         to pursue that complaint.

     19. It was the Appellant's case that  the  last,  and  apparently  most
         serious incident of violence occurred after  the  occasion  at  the
         police station upon  which  she  had  decided  not  to  report  the
         Appellant for breaches of the protection order, but to go  to  live
         in Durres temporarily with her children and a male friend  instead.
         Thus she accepts that this last  incident  of  violence  was  never
         reported to the police. Given the history of  past  willingness  to
         prosecute her ex-husband, convict, and ultimately imprison him,  it
         is difficult to see any basis upon which she could  properly  argue
         that she genuinely and reasonably believed the Albanian authorities
         would have no interest in doing so once again in relation  to  this
         more serious incident. This last and more serious incident was said
         to be when she said that she and the children  were  showered  with
         diesel, and then threatened with  death  by  her  ex-husband.  This
         incident occurred the night before she had arranged  to  leave  the
         matrimonial home to stay with a friend in Durres,  where  she  says
         she stayed for about a month before leaving  Albania.  She  accepts
         that her ex-husband did not follow her to Durres, and  she  accepts
         that there were therefore no further incidents during this period.

     20. The Appellant's case was therefore that there had been a number  of
         breaches of criminal law before she obtained the  first  Protection
         Order. The Protection Order(s)  granted  to  her  by  the  Albanian
         courts did not result in him ceasing to breach  the  criminal  law.
         Thus it was argued both before the Judge, and again before me by Ms
         Warren that the criminal law, and the Protection  Orders,  were  no
         deterrent to the Appellant's ex-husband. That  may  have  been  so.
         Sadly some individuals do display criminal behaviours  despite  the
         sanctions provided for in the  criminal  law,  and  continue  their
         behaviour in the face of orders made by the courts, even in the UK.
         However the mere fact that this  man  was  not  deterred  from  his
         criminal conduct did not of itself establish a failure of the  test
         set out in Horvath [2001] AC 489; the risk of harm by a  non  state
         agent, no matter how severe, or  how  well  founded,  does  not  of
         itself establish the status of a refugee. To the extent that either
         Ms  Warren,  or  the  grounds  (which  she  did  not  draft)  argue
         otherwise, that argument is misconceived.

     21. The test posed in Horvath was whether there is in force a  criminal
         law which  makes  violent  attacks  by  persecutors  punishable  by
         sentences commensurate with the gravity of their crimes. Victims as
         a class must not be exempt from the  protection  of  the  law,  and
         there must be a  reasonable  willingness  by  the  police  and  the
         courts,  as  the  relevant  law  enforcement  agencies,  to  detect
         prosecute and punish offenders. Incompetence and  inefficiency  are
         not however the same as unwillingness to do so on the part  of  the
         state. Nor is the failure to do so in an individual  case,  for  it
         was recognised that there might be sound reasons why a criminal  is
         not brought to justice. Nor did corruption or weakness on the  part
         of some individuals within the law enforcement system mean that the
         state was unwilling to afford protection. It was  said  to  require
         cogent evidence that a state which is able to afford protection  is
         unwilling to do so, especially in the case of a democracy.

     22. This was the test that the Judge clearly  had  well  in  mind,  and
         which he rehearsed [23], before deciding for the  reasons  that  he
         gave that the Appellant had failed to establish  her  case  on  the
         Horvath  test.  He  did  not,  as  Ms  Warren  argued,  ignore  the
         undisputed evidence of the past assaults upon the Appellant and the
         children. That evidence was plainly well in his mind,  and  it  was
         rehearsed at some length in the course of the decision. Nor did  he
         reject the suggestion that the Appellant's ex-husband continued  to
         pose a risk of harm to her and the children. His finding, which  he
         was entitled upon the evidence before him to reach,  was  that  the
         Appellant and her children would have the benefit of adequate state
         protection from her ex-husband [25]. The evidence when viewed as  a
         whole did not establish that the authorities would be unwilling  to
         prosecute such a crime, or, that upon conviction of such a  serious
         crime  there  would  be  no  punishment   commensurate   with   its
         seriousness.

    The children - s55 of the 2009 Act

     23. The Appellant has two children. They were not born out of  wedlock,
         but during  the  currency  of  a  lengthy  marriage  only  recently
         terminated by divorce. They were aged 13 and 15 at the date of  the
         hearing, and they had  travelled  to  the  UK  illegally  in  their
         mother's company. They were born, and brought up in Albania, and at
         the date of the hearing of the appeal they had lived in the UK  for
         a mere six months. It is plain from the decision that  the  Judge's
         view of the evidence before  him  was  that  their  best  interests
         required them to live with, and to be brought up by, their  mother,
         and he said as much [25]. Since he was not satisfied that  she  had
         made out her case on the claim to  refugee  status,  or  Article  3
         protection, he said "On  the  facts  of  the  Appellant's  case,  I
         conclude that state protection would be available to  the  required
         standard for her and her children, so  that  their  best  interests
         would be met".

     24. Thus although the draftsman saw fit to commence ground one with the
         assertion that the Judge failed to give any  consideration  to  the
         s55 duty, I am satisfied that there is no merit in this  assertion.
         Thus the basis upon which permission to appeal was granted, that he
         did not do so, is misconceived.

     25. Although his reasons for doing  so  are  not  recorded,  Ms  Warren
         accepts before me that the Appellant's former Counsel chose not  to
         pursue before the First Tier Tribunal the Article 8 appeal that had
         been raised in the original grounds of appeal [28].

     26. In these circumstances it is extremely difficult to see  any  merit
         in the remaining arguments that are raised as part of  ground  one,
         and which do not appear to engage with the guidance to be found  in
         EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874. As set out above, the finding
         was  properly  made  that  the  Albanian  authorities  had  offered
         adequate protection to the Appellant, and it  is  plain  that  this
         finding included the provision of adequate protection to her school
         age children. In the circumstances the finding that  there  was  no
         real risk that the authorities would fail to continue to do so  was
         bound to follow. Thus whilst there are of course  circumstances  in
         which the Article 3 threshold for a child  will  be  reached,  when
         they would not be reached for an adult (SQ (Pakistan)  [2013]  EWCA
         Civ 1251), the evidence did not establish  that  this  was  one  of
         those cases. There was no suggestion that either  of  the  children
         had any medical issue. The lack of financial or  practical  support
         for the Appellant and her children from either the Appellant's  own
         extended family, or, from the members of her ex-husband's  extended
         family would not alter  the  findings  on  the  adequacy  of  state
         protection.

     27. Ms Warren argued that the inability of the Albanian authorities  to
         eliminate all risk of harm to the Appellant and her  children  from
         her ex-husband meant that their best interests could not be  served
         by a return to Albania,  and  thus  the  appeal  should  have  been
         allowed on that basis alone. Since Ms Warren accepted  that  having
         abandoned Article 8 as a ground of appeal the Appellant  could  not
         now argue that her removal from the UK was disproportionate to  the
         public interest in her removal, she put this argument on the  basis
         that the risk of harm resulted in a breach of the Article 3  rights
         of the Appellant's children in the event of return to Albania which
         the Judge had not dealt with. I am satisfied that there is no merit
         in such an approach, and that when the decision is read as a whole,
         the Article 3 appeal was clearly and properly  dealt  with  by  the
         Judge. This was not a case of a mother facing removal from  the  UK
         with an infant child to support and care for, whose  existence  and
         needs meant that she was unable to find employment because she  was
         a full time carer. These were teenage, albeit school age,  children
         who could reasonably be expected to cope with a  lifestyle  centred
         upon their schooling and coping  with  a  working  single  mother's
         lifestyle; especially one employed as a teacher.

     28. Since there was adequate state  protection  available  it  was  not
         necessary for the Judge  to  consider  the  reasonableness  of  any
         expectation that the Appellant internally  relocate  to  avoid  the
         risk of harm relied upon. Had he done so however he would have  had
         to consider the fact that the Appellant was able to live in  Durres
         without being traced for over a month. Moreover he would  have  had
         to consider that if the Appellant did not wish to return to live in
         the same area within Tirana that she previously lived,  or  to  the
         area in which her parents live, then she did not need to do so. She
         had the option of living in other areas of Tirana, or  other  urban
         centres within Albania. She was not forced to make  the  simplistic
         choice between life in her old area, and life in a rural area.  She
         had a University education, and from 2001 until her departure  from
         Albania she had worked as a French teacher at a secondary school in
         Tirana, and no doubt had good references  available  to  her  as  a
         result. A return to  employment  was  therefore  a  very  realistic
         prospect for her, and it would not mean a real risk of  poverty  or
         destitution, or the inability to provide for her children. Moreover
         at the date of the decision she would have had available to her the
         financial support offered by the IOM to those who agreed to  return
         voluntarily; it was not open to say that it could not be taken into
         account because she refused to do so.

     29. Whilst there was no express  consideration  given  to  the  medical
         evidence relied upon in relation to the Appellant, beyond the Judge
         noting Counsel's acknowledgement that it did not go so  far  as  to
         mean that the Appellant's return to Albania engaged her  Article  3
         rights [28], that medical evidence was extremely  limited.  It  did
         not consist of any formal psychiatric diagnosis by  any  consultant
         apparently qualified to offer one, but it did consist of;

          i) a letter from a GP's practice nurse dated 10 September 2014 to
             say that the Appellant had reported being unable to sleep  and
             having nightmares, being weepy and depressed, feeling that her
             world had fallen apart [A50].

         ii) a letter from a  Primary  Care  Heath  Practitioner  dated  19
             December 2014 to say that the Appellant had been referred with
             symptoms  suggestive  of  depression  and  anxiety.  She   had
             reported  occasional  suicidal  ideation  with  no  intent  or
             planning. She  reported  being  unable  to  sleep  and  having
             nightmares. She was offered weekly  sessions  to  build  trust
             prior to a referral for more specific  therapy  regarding  her
             abusive  past,  and   a   prescription   for   anti-depressant
             medication. She was  ready  to  access  Talking  Therapy,  and
             failure to do so as a  result  of  a  return  to  Albania  was
             considered to be detrimental to her mental health [A52].

        iii) a letter from a  Primary  Care  Heath  Practitioner  dated  12
             February 2015 to say that the  Appellant  had  reported  being
             unable to sleep and having nightmares. Her mental  health  was
             said to  have  been  severely  affected  by  the  Respondent's
             refusal of her asylum application. The opinion  was  expressed
             that  if  returned  to  Albania  her   mental   health   would
             deteriorate to crisis  point;  she  was  however  making  good
             progress  with  coping  with  her  experiences  prior  to  the
             Respondent's decision [A51].

     30. As was conceded before the First Tier Tribunal this evidence  falls
         a very long way short of establishing that the  Appellant's  return
         to Albania would lead to a breach of her Article 3 rights.  Nor  in
         my judgement did its existence and content mean that the  Appellant
         had demonstrated such unique features  that  she  could  reasonably
         argue that there was inadequate state protection available to  her,
         or that she did not have the mental strength to be able to relocate
         within Albania.




    Conclusions

     31. In the circumstances I am not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has
         demonstrated any error of  law  in  the  Judge's  approach  to  the
         evidence before him, sufficient to require his decision to  be  set
         aside, and the appeal reheard.

    DECISION

         The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 7 April 2015 contained no error of law in the dismissal  of  the
         Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to be set aside and
         remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 15 June 2015


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 15 June 2015

