
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11102/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 October 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     H S
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Head, Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan. He was  born  on  28  March
    1999. His application for asylum was refused by the  Respondent  on  12
    September 2014 but in view of his age, discretionary leave was  granted
    outside the Immigration Rules until 28 September  2016.  The  Appellant
    appealed that  decision  under  section  83  (2)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. His appeal was dismissed by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R Cassel in a decision dated 26 March 2015.

 2. Permission to appeal against that decision was granted on 6  July  2015
    by Upper Tribunal Judge  Finch  on  the  following  basis.   The  Upper
    Tribunal considered that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  dismissed  the
    evidence of three witnesses who had direct knowledge of the Appellant's
    family history on the basis that their evidence was hearsay, when there
    was no requirement in asylum law and proceedings that hearsay  was  not
    admissible evidence.  Further, when  considering  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence the First-tier Tribunal failed adequately to take into account
    the Appellant's age when the asylum interview was  conducted  and  that
    these two  factors  fundamentally  undermined  his  findings  of  fact.
    Permission was also granted on the basis that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had given a very cursory consideration of family tracing  which  needed
    to be reconsidered in the light of TN and MA (Afghanistan) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2015] UKSC 40 in  which  the  Supreme
    Court considered the impact of the best interests principle  in  family
    tracing cases.  It was also noted in the grant of  permission  that  in
    any event paragraphs 55 to 58 of the decision failed to give sufficient
    weight to the likely effect of returning a child to Kabul at the age of
    15 when his family had not yet been traced.

    The Grounds

 3. The grounds to the Upper-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal can  be
    summarised as follows.  They argue that the First-tier Tribunal made  a
    material error of law  in  failing  to  give  sustainable  reasons  for
    reaching findings that conflicted with the evidence of  the  witnesses,
    failing to give cogent or sustainable reasons for finding the Appellant
    could return to Afghanistan as a 15 year old without contact  with  his
    family and failing to or failing to competently or adequately  consider
    the  relevant  case  law  and  background  in  relation  to  minors  in
    Afghanistan.

 4.  In  particular  it  is  argued  that  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
    Appellant's claim that his father worked for the Arbaki was implausible
    was unsustainable. The basis for this finding was that the  Appellant's
    father was able to carry out his role for the Arbaki  for  nine  months
    without fervent pursuit.  The  Appellant  submits  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal that the finding is unsustainable because it can clearly  cannot
    be implausible that he carried out a job for nine months without  being
    killed by the Taliban.

 5. It is further submitted that the Appellant's uncle who had been  tested
    and found credible by the Tribunal confirmed that he had spoken to  his
    wife who had confirmed that  the  Appellant's  father  had  joined  the
    Arbaki and had been murdered.  It  is  submitted  that  the  Judge  had
    failed to given any cogent reason why this evidence should be rejected.
     The Appellant had  produced  three  separate  witnesses  all  of  whom
    confirmed to the court through their own  separate  sources  they  knew
    that the Appellant's father had  joined  the  Arbaki.   It  is  further
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal failed to identify in  what  way
    there were significant differences in the accounts of  the  Appellant's
    father's involvement with the Arbaki, and failed  to  acknowledge  that
    the witness MQF confirmed in evidence that he was unsure of the year of
    the Appellant's father's involvement.

 6. It is also submitted that in assessing the risk to  the  Appellant  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  ignored  the  wealth   of   background   material
    indicating the  real  risk  and  vulnerabilities  faced  by  minors  in
    Afghanistan.  Whilst the First-tier Judge had asserted at paragraph  55
    that he bore in mind the Appellant's youth and the evidence that he had
    lost contact with the rest of the family, it is  said  that  since  the
    assessment of risk had to be in relation  to  the  Appellant's  current
    circumstances and since it was accepted that he had no contact with his
    family in Afghanistan it was not open to the judge  to  find  that  the
    Appellant could safely  return.  It  is  also  submitted  that  it  was
    inadequate for the Judge to assert  that  relocation  to  Kabul  was  a
    viable option notwithstanding the Appellant's youth,  in  view  of  the
    fact that he was a 15 year old child and in view of the fact  that  his
    best interests were not properly considered.

 7. It is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal's findings fly in the face
    of the relevant case law  and  the  guidance  of  UNHCR  and  that  the
    material before the court clearly indicated the Appellant was  at  risk
    of treatment such as set out in the Respondent's Operational  Guidance.
    In the circumstances it is argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal  could
    not properly have reached the conclusion  that  a  15  year  old  child
    without contact with his family would be able to viably relocate.

 8. It is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings  that  it
    was reasonable for him to return to Afghanistan on the basis  that  his
    uncle had unnamed friends there was a legally flawed approach  and  was
    unsustainable.  It is submitted that when looking at the issue  of  the
    Appellant's ability to reside in Kabul the findings of the  judge  were
    fatally flawed and despite quoting AK  (Afghanistan)  (Article  15  (c)
    [2012]  UKUT  163  and  the  requirement  to  assess  both  safety  and
    reasonableness the judge failed entirely adequately to consider either.



 9. In conclusion therefore it is submitted on behalf of the appellant that
    the errors raised are material to the  decision  made  and  render  the
    determination fatally flawed.

    Rule 24 Notice

10. The Respondent contends that  the  Judge  gave  clear  and  sustainable
    reasons for finding that the Appellant's account was not credible.  The
    Judge considered  the  case  law  and  background  material  concerning
    returning to Afghanistan and made findings that were open to be made.

    Submissions

11. Miss Head relied on her grounds of appeal and a skeleton argument.  She
    submitted that there had been three separate witnesses before the First-
    tier Tribunal and one of those witnesses was the Appellant's   father's
    brother whose evidence was accepted  as  credible  in  his  own  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal. Reasons should have been  given  as  to
    why his evidence was not  acceptable,  particularly  because  the  only
    ground that was given in relation to rejecting his evidence was that it
    was hearsay.  The finding that his evidence was not  reliable  was  not
    sufficient.

12. The  First-tier  Tribunal  had  found  that  there  were  significantly
    different accounts.  Whilst it was accepted that he was confused  about
    what year the Appellant's father had been working for the Arbaki, there
    was no inconsistency between the Appellant's evidence and the  evidence
    of his uncle and there  were  no  reasons  given  for  the  finding  in
    relation to the fact that there were significant discrepancies  between
    the Appellant's evidence and his uncle's evidence. There was  no  basis
    for finding that it was implausible that the father had not been killed
    within nine months. This was not  based  on  any  background  evidence.
    There was also no reference in the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal
    to the Appellant's understanding in relation to his age.  At  paragraph
    57 his age was referred to in relation to his return to Kabul  but  not
    in relation to  the  assessment  of  his  evidence  and  therefore  the
    consideration of credibility was not sustainable.

13. There  was  also  no  consideration  of  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and his best interests and it  was
    incumbent on a judge to consider that.  At the hearing the Respondent's
    submissions probably did not assist as the  Respondent  submitted  that
    risk was hypothetical and implied that the Judge  should  not  consider
    risk at the date of the hearing.  It was accepted  by  the  Judge  that
    there was no  family  contact  and  he  had  no  past  connections  and
    therefore it was  entirely  inappropriate  to  find  that  the  unnamed
    friends or uncle could assist.  In fact all the evidence had been  that
    they had tried to find the Appellant's mother and there had been active
    attempts to make contact.  The findings were therefore unsustainable.

14. Mr Bramble in reply submitted that it was  clear  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was aware that the Appellant was  a  child  and  had  in  mind
    section 55.  That was clear from paragraphs 41 and 45 of the First-tier
    Tribunal determination.  At paragraph 48 she said that particular  care
    should be taken because he was a child.   In  relation  to  credibility
    findings, whether the  Appellant's  father  worked  for  Arbaki  as  he
    claimed was dealt with at paragraph 49.  The Judge did not just set out
    the evidence of the Appellant but also  the  uncle's  evidence.   There
    were also two other witnesses and the Judge set out their evidence. The
    Judge did not need to revisit what was specifically said  in  the  oral
    evidence.  The Judge had dealt  with  it  sufficiently.  He  had  given
    explanations as to why  he  believed  the  Appellant's  claim  was  not
    credible in the light of conflicting evidence  as  to  why  the  father
    would remain if he was employed by Arbaki.

15. The uncle's evidence was based on information provided by others.  That
    was correct because looking at paragraph 21 he discovered  through  his
    wife. At paragraph 29 there was a  discrepancy  in  MQF's  evidence  in
    relation to which year the Appellant's father  joined  Arbaki  and  the
    Judge was entitled to come to this finding having given reasons why  he
    did not find the explanation and the claim credible. He had  considered
    the evidence of the witnesses.

16. In relation to the Appellant's youth, it was the  Appellant's  argument
    that he had no direct family there. In  Mr  Bramble's  submissions  the
    Judge may not have worded  his  conclusions  well  as  it  appeared  to
    suggest that the uncle's friends would assist  the  Appellant  but  the
    judge was clear that they would support him.  The Judge found that that
    network was sufficient and there was no material error of law in either
    matter.

17. In response Miss Head submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    give reasons for accepting that the evidence  of  the  child  could  be
    different.  There was no evidence to show that that the  judge  applied
    section 55 to the facts of the Appellant's case. There were no examples
    given by Mr Bramble because those examples simply were not there.   The
    Judge had not given any reasons for  finding  the  Appellant's  uncle's
    evidence not to be credible; setting out  the  evidence  and  making  a
    finding in relation to the evidence  were  two  separate  duties.   The
    Appellant was entitled to know why that evidence was not considered  to
    be credible. Either way, if  someone  was  lying,  he  needed  to  give
    reasons.

18. The Judge's findings did not deal with the fact that this was a 15 year
    old boy returning to Kabul. In relation to the Supreme  Court  decision
    of TN and MA, Miss Head  submitted  that  that  did  not  take  us  any
    further.

19. I canvassed therefore with  the  parties  what  the  appropriate  forum
    should be in the event that I should find an  error  of  law.   It  was
    agreed that the challenges were to findings in relation to  credibility
    and the appropriate course would be for the matter to  be  remitted  to
    the First-tier were an error of law to be found.

Findings and conclusions

20. The First-tier Tribunal's findings in relation to  the  credibility  of
    the Appellant's account are at paragraph 49 of the decision. The  first
    reason for rejecting the Appellant's account is as follows:

         "49. I find that the evidence from the Appellant  that  his  father
         worked for the Arbaki implausible. At question 34 of the  screening
         interview he was asked when his  father  started  working  for  the
         Arbaki. He responded it was 9 months before he left the country. He
         stated he did not witness him doing any work nor did he  know  what
         he did as an employee of the Arbaki. He was asked that at  question
         43. The conclusion reached by the ECO was that it was not  credible
         that his father would remain employed by the Arbaki  for  9  months
         without  more  fervent  pursuit,  I  agree  with  that   conclusion
         particularly with regard to the fact that the Appellant's uncle had
         suffered  so  badly  at  the  hands  of  the   Taliban   within   a
         comparatively short distance from the  Appellant's  village,  in  a
         community where it is said, in effect,  by  the  various  witnesses
         that knowledge of such involvement is widespread."

21. The Courts have recognised the danger of fact-finders regarding aspects
    of an individual's account to be implausible when based  upon  cultural
    or social assumptions not supported by background  evidence  (see,  for
    example HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037).  The First-tier Tribunal  came
    to the conclusion that it was implausible that the  Appellant's  father
    could work for  the  Arbaki  for  nine  months  without  "more  fervent
    pursuit" from the Taliban in  the  absence  of  any  reference  to  the
    background evidence about the Taliban or the Arbaki. Whilst a  Tribunal
    is  entitled  to  draw  inferences  of  implausibility  when  assessing
    credibility and to draw on their common sense and ability  to  identify
    what was or was not plausible, such findings should be  based  on  hard
    evidence.  A  reason  was  given  for  the  finding,  namely  that  the
    Appellant's uncle who lived nearby had suffered at  the  hands  of  the
    Taliban. However, I consider that the nature of the finding is one that
    requires an assessment of background evidence in order to be adequately
    reasoned.

22. The First-tier Tribunal also rejected  the  Appellant's  account  on  a
    further basis, also set out in paragraph 49 of the decision:

         "In  addition  his  witnesses  gave  accounts   of   his   father's
         involvement with the Arbaki based on information from  others.   At
         best they gave hearsay evidence.  There are significantly different
         accounts of the appellant's father's involvement with  the  Arbaki.
         MQF gives details of an  entirely  different  time  period  of  the
         appellant's father's membership in the Arbaki."

23. The First-tier Tribunal did not find the  Appellant's  account  of  the
    interest shown by the Taliban to  be  credible.  Three  witnesses  gave
    evidence in his appeal. His uncle, MS, gave evidence. He is a  refugee.
    His account was accepted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Greasley  in  a
    determination promulgated on 12 July 2012. His  account  to  have  been
    persecuted by the Taliban and shot in  the  mouth  by  them  was  found
    credible. In the instant appeal his evidence in his  witness  statement
    was that he found out through his wife who was living in Afghanistan at
    the time that the Appellant's father was being harassed by the  Taliban
    and that the Appellant's father joined  the  local  Arbaki  to  protect
    himself. He spoke to the Appellant's father a few times whilst  he  was
    working for the Arbaki. He received a phone call in May 2013  from  his
    wife that the Appellant's father had been killed by the Taliban.

24. The Appellant also relied on the evidence  of  BK  who  has  indefinite
    leave to  remain.  According  to  his  witness  statement  he  knew  of
    Appellant's family as a fellow villager. He  had  left  Afghanistan  in
    1998 and said he received evidence of the Appellant's father's death by
    telephone. He was told that he had been killed by the Taliban as he had
    been a member of the Arbaki. He stated in his witness statement that he
    went to the Appellant's family home in Afghanistan in July 2014 to  try
    and offer condolences but no-one was there and he was told by a  farmer
    that the family had left.

25. The Appellant also relied on the evidence of  MQF  who  has  indefinite
    leave to remain. He said in his witness statement that he travelled  to
    Afghanistan in 2012 and saw the Appellant's father in the  village  and
    that he worked for the Arbaki. He never spoke to him personally but  he
    was aware that he worked for the Arbaki through the villagers. He  knew
    that he was working as a sub-commander within the Arbaki  and  that  he
    was commanding  over  people  as  this  was  well  known  around  their
    villages.

26. The First-tier Tribunal did not engage with the evidence of  the  three
    witnesses other than  to  state  that  it  was  hearsay.  There  is  no
    prohibition  on  the  admission  of  hearsay  evidence  within   either
    Procedure  Rules  or  established  case  law  in   this   jurisdiction.
    However, a Tribunal is entitled to take account of the fact that direct
    evidence is to be given greater weight  than  evidence  reported  to  a
    witness.  The First-Tier Tribunal effectively dismissed the evidence of
    the Appellant's witnesses because it was hearsay. All  three  witnesses
    had given evidence that through their own separate  sources  they  knew
    that the Appellant's father had joined  the  Taliban.  The  Appellant's
    uncle had been found in a previous decision to be a credible witness of
    fact and to  have  been  persecuted  by  the  Taliban.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not find that there were any  inconsistencies  as  between
    the evidence of the Appellant, his uncle and the evidence of BK.

27. Whilst the First-tier Tribunal found  that  there  were  "significantly
    different accounts of the Appellant's  father's  involvement  with  the
    Arbaki", this finding is not sustainable on the facts.  There  was  one
    discrepancy as between the Appellant's evidence and the evidence of MQF
    as to when the Appellant's father worked  for  the  Arbaki.  In  cross-
    examination he said he was in contact with his family in 2010/2011  and
    heard that the Appellant's father had joined the Arbaki  and  but  then
    said that he could not be sure and it could  have  been  2011  or  2012
    (paragraphs 32 and 33 of the decision).

28. I find that the First-tier Tribunal, in rejecting the evidence  of  the
    Appellant's three witnesses as hearsay, failed  to  give  adequate  and
    sustainable reasons for finding their evidence not to be credible.  The
    finding  that  there  were  significantly  different  accounts  of  the
    Appellant's father's involvement with the Arbaki is irrational  in  the
    light of the fact that there was one discrepancy  with  regard  to  the
    period of his involvement about  which  the  witness  admitted  he  was
    unsure.

29. I also find that First-tier Tribunal failed to give  sufficient  weight
    to material matters in finding that the Appellant could be returned  to
    Kabul at the age of 15 when his family had  not  yet  been  traced.  At
    paragraph 57 the First-tier Tribunal accepted that  the  Appellant  had
    not traced his family.  In  AA  (unattended  children)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00016 the Upper Tribunal held that:

         "(i) The evidence before the Tribunal does not alter  the  position
         as described in HK and Others (minors - indiscriminate  violence  -
         forced recruitment  by  Taliban  -  contact  with  family  members)
         Afghanistan CG [2010] UKUT 378 (IAC), namely that when  considering
         the question of whether children are disproportionately affected by
         the  consequences  of  the  armed  conflict   in   Afghanistan,   a
         distinction has to be drawn between children who were living with a
         family and those who are not.  That distinction has been reinforced
         by the additional material before  this  Tribunal.   Whilst  it  is
         recognised that there are some risks to  which  children  who  will
         have the protection of the  family  are  nevertheless  subject,  in
         particular the risk of landmines and the risks of being trafficked,
         they are not of such a level as to lead to the conclusion that  all
         children would qualify for international protection.   In  arriving
         at this conclusion, account has been taken of the necessity to have
         regard to the best interests of children.

         (ii) the background evidence demonstrates that unattached  children
         returned  to   Afghanistan,   depending   upon   their   individual
         circumstances and the location to which they are returned,  may  be
         exposed to risk of serious harm,  inter  alia  from  indiscriminate
         violence, forced recruitment, sexual violence,  trafficking  and  a
         lack of adequate arrangements for  child  protection.   Such  risks
         will have to be taken into account when addressing the question  of
         whether a return is  in  the  child's  best  interests,  a  primary
         consideration when determining a claim to humanitarian protection."

30. The First-tier Tribunal found, at paragraph  57,  that  the  Appellant,
    through his uncle in the United Kingdom, had "the support of a  network
    of friendships and relationships which on any sensible  and  reasonable
    assessment of his circumstances would help him  relocate  his  family".
    However, on the First-tier Tribunal's findings, the Appellant  did  not
    know the location of his family on return  and  was  therefore  in  the
    position of an  unattached  child.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no
    finding and there does not appear to have been  any  evidence  to  show
    that any of the unnamed contacts of the uncle would have been  able  to
    look after the Appellant. The First-tier Tribunal should therefore have
    addressed the risks averred to in AA and  in  the  background  evidence
    with regard to unattached children and assessed the best  interests  of
    the Appellant against this background. Notwithstanding  the  fact  that
    the First-tier Tribunal referred  to  the  relevant  case  law  I  find
    therefore that adequate reasons were not given on material  matters  in
    view of the Appellant's age and circumstances.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I set aside  the  decision  and  remit
the case to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing. No findings of fact  are
preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

