
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/11053/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 December 2014                            |On 16 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                     DH
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, instructed by Irving & Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Ethiopia and he appealed to
         the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
         State of 20 November 2013 to refuse his application for asylum. The
         Secretary of State granted the appellant limited  leave  to  remain
         until 19 May 2016. First-tier Tribunal Judge Malins  dismissed  the
         appeal against the refusal of asylum and the appellant now  appeals
         with permission to this Tribunal.

      2. The background to this appeal is that the appellant arrived in  the
         UK on 30 September 2001 and claimed  asylum.  His  application  was
         refused but as it was accepted  he  was  a  minor  he  was  granted
         Exceptional leave to remain until 10 November 2004 when  he  turned
         18. Prior to the expiry of that leave  to  remain  he  applied  for
         further leave to remain as a refugee.  That application was refused
         on 15 May 2007 and an appeal against that decision was dismissed by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy who found  that  the  appellant's
         account was not credible,  she  found  that  the  appellant  was  a
         national of Ethiopia and that his parents were both born  in  Addis
         Ababa in Ethiopia, although she was satisfied that the  appellant's
         father is of Eritrean origin. The Judge found that the  appellant's
         mother was Ethiopian and rejected his claim that both  parents  had
         been born in Eritrea. She found  that  the  appellant  was  thereby
         entitled to Ethiopian nationality and that there  was  no  evidence
         from the Ethiopian Embassy to suggest that he was not  entitled  to
         Ethiopian nationality. The Judge found that the appellant's  father
         was detained in 1999 but did not accept the appellant's claim  that
         he was himself mistreated. Judge Herlihy found that  the  appellant
         would not face a risk on return to Ethiopia. The appellant obtained
         permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against Judge  Herlihy's
         decision but in a decision promulgated  on  24  January  2008,  UTJ
         Chalkley dismissed the appeal on the basis that First-tier Tribunal
         Judge Herlihy had not made an error of law in her decision.

      3. The appellant was not removed from the UK and on 8  April  2011  he
         made further submissions to the Secretary of State. These  resulted
         in the decision now under appeal.

      4. The basis of the further representations was that the appellant has
         been deprived of his Ethiopian nationality. He claims that, at  the
         request of the Home Office, he attended the Ethiopian Embassy where
         he was interviewed and subsequently the Embassy  refused  to  issue
         him with travel documentation.

      5. The respondent considered the representations as an application for
         asylum and refused the application on the basis that the  appellant
         had not shown  that  he  provided  to  the  Ethiopian  Embassy  the
         evidence required to prove that he is Ethiopian as set out  in  the
         country guidance case  of  ST  (Ethnic  Eritrean  -  nationality  -
         return) Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT 252 (IAC).

      6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed  the  appeal  against  that
         decision. The Judge took  the  previous  Judge's  decision  as  her
         starting point and said that the parties  proceeded  on  the  basis
         that the sole issue was the appellant's nationality  and  therefore
         the country named in the removal directions [3.1].  The  respondent
         took the position that the appellant was Ethiopian. The appellant's
         case as put to First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Malins,  was  that  his
         parents were both Eritrean and that he was therefore  Eritrean  and
         that he had visited the  Ethiopian  Embassy  twice  but  had  never
         visited the Eritrean  Embassy.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Malins
         found that the appellant was not credible and that he was Ethiopian
         rather than Eritrean because he  has  never  visited  the  Eritrean
         Embassy;  he  failed  to  take  the  required  information  to  the
         Ethiopian Embassy; and he produced no evidence  that  he  has  been
         refused Ethiopian nationality apart from a Home Office  entry  onto
         its computer log which was based in the appellant's own  assertion.
         The Judge found that the appellant had failed to show that  he  had
         provided the Ethiopian Embassy with the required documentation;  he
         therefore failed to show that he would be regarded by the Ethiopian
         authorities as  an  ethnic  Eritrean  and  that  it  was  therefore
         unlikely that he would face any problems in Ethiopia.

      7.  The grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  contend  that  the
         previous Judge's findings, that the appellant is of mixed ethnicity
         and would not be considered by  the  Ethiopian  authorities  to  be
         Eritrean,  are  unsustainable  in  light  of  the  refusal  of  the
         Ethiopian Embassy to issue travel documents. Judge Malins said that
         she took Judge Herlihy's decision into account in  accordance  with
         the principles in  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  00702.  The  Tribunal
         issued  the  following  guidance  to  Judges  (then   Adjudicators)
         considering a second appeal. The Tribunal said;

             "39.      In our view the second Adjudicator should treat such
                  matters in the following way.
                  (1)  The first Adjudicator's determination  should  always
                      be  the  starting-point.  It  is  the   authoritative
                      assessment of the Appellant's status at the  time  it
                      was made. In principle issues  such  as  whether  the
                      Appellant was properly  represented,  or  whether  he
                      gave evidence, are irrelevant to this.
                  (2)   Facts  happening  since  the   first   Adjudicator's
                      determination can always be taken into account by the
                      second Adjudicator. If those facts  lead  the  second
                      Adjudicator to the conclusion that, at  the  date  of
                      his determination and on the material before him, the
                      appellant makes his case,  so  be  it.  The  previous
                      decision,  on   the   material   before   the   first
                      Adjudicator and at that date, is not inconsistent.
                  (3)   Facts  happening  before  the  first   Adjudicator's
                      determination but having no relevance to  the  issues
                      before him can always be taken into  account  by  the
                      second Adjudicator. The first  Adjudicator  will  not
                      have  been  concerned  with  such  facts,   and   his
                      determination is not an assessment of them."

      8. Judge Herlihy made her decision on 11 July  2007.  The  appellant's
         case is that he had an interview at the Ethiopian Embassy in  2008.
         According to the Home  Office  record  the  appellant  attended  an
         interview at the Ethiopian Embassy on 29  February  2008.  This  is
         clearly an event which occurred after Judge Herlihy's decision. Any
         finding based on that event may have been capable of leading  Judge
         Malins to a different conclusion from that reached by Judge Herlihy
         but  this event does not in itself make  Judge  Herlihy's  findings
         unsustainable. The correct approach  was  that  followed  by  Judge
         Malins, which was to take Judge Herlihy's findings as her  starting
         point.

      9. The grounds of appeal contend that Judge Malins' finding  that  the
         note on the Home Office file that he attended the Ethiopian Embassy
         is based only the appellant's assertion and therefore  insufficient
         to prove that the appellant cannot be documented is perverse.   The
         note on the  Home  Office  computer  system  is  contained  in  the
         appellant's bundle. It appears to be a record of a  telephone  call
         to the Ethiopian Embassy  about  the  outcome  of  the  appellant's
         interview there on 29 August 2008. It  states  that  the  emergency
         travel document application  was  refused  and  that  both  of  the
         appellant's parents are Eritrean. Judge Malins may  therefore  have
         misunderstood the source of the information recorded  on  the  Home
         Office note in that it appears to have come from the Embassy rather
         than the appellant's own assertion. However this is not a  material
         error as the note says that the appellant claims that both  of  his
         parents are Eritrean, a claim which was rejected by Judge  Herlihy.
         It is not therefore clear whether this was the claim  made  to  the
         Ethiopian authorities. Further, in his statement the appellant said
         that he went to the Ethiopian Embassy but did not say what he  told
         them about his family origins nor did he say  what  information  or
         documents he submitted to the Ethiopian Embassy.

     10. Mr Fripp submitted that the appellant was supervised or accompanied
         by a Home Office official on the visit to the Ethiopian Embassy. He
         submitted that the visit to the Ethiopian Embassy would  have  been
         organised by the RGDU of the Home office and that the Judge  failed
         to appreciate the nature of the visit which was therefore under the
         auspices of the Home Office.  Ms  Kenny  submitted  that  the  Home
         Office notes do not amount to a concession that the  appellant  has
         been unlawfully deprived of his nationality, it is  just  a  record
         that the appellant was refused an Emergency  Travel  Document.  She
         produced a copy  of  a  Home  Office  minute  in  relation  to  the
         appellant's Discretionary leave to remain  and  submitted  that  it
         shows that the appellant was granted leave based on his  length  of
         residence and his conduct. It is clear therefore that the grant  of
         leave does not amount to an acceptance that the appellant has  been
         unlawfully deprived of his nationality.

     11. Therefore even if Judge Malins did not  appreciate  that  the  Home
         Office obtained the information directly  from  the  Embassy  I  am
         satisfied that this is not a material error as it is clear from the
         determination that the appellant did not  provide  evidence  as  to
         what he told the Embassy officials about his family  background  or
         what evidence he produced. The fact that he  had  not  been  issued
         with an Emergency Travel Document by the Ethiopian Embassy was  not
         enough in itself to show that he had been  unlawfully  deprived  of
         his citizenship.

     12. Judge Malins properly referred to the guidance set  out  in  ST  as
         summarised at head note 5 as follows;

             "(5) Judicial fact-finders  will  expect  a  person  asserting
             arbitrary deprivation of Ethiopian nationality to approach the
             embassy  in  London  with  all  documentation  emanating  from
             Ethiopia that the person may have,  relevant  to  establishing
             nationality, including  ID  card,  address,  place  of  birth,
             identity  and  place  of  birth  of  parents,   identity   and
             whereabouts of any relatives in Ethiopia and  details  of  the
             person's  schooling  in  Ethiopia.   Failing   production   of
             Ethiopian documentation in respect of such matters, the person
             should put in writing all relevant details, to  be  handed  to
             the embassy. Whilst persons are not for this purpose  entitled
             to portray themselves to the embassy as Eritrean, there is  no
             need to suppress details which disclose an Eritrean connection
             (paragraph 105)."

     13. The Judge found that the appellant's attendance at the Embassy with
         a friend and a letter from the Home Office 'falls woefully short of
         the above injunction'. This was a finding open to the Judge on  the
         basis of the evidence before her.

     14. In summary for the reasons set out above  I  find  that  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Malins did not err in her determination.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.



Signed      Date: 15 January 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal





Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed      Date:  15 January 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



