
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA119572015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th May 2016                              |On 20th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                               ROWENA PERALTA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of the Philippines born  on  1st  May
    1969.  The Appellant first arrived in the UK on 22nd June 2013 when she
    was given leave to enter  until  18th  February  2014  as  an  Overseas
    Domestic Worker.  The Appellant applied for asylum on 13th March  2014.
    She withdrew that application later that month in order  to  return  to
    the Philippines to see her children, but on 4th April 2014 she repeated
    the application.  The application was refused on 21st August  2015  for
    the reasons given  in  the  Respondent's  letter  of  that  date.   The
    Appellant appealed, and her appeal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Graves (the Judge) sitting at Harmondsworth on  6th  April  2016.
    He decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons given in his  Decision
    of the same date.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that  decision,
    and on 26th April 2016 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. At the hearing before me, there was no appearance by or  on  behalf  of
    the Appellant.  I decided to hear the appeal  in  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant in accordance with the provisions of Rule 38 of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   I  was  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant had been notified of the time, date, and place of the hearing
    at her last known address.  I considered it  was  in  the  interest  of
    justice to proceed with the hearing.   As  will  become  apparent,  the
    Appellant has a history of failing to attend hearings.

 4. The sole ground of application is that  the  Appellant  was  unable  to
    attend the hearing before the Judge through ill-health and because  she
    had not been given the necessary  notice  of  the  hearing.   Leave  to
    appeal was granted on that basis.

 5. I find no error of law in the decision of  the  Judge.   The  Appellant
    failed to attend the hearing before the Judge on 6th April  2016.   The
    Judge gave his reasons for proceeding to hear the appeal in the absence
    of the Appellant at paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Decision.  The Judge  had
    regard to the overriding objective given by  Rule  2  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014 and the Judge considered that it was in the interest of justice to
    proceed as required by Rule 28.  There was no evidence before him  that
    the Appellant was  ill,  and  the  Judge  satisfied  himself  that  the
    Appellant had received a Notice of Hearing  in  accordance  with  those
    Procedure Rules.  There was no application for  an  adjournment  before
    the Judge.  The Judge properly took into account  the  history  of  the
    appeal.  The Judge's decision to proceed contained no error on a  point
    of law.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.
Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did make an order for anonymity.  I  was  not  asked
to continue that order, and indeed find no reason to  do  so.   I  therefore
lift the order made by the First-tier Tribunal.






Signed                              Date 20th June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
