
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11461/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 19 June 2013                               |on 21 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                      VA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr C McGinley, of Gray & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant is a 2 year old  citizen  of  Nigeria.   Her  mother  is  a
   citizen  of  Nigeria  who  has  exhausted  her  asylum   appeal   rights.
   Circumstances  have  changed  with  the  passage  of  time,  and   rather
   conflicting information about the family unit has  been  given,  but  the
   case now appears to be put on the basis of a family unit  comprising  the
   appellant, her mother, her older brother, her younger sister (born  since
   this case began) and her father, a citizen of Nigeria with no immigration
   status in the UK.

2) An application was made (apparently on instructions through  her  mother)
   for the appellant to be recognised as a refugee because if  returned  she
   would be at real risk of enforced FGM, as a member of the  Yoruba  tribe,
   to which her mother belongs, against the wishes of her parents.

3) The respondent refused the claim by letter dated 11 December  2012.   The
   respondent considered that a medical report by Dr T Groom did not support
   the claim that the appellant's mother had been subjected to FGM; that the
   appellant would not be at risk of enforced FGM; and that in any event she
   could relocate to Abuja, or elsewhere in Nigeria.

4) First-tier Tribunal Judge  Agnew  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by
   determination dated 11 March 2013.  The judge recorded the conclusion  of
   the medical report:

    ... we felt there is no evidence of major  female  genital  mutilation,
    however the appearance could be consistent with minor cutting affecting
    the right labia (this would be classified as a Type 4 FGM).


5) The judge did not give credit to the  appellant's  explanation  that  she
   had forgotten to mention her own experience of FGM, and said at paragraph
   21:

    Having considered ... the report of Dr Groom with  the  other  evidence
    ... it has not been established to the low standard of proof  ...  that
    [the appellant's mother] was forced to undergo FGM in Nigeria.


6) The judge found it incredible that the parents of the appellant would  be
   unable to protect her from the risk of  FGM;  did  not  accept  that  the
   appellant, through her mother, would need to resort to a women's shelter;
   and found that the family could relocate.

7) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  focus  on  the
   judge's treatment of the medical report.  It is asserted  that  Dr  Groom
   had the necessary expertise to make a finding regarding FGM, that she was
   fully aware of her instructions, and that  the  Tribunal  speculated  and
   reached an irrational finding.  The  further  point  raised  is  that  in
   finding it significant that the appellant's mother said she had forgotten
   that she  had  been  circumcised,  the  Tribunal  "failed  to  take  into
   consideration the personal history of [the appellant's  mother]  who  had
   been found to have been the victim of sexual trafficking to the UK",  and
   that there was a failure to give anxious scrutiny to this point.

8)  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wilson  granted  permission  to
   appeal, saying:

    The grounds ... argue that the judge failed to give  sufficient  weight
    to a medical report ... Whilst I grant leave on this issue  it  appears
    that the appellant's mother's own asylum appeal has  been  refused  ...
    but no copy of any ... decisions were before the judge.  Arguably  they
    should also have been considered if this was a  new  factual  assertion
    not previously raised by the appellant's mother.  Both  parties  should
    take immediate steps to file such decisions ...


9) The appellant's  solicitors  in  response  to  the  grant  of  permission
   produced a copy of a First-tier Tribunal determination by Judge Wood  TD,
   promulgated on 8 March 2010.  The appellant at that stage herself forward
   as a single female with an infant (male) child,  basing  her  claim  upon
   having been trafficked to the  UK  for  purposes  of  prostitution.   The
   determination records at paragraph 29 that  the  judge  was  referred  to
   reports by Dr S Copstick, Consultant Clinical Neuropsychologist,  to  the
   effect that although the appellant was able to function on a basic level,
   her understanding of timescales, calendars and the like was  particularly
   poor and she had a tendency to  agree  with  authority  without  offering
   explanations, which might make her behaviour seem irrational.  The report
   said, "This woman thinks slowly, markedly slowly.  Give  plenty  of  time
   for answers and do not force answers because this woman will  conform  to
   authority ... she is not being difficult".

10) At paragraph 37, the judge fully set out Dr Copstick's conclusions.   He
   took them into account in reaching  his  positive  credibility  findings.
   However, there was no evidence of a real risk of being re-trafficked.  It
   was accepted that the appellant would have a number of difficulties as  a
   single mother with a child and having been a victim of  trafficking,  and
   being of low education and low intellect, but her  appeal  was  not  made
   out.

11) Permission to appeal was granted for absence  of  consideration  of  the
   Article 8 aspect.  The case came before Designated Judge  Murray  in  the
   Upper Tribunal on 1 September 2010.  The appellant's  position  then  was
   that she would be returning with her son, born in March  2008,  and  with
   another child not yet born.  The judge noted  that  there  had  not  been
   found  to  be  any  credibility  issues  in  the  previous  determination
   (paragraph 46) but concluded that the appellant could relocate in Nigeria
   to get away from her uncle, if necessary, and that for her and her  child
   to return to Nigeria would not be disproportionate in terms of Article 8.



12) At the outset of his submissions on 19 June 2013 Mr McGinley also  filed
   a copy of the record of the substantive asylum interview on  17  November
   2009 of the appellant's mother.  Q/A 40-42, 47-48 and 77  show  that  her
   account in her own case included the infliction of FGM against  her  will
   after her uncle decided that she was to marry one of his  friends,  a  75
   year old Muslim who already had many wives.

13) Mr McGinley said that at the time of the  determination  by  Judge  Wood
   the appellant had only her son.  By the  time  of  the  determination  by
   Judge Murray she  was  pregnant,  and  subsequently  gave  birth  to  the
   appellant.  She now also has another daughter, who would  be  in  exactly
   the same position as the  appellant.   An  examination  of  the  previous
   determinations, the evidence of Dr Copstick and the interview  record  of
   the appellant's mother showed that the findings  reached  on  credibility
   were unsustainable.  These matters were fundamental to the risk faced  by
   the appellant in Nigeria.  Judge Agnew rejected the account given by  the
   appellant's mother of her enforced FGM through a misapprehension.  It was
   accepted that it would have been  preferable  had  these  materials  been
   before the First-tier Tribunal, but the question  was  one  of  essential
   fairness to a child appellant.   Now that the papers  had  been  located,
   the determination should be set aside.  The Upper Tribunal should  remake
   the decision on the basis of the skeleton legal argument which  had  been
   relied upon in the First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant derives  a  Yoruba
   ethnic identity from her mother.  There is a 54.8% prevalence of  FGM  in
   that ethnic group, which indicates more than a  real  risk.   A  decision
   should be substituted in her favour.

14) Mrs O'Brien submitted that the judge made no error of law  on  the  case
   placed before her.  At paragraph 19 the judge noted that the  appellant's
   mother had not raised her experience of FGM "... when further submissions
   were made on 4 May 2011.  When asked [at the hearing] why not  ...  [she]
   said that she had  forgotten  she  had  been  circumcised."    The  judge
   contrasted that with an interview where the appellant's mother said  that
   FGM was an experience which "... you can never forget ... for the rest of
   your life.  So I don't support it at  all."   That  looked  at  what  the
   appellant's mother said in an interview and what she said at the  hearing
   before Judge Agnew, which was not a false comparison.  The documents  how
   produced were irrelevant to those findings.  The judge  was  entitled  to
   reject the explanation by the appellant's mother that  she  forgot  about
   such a significant matter.

15) I queried whether the absence of the determinations  and  Dr  Copstick's
   report might be regarded as inadvertent procedural unfairness,  amounting
   to error of law, through no fault of the judge.  The determinations would
   have been available to the Secretary of  State.   Mrs  O'Brien  submitted
   that there was no unfairness, because the case related to  the  appellant
   and not to her mother.  She further submitted  that  the  matters  raised
   made no difference to the outcome.  Whether or not the appellant's mother
   had been subject to FGM, it had not been shown that there  was  any  such
   real risk to the child.  In any event, the risk was at worst local,  from
   extended kin, and could be avoided through internal relocation, as argued
   in the refusal letter and as held by Judge Agnew.

16) Mr McGinley in response pointed out that the  documents  did  not  raise
   any matters which were new to the Secretary of State.  It was commonplace
   for the Secretary of State to  rely  on  previous  negative  findings  of
   credibility.  In this  case  there  were  positive  credibility  findings
   regarding a highly significant witness, and unfairness had arisen through
   these  being  overlooked.   Taking  the  findings  in  the  determination
   together with the conclusions by Dr Copstick regarding  the  intellectual
   difficulties of the appellant's mother, there was  a  legal  error  which
   should lead to the decision being reversed.

17) I reserved my determination.

18) Mr McGinley did not seek to advance the argument that  there  was  error
   of approach to the medical report.  I am satisfied that there was no such
   error.  The weight to be given to any item of evidence  is  very  much  a
   matter for the judge.  On whether the appellant's  mother  had  undergone
   FGM the report was, as Mrs O'Brien pointed out, inconclusive.  The  judge
   was entitled to look at the report in the context of the history of being
   forced into prostitution, having been subject  to  sexual  violence,  and
   having had children.

19) The issue now argued was not raised in the grounds of appeal, and  there
   has been no application to amend, but Mrs O'Brien accepted that it should
   be resolved on its merits.  The  question  is  whether  legal  error  has
   arisen through the judge not having had sight of the prior determinations
   and the psychological report relating to the appellant's mother.

20) Mrs O'Brien's first argument was that these documents  do  not  bear  on
   the judge's reasoning.  Mrs O'Brien  was  correct  to  observe  that  the
   precise  comparison  the  judge  drew  was  between  evidence  from   the
   appellant's mother at an interview and at the hearing, which presented  a
   contradiction which would still have had to be explained away.

21) The judge went on to find this discrepancy extremely damaging  not  only
   to the claim that the appellant's mother had undergone FGM, but  also  to
   the claim that her daughter might be forced to undergo FGM.  Reading  the
   determination as a whole, I do not think it could safely be said that the
   same conclusion on the credibility of the appellant's mother  would  have
   been reached had the two determinations and the psychological report been
   before Judge Agnew.

22) That does not necessarily mean that legal error arose.  If  it  did,  it
   can only be constructive so far as the judge was concerned.  It  has  not
   been suggested that she was under a duty to call for further materials.

23) This is  not  the  typical  case  of  inadvertent  procedural  oversight
   amounting to  legal  error,  which  is  administrative  failure  to  link
   evidence timeously to a file before a judge reaches a decision without an
   oral hearing.  What occurred here could only amount  to  legal  error  if
   there was a positive duty on the respondent to  trace  and  to  link  the
   materials relating to the case of the appellant's mother.

24) The application to the SSHD was  put  forward  by  agents  who  had  not
   previously  acted  for  the  appellant's  mother,  without  reference  to
   materials which have now come to light, although there were included such
   items as Dr Groom's medical report.

25) I do not think the SSHD can be criticised  for  having  dealt  with  the
   claim  exactly  as  it  was   put   forward,   particularly   where   the
   representations were made through professional  representatives  of  long
   experience in this jurisdiction.  It would be imposing a very high  legal
   duty to expect  the  Secretary  of  State  to  have  delved  further  for
   materials to support the appellant's case.

26) If error of law had been found, that would not necessarily result  in  a
   decision in the appellant's favour.  Whether her mother  was  subject  to
   FGM was relevant, but not decisive.  The critical finding  was  not  that
   the appellant's mother had not been subject to FGM, but that there was no
   risk of FGM being enforced upon the appellant against  the  will  of  her
   parents, who could  relocate  in  Nigeria  if  necessary,  without  undue
   hardship.  Mr McGinley based his arguments on the prevalence of FGM among
   the appellant's ethnic group, but the prevalence of a practice is not the
   same as the risk of its enforced infliction.  The evidence was not  cited
   to establish a risk of that nature.   There  are  no  grounds  of  appeal
   directed at the relevant findings, which are at paragraphs 31 to 33.

27) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
   of an error on a point of law.  In any event, if constructive  error  had
   been found in relation to the prior determinations and the  psychological
   report on the appellant's mother, the conclusions reached by  the  First-
   tier Tribunal on absence of risk of  enforced  FGM,  on  availability  of
   relocation, and on  Article  8,  including  the  best  interests  of  the
   children,  are  all  legally  sound.   Those  conclusions  were  properly
   decisive of the appeal.

28) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



                               [pic]
                                19 June 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
