
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/11660/2014
     aa/11657/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 9 February 2016                     |On 15 March 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                             abdul hossain noory
                                masooma noory
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Harding, Counsel instructed by Seelhoff
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Roopnarine-Davies dated 27 August 2015 following a hearing  at
    Taylor House on 20 July 2015.  In  her  decision  the  judge  dismissed
    appeals brought by the Appellants against the Respondent's decisions of
    10  December  2014  refusing  their   applications   for   asylum   and
    humanitarian protection, and making decisions to remove them  from  the
    United Kingdom. The judge also held that  the  Appellants'  removal  to
    Afghanistan  would  not  be  unlawful  under  Article  8  ECHR  or  the
    Immigration Rules.

2.   The Appellants are father and adult daughter  respectively.  The  first
    Appellant's wife (the second Appellant's mother) is a dependent on  the
    first Appellant's appeal. The background to this  matter  is  that  the
    Appellants  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  March  2011   having
    previously applied for entry clearance in 2009 to visit AMN, the son of
    the first Appellant and his wife  (and  hence  the  second  Appellant's
    brother). AMN resides  in  the  UK  and  is  a  British  national.  The
    Appellants' applications were refused but they succeeded  in  obtaining
    entry clearance on appeal.   It  is  to  be  noted  that  although  the
    Appellants are nationals of Afghanistan they have spent over  30  years
    outside of Afghanistan, living  in  Iran,  where  in  fact  the  second
    Appellant was born.  They do not possess Iranian nationality.

3.   After their arrival in the United Kingdom the  Appellants  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain as dependants of AMN. That  application  was
    refused and an appeal was pursued.  That resulted in a decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 2  February  2012  dismissing  their
    appeal.  No protection claim was advanced  at  that  stage  before  the
    Respondent or the Tribunal; rather the appeal was pursued on Article  8
    grounds.  Upon that appeal being dismissed, the Appellants  pursued  an
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal and ultimately to the Court of  Appeal  in
    AN (Afghanistan) & Ors v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1189 (11  October  2013),
    in which the Court of  Appeal  held  that  the  First  tier  and  Upper
    Tribunals had not erred in law in dismissing the Appellants' appeals.

4.    Further  representations  were  made  including  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection,  and  human  rights  grounds,  resulting  in  the   present
    decisions of 10 December 2014.  On appeal to the First tier Tribunal on
    20  July  2015,  the  Appellants  did  not  pursue  the  asylum  ground
    (decision,  para  [9]),  but  argued  that  they   were   entitled   to
    humanitarian protection, immigration  rule  para  276ADE(1),  and  that
    their removal would be unlawful under article 8 ECHR.

5.   The judge set out in her decision a number of issues which  caused  her
    concern as regards the credibility of the Appellants and  their  claims
    to lack family support in Afghanistan.  She held  at  paragraph  20  as
    follows:

         "20. Having considered the evidence as a whole including  the  oral
             evidence of the Appellants and their witnesses I did not  find
             them to be open and straightforward in material  aspects  e.g.
             their continuing connections to  and  level  of  contact  with
             Afghanistan.  The impression as a whole is  of  a  very  close
             family.  Their evidence was noticeably reticent  in  reference
             to the first Appellant's other son whom it was  claimed  lived
             in Iran.  I do not accept that  they  are  not  aware  of  his
             whereabouts.   Although  the  psychologist's  report  was  not
             relied on as a basis for claiming that the  first  Appellant's
             health is a factor in assessing removal, it was  there  stated
             that he was worried about his son because  of  the  kidnap  of
             Shia Afghanis.  This  suggested  that  his  son  may  live  in
             Afghanistan though I do not proceed on that basis.


         21.  I do not accept that the Appellants last  visited  Afghanistan
             in 2004 to regularise their residency  status  in  Iran.   The
             findings by the FtT and the CA were that they visited in 2010.
              In 2004 their passports were issued by the Afghan Embassy  in
             Tehran.  Masooma has visited  the  country  approximately  2-3
             times in her life, possibly more.  Masooma and  the  witnesses
             were not candid.  Her father lived in Afghanistan for most  of
             his life.  As at 2013 he and  his  wife  each  had  a  brother
             there.  There was  not  evidence  beyond  assertion  that  his
             brother has since died or that  his  cousin  who  lived  in  a
             village in Afghanistan had moved to Russia.  The oral evidence
             of the first Appellant was at odds with that  of  Masooma  and
             her brother regarding their mother's relatives  in  Kabul.   I
             preferred the evidence of the last 2 that she has  2  brothers
             in Kabul.  One has 7 children, the other  2  children.   Their
             claim that they were not aware of their cousins' circumstances
             was not credible. Eventually it  emerged  that  one  of  their
             uncles has a  car  repair  business  in  which  the  sons  are
             involved. There was no evidence that  they  had  suffered  any
             harm in Kabul  as  a  result  of  the  security  situation  or
             otherwise."

6.   There was also a reference at paragraph 23 that  the  judge  found  the
    witnesses coy about their visits to Afghanistan and sought to underplay
    their connections.

7.   In summary, the judge held that the Appellants had not shown that  they
    were at individualised risk of harm in accordance with Article  15C  of
    the Qualification Directive and were thus not entitled to  humanitarian
    protection.  Their application under the  Refugee  Convention  was  not
    pursued. The judge also held that  in  relation  to  Immigration  Rules
    276ADE  none  of  the  Appellants  succeeded  because  of  the  judge's
    assessment of the likely availability  of  support  from  other  family
    members in Afghanistan.

8.    Grounds  of  appeal  were  filed  against  that  decision,   initially
    resulting in a refusal  of  permission  by  the  First-tier,  but  upon
    renewal to the Upper Tribunal permission was  granted.   Those  grounds
    are lengthy, and argue, in summary, that the judge erred in law in:

         (i)  wrongly recording the evidence of the witnesses before her, in
             relation to at least 8 different elements of  the  Appellants'
             evidence (set out in the grounds at, paras 9-23), resulting in
             her adverse credibility finding being unsound;


         (ii) misapprehending the scope and relevance of a report from  June
             2015 from the International Crisis Group, when  assessing  the
             security situation in Afghanistan  for  the  purposes  of  her
             assessment  of  the  Appellants'   claim    for   humanitarian
             protection;


         (iii)    making irrational findings at [26]  as  to  whether  there
             were very significant  obstacles  to  the  second  Appellant's
             integration into Afghanistan (she never having  lived  there),
             as per 276ADE(1)(vi);


         (iv) misdirecting herself in law in her assessment of whether there
             were very significant obstacles to the Appellants' integration
             into Afghanistan, as per 276ADE(1)(vi); by  directing  herself
             at [25]  that   the  security  situation  in  Afghanistan  was
             irrelevant to integration;


         (v)  failing at [25] to apply Devaseelan in respect of  an  earlier
             finding by the Tribunal in 2012 that the  family  would  'face
             real difficulty upon moving to Afghanistan', in that the judge
             held that such a finding was not sufficient to establish  that
             there were very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  into
             Afghanistan  under para 276ADE(1)(vi);


         (vi) failing, when assessing the proportionality  of  the  proposed
             removal  of  the  second  Appellant,  to  take  into   account
             mandatory considerations under s.117B of her ability to  speak
             English and her financial independence, or  that  her  British
             husband  could  not  reasonably  be  required   to   live   in
             Afghanistan,  in  the  light  of  F&CO  travel  advice   which
             recommends against all but essential travel to Afghanistan.


9.   Permission to appeal was granted generally by UTJ Karama on 16  October
    2015, noting that as  the  Appellant  raised  an  issue  regarding  the
    accuracy of the Judge's note of  evidence,  that  the  drafter  of  the
    grounds of appeal should file a witness statement, and  the  Appellants
    should engage  separate  Counsel  for  the  hearing  before  the  upper
    Tribunal.

10.  Before me, such arrangements are in place;  Mr  Seelhoff,  of  Seelhoff
    Solicitors,  has  prepared  a  witness  statement   setting   out   the
    allegations made in the grounds of appeal, supported  by  his  note  of
    evidence before the First tier Judge. Mr Harding  of  Counsel  appeared
    for  the  Appellants,  with  Mr  Seelhoff  being  available  for  cross
    examination by the Respondent if necessary. At the appeal before me,  I
    made available to the parties a copy of the note of evidence  taken  by
    the judge.

11.  Mr Harding proceeded to  address  me  on  the  Appellants'  grounds  of
    appeal. The first issue is the suggestion that  the  judge  incorrectly
    recorded the witnesses' evidence in a number of respects.  Firstly,  at
    [20] the judge suggested that the Appellants were reticent in reference
    to the first Appellant's older son.  The Appellants argue that none  of
    the witnesses were asked any  questions  about  the  first  Appellant's
    older son, thus their evidence could not properly be described as being
    'reticent', nor could they properly be criticised for failing  to  give
    evidence about him. Upon consideration of both Mr Seelhoff's  statement
    and his exhibited  handwritten  note  of  evidence,  and  the  note  of
    evidence taken by the judge, it seems correct that questions  were  not
    asked about the first Appellant's older  son,  or  his  whereabouts.  I
    agree with the Appellants' submission that it may  not  be  appropriate
    for  adverse  inferences  to  be  drawn  from  a  witness's   perceived
    unwillingness to give evidence on a particular topic, when the  witness
    has not been asked questions about that topic.

12.  Secondly, whereas at [21] the judge did not accept that the  Appellants
    last visited Afghanistan in 2004 to regularise their residency in Iran,
    the grounds assert that neither of the Appellants had in fact said that
    they had last gone to Afghanistan in 2004. Rather, the first  Appellant
    had said: "I cannot recall precisely", but thought that it was  "almost
    seven years ago" (which would therefore have been in  or  around  2008)
    and the evidence of the second Appellant, Masooma, was that she thought
    it was "when I was 11", being therefore in or around 2006 or 2007.

13.  Again, upon consideration the notes of evidence taken  by  Mr  Seelhoff
    and the judge, it  seems  correct  that  none  of  the  Appellants  had
    asserted before the judge that they had last  gone  to  Afghanistan  in
    2004.

14.  When considering what ties the Appellants have  to  Afghanistan,  their
    actual evidence, which was that  they  were  last  there  in  2008  (or
    potentially  2010  according  to  evidence  recorded  in  the   earlier
    proceedings) would result in them having last visited their country  of
    origin  more  recently  than  the  judge  had  thought,  and  therefore
    potentially  undermining  their  assertion  to  have  lost  ties   with
    Afghanistan.  However, the point the Appellants raise is that there can
    be little confidence in the  judge's  credibility  assessment  in  this
    regard, and in  other  regards,  when  it  becomes  apparent  that  the
    evidence of the witnesses had been  recorded  incorrectly.  I  tend  to
    agree with that proposition.

15.  Further, at paragraph 21 the judge had asserted that  Masooma  and  the
    witnesses were not candid, but there is no example  of  their  lack  of
    candour being set out within the judge's paragraph.   I  find  that  an
    allegation of insincerity or dishonesty needs to be supported  by  some
    illustration of the inconsistent, implausible or  otherwise  untruthful
    element within a witness's evidence, in order to substantiate  such  an
    allegation.   I  cannot  find  any  such  substantiation  within   that
    paragraph of the judge's decision.

16.  At this juncture, following partial submissions made by Mr Harding,  Mr
    Nath wished to address me having considered the position on  behalf  of
    the Respondent and having heard the submissions thus far by Mr Harding.
     He informed me that upon his consideration of the matter he had formed
    the view that  the  Appellant's  first  ground  was  made  out  in  the
    following respect; that there did appear to  be  instances  within  the
    judge's record of evidence as set out in the promulgated decision where
    the evidence appeared to differ from the judge's own  record,  and  the
    record taken by Mr Seelhoff, which gave some cause for concern that the
    judge may have proceeded to  assess  the  factual  situation  for  this
    family upon potential return to Afghanistan on a misinformed basis, and
    that the credibility of the witnesses may  have  been  impugned  on  an
    incorrect basis also.  So, the Respondent accepted that  the  first  of
    the Appellant's grounds was made out.  I found that  it  was  not  then
    necessary to consider the other allegations within Ground 1 as to other
    elements of evidence said not to have been set  out  correctly  in  the
    decision.

17.  I then raised with the parties the fourth ground  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant, which is that in finding that there would be no obstacles to
    the Appellants' integration into Afghanistan that due  to  her  social,
    cultural and family ties being not other than Afghani, it  appeared  at
    paragraph 25 of the judge's decision that she had  misdirected  herself
    in law.  The judge held as follows  on  her  assessment  of  the  first
    Appellant's ability to integrate into Afghanistan:

         "25. The first Appellant is 73 years old.  He has lived for over 30
             years in Kabul, 19 (sic - this should be 29) years in Iran and
             4 years in the UK.  He and his wife have not suffered harm  or
             persecution in Afghanistan  or  Kabul.   He  speaks  Dari  and
             Farsi.  He will return with his wife who is 10  years  younger
             than he and who has no health problems.  They have  close  and
             extended family  members  in  Kabul  with  whom  they  are  in
             contact.  They have sufficient means to live in Kabul.   Their
             family in the UK can visit them.  The first Appellant  is  old
             but not disabled.  It is not claimed that their health  is  an
             impediment to relocation.  Considering the evidence as a whole
             I  find  that  there  are  not  very   significant   obstacles
             (including social, cultural or family) to his integration (not
             safety) into Afghanistan within para 276ADE(vi)  private  life
             of the Rules. I do not accept that the security  situation  is
             relevant to integration."


18.  Before the judge, the Appellants had  raised  as  a  discrete  argument
    that they faced a serious and  individual  threat  to  their  lives  or
    person  by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence   in   situations   of
    international or internal armed conflict, contrary to art 15(c) of  the
    Qualification  Directive.  The  judge  held  at  [15-16]  that  was  no
    sufficient evidential basis for her  to  depart  from  guidance  in  AK
    (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] 00163 (IAC)  that  there  was  no
    such risk.

19.  Even if that were a sustainable finding  (as  to  which,  see  para  21
    below), I find unsustainable the judge's proposition at [25]  that  the
    security situation in Afghanistan is irrelevant to  the  assessment  of
    whether there may be very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellants'
    integration  into  Afghanistan  as  per  para  276ADE(1)(vi).  Security
    concerns,  even  if  falling  short  of  establishing  a   ground   for
    humanitarian protection, must logically in my view be relevant  to  any
    person's ability to integrate into a  country.   It  would  clearly  be
    easier for a person to integrate into a  country  in  circumstances  of
    peace and the respect for the rule of law,  on  the  one  hand,  or  in
    circumstances of significant armed conflict between  government  forces
    and Anti- Government Elements (AGE's), and  indiscriminate  attacks  on
    the civilian population, on the other, as is the case  in  Afghanistan,
    on any assessment. I find that the judge misdirected herself in law  in
    finding  that  such  conflict  was  irrelevant  to  the  assessment  of
    integration  under  276ADE.   Quite  how  the  security  situation   in
    Afghanistan would affect the Appellants' integration  into  Afghanistan
    is therefore a matter which  needs  to  be  decided,  but  taking  that
    security situation into account, rather than ignoring  it,  and  taking
    into account that the first Appellant spent 29  (not  19)  years  lived
    outside Afghanistan before coming to the UK.

20.  I have therefore found two material errors of law; firstly the  judge's
    assessment as to the factual situation which exists for members of this
    family upon return  to  Afghanistan,  and  also  whether  the  security
    situation is relevant for the  purposes  of  the  assessment  of  their
    integration into that country.

21.  As a result  of  those  findings  it  is  therefore  unknown  what  the
    circumstances may be for this family upon return. Consequently  I  find
    that the judge's finding on humanitarian protection is also infected by
    error.  Whether someone is at risk from serious and  individual  threat
    to their lives or person by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence  will
    necessarily depend on what level of security they  will  benefit  from,
    and what assistance and accommodation  may  be  available  to  them  on
    return.  I therefore find that there are sufficient errors  of  law  in
    the judge's decision such that its overall conclusions cannot be relied
    upon and I set it aside. It has not been necessary for me  to  rule  on
    the  Appellants'  grounds  (ii),  (iii),  (vi),  and  (vi),  therefore,
    although I do not think that (vi) has merit.

22.  The consequence of this is that all findings of fact  need  to  be  re-
    made.  I find, and the parties agree, that the  appropriate  place  for
    that to  take  place  is  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that  the
    Appellants' appeal should be remitted to  that  Tribunal.   I  make  no
    specific directions as to how that appeal proceeds.  I  leave  that  to
    members of the First-tier Tribunal, save that all relevant findings  of
    fact will need to be re-made.  I therefore allow the Appellants' appeal
    to the extent that it is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

    Notice of Decision

    The making of the decision by the  First  tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of material errors of law.


    I set aside the decision of the First tier Tribunal.


    I remit the appeal to the First tier under powers  under  s.12(2)(b)(i)
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

Signed                     Date: 4.3.16
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

