
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11850/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 May 2016                                 |On 1 July 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     MM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Harrison, Immigration Advice Service


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer in this decision to the respondent as the  appellant  and
    to the appellant as  the  respondent  (as  they  appeared  respectively
    before the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant MM was born in 1988 and
    is a citizen of Iraq.  He appealed against a decision dated 17 December
    2014 of the respondent refusing him asylum and  making  directions  for
    his removal from the United Kingdom.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Buchanan) in a decision promulgated on 7 April 2015 allowed the appeal.
     The Secretary of State now appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  There are two grounds of appeal.  The first  challenges  the
    decision on the basis that the judge failed to give adequate reasons to
    establish a risk to the appellant.  The respondent's position was  that
    the appellant could return to Iraq and reside in an uncontested area to
    avoid any risk from ISIL.  The judge found that ISIL had approached and
    threatened the appellant at his shop in Baghdad on two occasions.   The
    judge made an error by referring to an anonymous threatening  telephone
    call having been made from Nineveh as a "non-contested" area  of  Iraq.
    The judge failed to refer to any evidence which  established  that  the
    appellant would, as he claimed, be at risk  from  ISIL  throughout  the
    country of Iraq.   Further,  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
    motivations of ISIL and why they might "pursue the appellant to such  a
    degree given the resources required and the difficulties they may  face
    in so doing".

 2. It is clear from any reading of the decision that the  judge  was  well
    aware that there were areas of Iraq where the appellant (who claimed to
    have been threatened by ISIL) might be at a real risk of  ill-treatment
    by that organisation whilst in other areas the risk prima  facie  would
    not appear to be so great.  The main argument adopted by the respondent
    is that: (a) the appellant cannot be said to be at risk throughout Iraq
    including areas where ISIL are not in control,  and  (b)  there  is  no
    reason to suppose that ISIL would devote scarce  resources  to  hunting
    down and harming this particular appellant.  I find that the ground  is
    without merit.  Quite correctly, the judge has  sought  to  define  the
    particular characteristics of this appellant and has used the resulting
    factual matrix to conduct his analysis of risk on  return.   At  [7.10]
    the judge found that "the appellant's family background  heightens  the
    risk which he would face ... on return to Iraq whether that  return  be
    to Baghdad or to  Basra  (as  determined  as  a  place  reasonable  for
    relocation by the respondent)".  The appellant has  close  associations
    with the United Kingdom (two of his brothers  live  here).   The  judge
    accepted the evidence of  the  witness  (brother)  who  had  "given  an
    independent assessment of distinguishing  features  which  would  alert
    ISIL to the appellant's whereabouts in Iraq".  The judge  had  attached
    "significant weight to [the brothers'] evidence that  they  had  spoken
    directly to their mother about the  receipt  of  a  death  threat  from
    ISIS".  The judge found that ISIS (ISIL) "may issue death  threats  and
    may warn people of their  interest  in  them  prior  to  taking  action
    against them".  That finding was based on the background material.  The
    judge found that the appellant had received a death  threat  and  found
    that the appellant was likely to be perceived by ISIL members as having
    been "associated ... with western allies".  Ultimately, the appellant's
    "family associations, family history and his own background of visiting
    the UK and his father's background of  previously  living  in  the  UK"
    exposed him to a risk of ill-treatment at the hands  of  IS  throughout
    Iraq.

 3. I am also not persuaded that the ground concerning the judge's comments
    about Nineveh and Basra  take  the  respondent's  challenge  very  far.
    Likewise, the second ground of appeal (that the judge failed  to  refer
    to or apply Section 8 of the  2004  Act)  does  little  to  assist  the
    respondent.  It is true the judge failed to deal with Section 8 but, in
    the light of his very firm findings (which I have summarised above)  as
    to the appellant's past problems in Iraq and the likelihood of  a  real
    risk of ill-treatment upon his return to any part of that  country,  it
    is difficult to see how the application of Section 8 in  this  instance
    will have dislodged those firm findings.

 4. For the reasons I have given, this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 5. The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 30 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



