
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11355/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination sent           |
|on 8 July 2013                                |on 10 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  M OMAR FARUK (also known as FEROZ BUHYAN)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) This determination refers to parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

2) In the identity of Feroz Buhyan,  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh  born  on  8
   September 1983, the appellant entered the UK as a student  in  2011.   He
   did not study.  The police arrested him as an overstayer  on  16  October
   2012.  He then said that his real identity is M Omar Faruk, a citizen  of
   Bangladesh born on 8 September 1983, and he sought asylum.

3) The respondent refused the claim for reasons explained in a letter  dated
   6 December 2012.  The respondent declined to accept that the appellant is
   M Omar Faruk, and rejected his account that he was at risk of persecution
   on return to Bangladesh.

4) The respondent also considered the claim under Article  8  of  the  ECHR,
   within the terms of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, on the basis of
   his relationship with Lorna Riddoch, a UK citizen.  The respondent  found
   that Ms Riddoch was not the appellant's partner as defined in the  Rules,
   and that in any event their relationship was not genuine and subsisting.

5) The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   By  determination
   dated 28 March 2013, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Debra  Clapham  accepted
   that the appellant's true identity is M  Omar  Faruk,  but  rejected  his
   account of any involvement in political activity and his claim to  be  at
   risk on return.  The determination concludes thus:

  86. I also considered the appellant's claim in terms of Article 8.  I note
      that the respondent  considered  the  Article  8  claim  in  terms  of
      Appendix FM ... and  found  that  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the
      requirements because his partner is not a partner as  defined  in  the
      Rules.  I have also considered the matter  in  terms  of  the  general
      jurisprudence of Article 8 and  on  both  accounts  I  find  that  the
      appellant has family life as claimed.


  87. Ms MacNamee on behalf of the Home Office sought to show ...  that  the
      appellant and his alleged partner were inconsistent  ...  However,  it
      seemed to me that the parties were consistent  in  relation  to  their
      account of their social life.  I found Ms Riddoch  to  be  genuine  in
      that she has a strong affection for the appellant.  Both she  and  the
      appellant narrated how they became engaged and both  were  also  clear
      that they discussed marriage in November last year.   They  were  also
      consistent in relation to when they last went out  socially  and  they
      were both also consistent insofar as both narrated that  he  helps  Ms
      Riddoch with her shopping.

  88. ... Ms Riddoch cannot easily relocate to Bangladesh.  She  has  severe
      medical problems and she also appears to  have  a  close  relationship
      with her own family in the UK.

  89. ... The appellant's immigration history is far from  satisfactory  ...
      there are credibility issues in relation to his  asylum  claim  but  I
      consider that Ms Riddoch is genuinely fond of  the  appellant  ...  it
      would be disproportionate to expect the appellant to leave the country
      and relocate in the circumstances ... Ms Riddoch would be severely and
      detrimentally affected by his  departure  ...  their  relationship  is
      genuine and subsisting.

  90. I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

  91. I dismiss the appeal on humanitarian protection.

  92. I allow the appeal under Article 8.

6) The SSHD's first ground of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  that  the
   judge erred in law by  failing  to  consider  the  Rules  as  a  detailed
   expression of government policy.  The Article 8  sections  of  the  Rules
   reflect the respondent's view  as  to  where  the  balance  lies  between
   individual  rights  and  the  public  interest,  and  reflect  the  broad
   principles of Strasbourg and domestic jurisprudence.   The  Secretary  of
   State therefore expects the courts to defer  to  her  view,  endorsed  by
   Parliament, of how proportionality should be considered in an  individual
   case.

7) Ground 2 is that the Article 8 outcome  is  unreasoned,  or  inadequately
   reasoned.

8) Mr Mullen submitted that the judge failed to give  any  consideration  to
   the case under Article 8, so far as incorporated in the Rules, and failed
   even to conclude which of the appellant's identities was  reliable.   The
   appellant used different identities  and  had  an  appalling  immigration
   history.  Mr Mullen accepted that the judge's conclusion that there is  a
   genuine and subsisting relationship was not attacked in the grounds.   He
   also accepted that the judge, on much recent authority,  was  correct  in
   considering Article 8 separately from the Rules.   He  said  it  was  not
   clear what weight was given to the  appellant's  immigration  history  in
   considering the freestanding Article 8 claim.  The only  point  on  which
   there was a conclusion in the appellant's favour was that his partner was
   genuinely fond of him.  However, this was a short lived relationship  and
   there was no explanation of why the  proportionality  balance  should  be
   struck in the appellant's favour.  On the authority of Izuazu  (to  which
   no direct reference was made; it is [2013] UKUT 45  (IAC),  produced  for
   the appellant) there had to be weighty reasons  for  a  decision  in  the
   appellant's favour in such a case, and there was  no  such  reason  here.
   The determination should be set aside and  the  decision  remade  in  the
   Upper Tribunal.  For that purpose, Mr Mullen invited the  Upper  Tribunal
   to admit into evidence  a  copy  certificate  of  approval  issued  to  a
   Nigerian citizen on 25 February 2009 for his proposed  marriage  with  Ms
   Riddoch.

9) It became common ground that such a certificate of approval for  marriage
   was issued, that Ms Riddoch did marry the  Nigerian  citizen,  that  they
   subsequently divorced, and that on 7 June 2013 she married the appellant.



10) Mr Mullen submitted that the Upper Tribunal should have been made  aware
   of the sponsor's marriage history, and that successive marriages  to  two
   much younger overseas nationals  within  a  short  period  of  time  gave
   grounds for suspicion that these were  marriages  of  convenience.   This
   undermined any significance to be given to the relationship  in  striking
   the proportionality balance.  A fresh decision should be made, dismissing
   the appeal.

11) Mr Winter acknowledged that the judge had not  expressly  dismissed  the
   appeal under the Immigration Rules, although she ought to have  done  so.
   However, it was plain that parties were agreed at the hearing before  her
   that the case did not meet the terms of the Immigration Rules, and  there
   was no need for her to delve into these any further.  She was also  bound
   to consider the case outwith the Immigration Rules, on which point  there
   are now several authorities, but she  did  not  need  to  rehearse  these
   either.  Mr Winter said that the matter is now governed by MS [2013] CSIH
   52, the conclusions  of  which  are  summarised  at  paragraph  30.   The
   question was whether the appellant had shown a "good arguable case" to be
   dealt with outside the Rules, which she had done. Although that case  was
   not reported until after the judge's decision, the other cases pointed at
   in a similar direction, and she had in fact  asked  herself  the  correct
   question, which was simply whether the case succeeded  under  Article  8.
   Error by failing expressly to  dismiss  the  case  under  the  Rules  was
   immaterial.  An expert Tribunal should in  general  be  assumed  to  have
   taken the correct approach, and on appeal the Upper  Tribunal  should  be
   slow to interfere.

12) On the second ground, Mr Winter submitted that the reasoning  was  brief
   but adequate.  The judge made a clear finding that there  was  a  genuine
   relationship, which was not attacked in the  SSHD's  grounds  of  appeal.
   The facts before the judge had  been  that  Ms  Riddoch  has  an  elderly
   mother, children and grandchildren and makes weekly visits to  the  grave
   of  a  deceased  daughter.   There  was  also  evidence  of  her  medical
   condition.  It had not  emerged  in  evidence  that  she  was  previously
   married to another non-UK citizen.  A statement by  Ms  Riddoch  had  not
   been before the First-tier Tribunal, although she gave oral evidence.  It
   appeared that she had not been asked any question  which  would  lead  to
   disclosure of her marital history.  There was no reason why  she  or  the
   appellant should have thought it relevant to volunteer  the  information.
   The matter would in any event have  been  on  the  records  of  the  Home
   Office,  and  non-emergence  had  no  sinister   implication.    If   the
   determination were to be set aside and remade, the decision should  again
   go in the appellant's favour.  It was further to be  taken  into  account
   that as an EU citizen Mr Riddoch could not be  expected  to  relocate  to
   Bangladesh.  If the appellant were to be removed, there would effectively
   be a permanent separation.  Mr Winter also pointed out that at  paragraph
   80 the judge accepted that the appellant's identity is as he now  claims.



13) I reserved my determination.

14) Judges are not required to set out all the  case  law  which  forms  the
   background to their decisions, particularly when they  do  not  have  any
   opposed legal submissions to resolve.  The respondent's position  in  the
   refusal letter and in the first ground of appeal is effectively that  the
   Article 8 consideration is co-extensive with the Rules, but there appears
   to have been little if any discussion by representatives of  the  correct
   legal approach to this issue at the hearing.   However,  it  was  clearly
   implicit in the appellant's approach that although he could not meet  the
   specific requirements of Appendix FM, his case  nevertheless  had  to  be
   considered outwith the Rules.   That  is  correct.   In  the  absence  of
   submissions, I do not consider the judge had to say  any  more  than  she
   did.  She should be given credit for familiarity with the  leading  cases
   on the topic of greatest current interest in this jurisdiction,  and  she
   did in effect focus on the question whether  the  appellant  had  a  good
   arguable case outside the Rules.

15) The respondent does not succeed in showing either absence or  inadequacy
   of reasoning.  The respondent has not suggested that  the  conclusion  is
   one at which no  reasonable  judge  could  have  arrived.   The  material
   factors on each side were  plainly  before  the  judge.   The  concluding
   paragraphs explain why she came down on the side she did.

16) The judge should have dismissed the appeal  under  the  Rules,  but  the
   omission is of no practical significance.

17) The respondent may think the outcome over-generous, but the attack  upon
   it at ground two is in substance no more than a disagreement.

18)  The  SSHD's  appeal  to  the  Upper   Tribunal   is   dismissed.    The
   determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.





                               [pic]
                                Date
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
