
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11327/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At North Shields                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|on 9th September 2016              |on 3rd October 2016                |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before


                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY








                                   Between


                                     IH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Tobin instructed by Kanaga Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer.




                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction


      1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 14 January 1942. He
         appeals against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  I.S.  Lamb
         who dismissed his appeal against removal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
         protection and human rights grounds.

      2. He was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal by  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Frances on 2 August 2016. Judge Lamb had  found  the
         appellant credible and accepted  he  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution. However his  claim  failed  on  the  basis  there  was
         sufficiency  of  protection  in  Pakistan.  The  judge  also  found
         relocation was not an option given his age and lack of support.  It
         was arguable that the judge erred in law in concluding there was no
         evidence to suggest that the police were  unwilling  or  unable  to
         protect the appellant.

      3. The appellant's son-in-law, Syed Kamal  Qaiser  Zaidi  (hereinafter
         referred to as `Kamal') had made an earlier claim to  asylum.  This
         was on the basis he faced persecution by reason  of  religion.  His
         claim was that  he  was  of  the  Shia  branch  of  Islam  and  had
         encountered problems after preaching  against  an  extremist  Sunni
         group.

      4. The appellant's claim was that in order  to  assist  Kamil  in  his
         asylum claim he had repeatedly  gone  to  the  police  in  Pakistan
         seeking corroboration of complaints his  son-in-law  had  made.  He
         said the police were uncooperative and rude and  he  believed  this
         was because many where Sunni. Shortly afterwards he was knocked off
         his motorbike and he believes the  police  informed  the  extremist
         that he was making enquiries. He then  referred  incidents  at  his
         home when men arrived and he  subsequently  reported  this  to  the
         police.

The First tier Tribunal

      5. At paragraph 64 First-tier Tribunal Judge I.S. Lamb  accepted  that
         the appellant came to the United Kingdom as he  had  been  attacked
         because he was a Shia Muslim  and  an  extremist  Sunni  group  had
         discovered he was trying to find evidence to support his son-in-law
         Kamal. Consequently the judge concluded he had a well-founded  fear
         of persecution by reason of religion.

      6. However, at paragraph 66 the judge was not  satisfied  to  the  low
         standard of proof applicable that  he  was  without  protection  in
         Pakistan. The judge said there was no  evidence  on  which  such  a
         finding could be made, pointing out that the organisation had  been
         prescribed and held there was no prospect of it being supported  or
         abetted by the  police.  The  judge  was  aware  that  a  different
         conclusion had been reached in the appeal of Kamal but stated  that
         this depended on the evidence in each case.

The Upper Tribunal

      7. At hearing I was referred to references in the  appellant's  asylum
         interview of police involvement.  This was indicative of protection
         being afforded. In response the appellant's representative said the
         police were slow to act unless  the  appellant  engage  someone  of
         influence. It was said that the complaints made were  not  followed
         up by the police.

      8. There is a statement from the appellant which was used in  his  son
         in law's appeal where he referred to an incident back in 2003  when
         he claims an attempt was made to kidnap his son-in-law. He said the
         police were called and saved him and they then stationed two guards
         at his house. However the house was then attacked by men with guns,
         the police called for support, and the men ran away.

      9. The reasons for refusal letter comments on  the  claims  of  police
         inactivity. There is detailed coverage from paragraph 48 through to
         64 about sufficiency of protection and the country guidance. Police
         corruption  is  acknowledged  but  this  did  not  demonstrate   an
         institutionalised unwillingness to afford protection. Reference was
         made to past willingness on the part of the police to act.

     10. Judge Lamb sets out in detail the claim; the refusal; the  decision
         in his son-in-law's claim and provides a summary of  law  including
         reference to  sufficiency  of  protection.  The  judge  made  clear
         findings on the facts and was prepared to  accept  the  appellant's
         claim of persecution.

     11. The reference in paragraphs 66 and 67 to sufficiency of  protection
         is not particularly detailed.  However,  the  decision  has  to  be
         looked at in totality including  the  references  to  the  material
         before the judge. The judge acknowledged the conclusion in relation
         to sufficiency of protection differed from that found in the appeal
         of the appellant's son-in-law. However the judge  correctly  points
         out that this issue is fact sensitive and it has  to  be  borne  in
         mind that on the claim it was the appellant son-in-law's activities
         which primarily brought about the difficulties. The  appellant  had
         remained in Pakistan for many years and his difficulties only arose
         when he started  making  enquiries.  This  individualised  approach
         accords with the country guidance.

     12. In conclusion, when I consider  the  decision  in  the  round;  the
         country  guidance  decision  of  AW  (sufficiency  of   protection)
         Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31 and the country information referred  to  I
         do not find a material error of  law.  Consequently,  the  decision
         dismissing the appeal shall stand.

Decision.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal  of  the
      appellant shall stand.


   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly
   3rd October 2016
