
[pic]
IAC-FH

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11779/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2015                   |On 30 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                     RN
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             Secretary of State
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Nizani, Counsel, instructed by Bespoke
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    N. Willocks -Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision promulgated  on
    24 April 2015 of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Watt  who  dismissed  the
    appeal of RN.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who arrived  in  the  UK  on  21
    October 2013 and claimed asylum on 13 January 2014.  The respondent  by
    decision dated 11 December 2014 refused to grant asylum.

3.   The appellant appealed against that decision.  The  appellant's  appeal
    came before the First-tier Tribunal on 14 April  2015.   Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Watt dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.  As a preliminary matter the judge  considered  that  a
    fax was received by the appellant's solicitors indicating that they had
    only been instructed on that day by the appellant  and  an  adjournment
    requested.  The file notes that  the  application  was  refused  as  no
    reason was given for the adjournment request.  The judge notes that  on
    the  morning  of  the  hearing  Mr  Chipperfield  of  Counsel  appeared
    indicating that he had received instructions that  morning  to  make  a
    further request for an adjournment indicating that the  solicitors  had
    only just been instructed but no reason for the late instruction given.
      The  judge  decided  to  refuse  the   adjournment.    Although   not
    specifically indicated in the  determination  both  parties  before  me
    confirmed that Mr Chipperfield did not represent the appellant  in  the
    substantive appeal but only in the adjournment request.

4.   The judge  further  noted  that  the  appellant  was  not  present  and
    proceeded with another  case.   However  when  the  appellant  had  not
    appeared by 2pm the judge proceeded to hear the case in the absence  of
    the appellant.

Permission to Appeal

5.   The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis firstly that the judge's consideration of the appellant's child's
    best interests was inadequate  and  secondly  that  it  was  unfair  to
    proceed, particularly where a child was involved and this prevented the
    Tribunal from examining the respondent's Section 55 duty in respect  of
    the child.

6.   Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Zucker  granted  permission
    to appeal on 24 July 2015 on the basis that there was an arguable error
    of law as a child was affected by the outcome  and  therefore  arguably
    paragraph 27  of  the  judge's  determination  amounted  to  inadequate
    reasoning and arguably the appellant should have been given one  chance
    to appear on a later date.

7.   The  appeal  then  came  before  me.   Miss  Nizani  advised  that  the
    appellant was present but outside the court room with  her  young  son.
    In relation to the second ground she argued that  there  was  case  law
    which  indicated  that  where  a  representative  declines  to  act  an
    adjournment should have been given.  Although she referred to the  case
    being listed in 'ILPA' best practice guide, she had no neutral citation
    reference and I am  not  satisfied  that  she  has  complied  with  the
    relevant practice direction  in  relation  to  reliance  on  unreported
    cases.  It was her submission that  she  had  been  instructed  by  the
    appellant that the appellant did not actually  know  about  the  appeal
    hearing and it was only when she was  contacted  by  someone  connected
    with her representatives that she subsequently found out that  she  had
    missed a case.  Miss Nizani had also been instructed that the appellant
    had not received post and  did  not  appreciate  that  she  had  had  a
    previous adverse decision against her.  She said the appellant was very
    clear that she had not asked for an adjournment so it was not clear why
    the representatives had done so. Miss Nizani indicated that instructing
    solicitors had indicated that the case worker formerly dealing with the
    case was no longer with the firm so it was not  possible  to  ascertain
    the exact circumstances.

8.   In relation to the best interests ground  Ms  Nizani  argued  that  the
    best interests  consideration  was  cursory  and  Ms  Nizani  rehearsed
    matters set out in the grounds of appeal, including in relation  to  JO
    and Others (Section 55 duty) [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC).

9.   Ms Willocks-Briscoe (who had also appeared for  the  respondent  before
    the First-tier Tribunal) relied on the Rule 24 submission in respect of
    the best interests grounds and submitted that there was  no  indication
    that was anything else to consider and in  all  the  circumstances  the
    judge's consideration of the best interests of the child had  been  set
    out appropriately.

10.  In respect of the adjournment ground Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  referred  me
    to the judge's determination where he detailed that no reasons had been
    given as to why the adjournment  request  was  required.   Counsel  had
    informed the Tribunal on the day that  he  was  unable  to  assist  the
    Tribunal as to why the appellant had not turned up.  The appellant  had
    every opportunity to put her case forward and had  had  at  least  four
    months to prepare her case.  She submitted that had good  reasons  been
    given for requesting an  adjournment  and  that  adjournment  not  been
    granted then there might be force in the unfairness argument.

My Findings

11.  Although the judge at paragraphs 11 and 12 refers  to  the  adjournment
    request of  the  previous  day  containing  no  reason  given  for  the
    adjournment (and I note that the Tribunal notice dated  13  April  2015
    states that this was the case) the fax from the appellant's  solicitors
    also dated 13 April stated that 'Ms N has had some personal issues  and
    as recently as today has instructed us to lodge  this  request  for  an
    adjournment'.  However no further details are given as  to  the  reason
    for requesting an adjournment.

12.  It is of concern that Ms Nizani before me appeared to  have  completely
    different instructions, stating that the appellant was not  even  aware
    of her hearing and  had  not  received  the  notification  of  hearing.
    Clearly either the appellant or her solicitor have not been  completely
    truthful with the Tribunal.  I also note that with the  13  April  2015
    fax to the Tribunal the appellant's solicitors included an email  dated
    13 April 2015 from the appellant to  her  solicitors  which  instructed
    them to act for her.

13.  I note that the address for service  on  the  appellant,  held  by  the
    Tribunal, was care of her solicitors. The  Tribunal  did  not  have  an
    address for the appellant.  Given this and given the  appellant's  non-
    attendance at the hearing I accept that it may have been possible  that
    she had not, for whatever reason, received written notification of  her
    appeal (as she claims) and it was her representative who was being less
    than truthful in his fax of 13 April  2015  which  referred  to  having
    instructions from the appellant  including  that  she  was  'unable  to
    proceed with the hearing scheduled for tomorrow at  10:00am'.   However
    this explanation is unlikely in  my  view  given  the  email  from  the
    appellant to her solicitor, also dated 13 April 2015, with her form  of
    authority.

14.  I have considered the decision of the President, Mr Justice  McCloskey,
    in Nwaigwe  (Adjournment:  Fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC).   The
    crucial question is not whether the decision of  the  First-tier  Judge
    was reasonable, but whether the refusal deprived the affected party  of
    her right to a fair hearing.

15.  I have considered the Presidential Guidance 2014  which  sets  out  the
    factors weighing in favour and against an adjournment.  In favour  this
    includes

         '... sudden illness or other compelling reason preventing  a  party
         or a witness attending a hearing.  Normally such a reason should be
         supported by medical or other relevant evidence, unless  there  has
         been insufficient time to obtain such evidence.'

    Factors which are said in the guidance to weigh against the granting of
    an adjournment are that:

         '(a) the application  to  adjourn  is  not  made  at  the  earliest
         opportunity.

         (b) the application is speculative, such as, for example, a request
         for time for lodging further evidence where there is no  reasonable
         basis to presume that such evidence exists  or  could  be  produced
         within a reasonable period.

         (c) The application does not show that anything material  would  be
         achieved by the delay, for example, where an appellant  wants  more
         time to instruct a legal representative but there  is  no  evidence
         that funds or legal aid is available.

         (d) The application does not explain how the reason for seeking  an
         adjournment is material to the case, for example where there  is  a
         desire to seek further evidence but this evidence does  not  appear
         to be material to the issues to be decided.

         (e) The application seeks more time  to  prepare  the  appeal  when
         adequate time has already been given.  In such  circumstances,  the
         Tribunal may take into  consideration  a  failure  to  comply  with
         direction.  However, a failure to comply with directions  will  not
         be sufficient of itself to refuse an adjournment.'

16.  Although on balance I am inclined not to accept that the  appellant  is
    without fault in this matter, given the  conflicting  instructions  and
    the fact that she was in email contact  with  her  solicitors  the  day
    before the hearing.  However taking into account that the  fax  to  the
    Tribunal the day before the hearing indicated the appellant's 'personal
    issues' and her subsequent non-attendance I am prepared to accept  that
    there is a possibility that she may have understood that  she  did  not
    have to attend (however erroneous that understanding  may  have  been).
    Although this may have involved less than correct advice from her  then
    advisor and/or sharp practice in order to obtain more time to  prepare,
    it is not possible to say, particularly since the Tribunal is told that
    this advisor is no longer with the instructing solicitors.

17.  On balance therefore, although a marginal  case  and  the  judge  acted
    reasonably, that is not the test.  I find that  there  was  a  material
    error of law as the decision did deprive the appellant of a right to  a
    fair hearing, in particular the right to give evidence to address  both
    the respondent's credibility conclusion and the decision in relation to
    the child's best interests.  In light of all the circumstances and  the
    issues to be decided, which involved  an  asylum  claim  and  the  best
    interests of a minor, the appellant ought to have been given  one  last
    opportunity to attend

18.  Although academic as I have found an error of law I  am  not  satisfied
    that the judge's consideration of the child's best interest, of itself,
    discloses any error.  It is difficult to see how the judge  could  have
    made any other findings on the basis of the material in front of him.

19.  I find that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  materially
    in law for the reasons identified.

Notice of Decision

20.  The appeal is allowed.  The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    is set aside.  No findings are to stand,  Under section 12(2)(b)(i)  of
    the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2 (b), the nature and  extent  of
    judicial fact finding necessary for the decision to be remade  is  such
    that it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The member(s) of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the  case
    are not to include Judge Watt.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 28 October 2015

M. M. Hutchinson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As there was no fee available there can be no fee award

Signed   Date: 28 October 2015

M. M. Hutchinson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
