
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11548/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 November 2016                  |On 06 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     p o
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Lane instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make an anonymity order given the nature  of  the
    appellant's  claim.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  Court   directs
    otherwise, no report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly
    identify the Appellant.  This direction applies to both  the  appellant
    and to the respondent and a failure to comply with this direction could
    lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born  on  9  July  1982.
    She arrived in the United Kingdom on 1 May 2014 as a visitor with leave
    valid until 7 October 2014.  On 7 October 2014 she claimed asylum.   On
    12 December 2014, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claim
    for asylum and made a decision to remove her to Zimbabwe.

 3.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision.   The  appeal   was
    ultimately listed before the First-tier Tribunal on  5  February  2016.
    At that hearing, the appellant's legal representative  applied  for  an
    adjournment  on  a  number  of  grounds,  in  particular   that   those
    instructing him had been unable to prepare adequately  the  appellant's
    appeal, including producing a witness statement.

 4. Judge M M Thomas refused the appellant's application for an adjournment
    and went on to hear the appeal.  The judge  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    single ground that  the  judge  had  acted  unfairly  in  refusing  the
    adjournment application.

 6. On 4 April 2016, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge J M Holmes) granted the
    appellant permission to appeal.

 7. On 13 April 2016, the Secretary of  State  filed  a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the First-tier Tribunal's decision on the basis  that
    it was not unfair to refuse the adjournment application.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

 9. Mr Lane, who represented the appellant relied upon the grounds  drafted
    by the appellant's legal representative at the date of  the  First-tier
    hearing (Asylum Justice).  He submitted that the appellant  had  sought
    an adjournment on four grounds, set out in para 5  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal:

         (1)  There was no appellant's bundle or statement;

         (2)  The need for medical  evidence  relating  to  the  appellant's
             mental health and her ability to give oral evidence;

         (3)  Counsel was without clear instructions from those  instructing
             him;

         (4)  An allegation of sexual abuse that was  being  raised  at  the
             hearing.

10. Mr Lane submitted that it was unfair  for  the  appellant's  appeal  to
    proceed in the absence of a written statement,  including  one  dealing
    with the matter of sexual abuse that was raised  at  the  hearing.   Mr
    Lane submitted that the judge had failed properly to have regard to the
    fact that  the  appellant's  representatives  at  the  hearing  (Asylum
    Justice) had not been representing the appellant since  early  December
    2015 and, therefore, had not had almost two months to prepare the  case
    as the judge stated in para 13 of her determination.

11. Mr Lane submitted that the facts, as set out in the grounds of  appeal,
    were that Asylum Justice had been approached  by  the  appellant  on  7
    December  2015  because  the  appellant  believed  that  her   previous
    representatives (Virgo Consultancy) had ceased to act for  her.   As  a
    consequence, Asylum Justice sought, and obtained, an adjournment of her
    forthcoming hearing listed on 9 December 2015 in  order  to  take  full
    instructions and to represent her.  She had attended that hearing  with
    her support worker but without legal representation.   The  appeal  was
    adjourned and relisted for 5 February 2016.  However, in early  January
    the appellant informed Asylum Justice that Virgo  Consultancy  had,  in
    fact, not ceased to act for her and that she was to be  represented  by
    them.  Asylum Justice, as a consequence, ceased to have any involvement
    in the appellant's case at that time.

12. The appellant, however, attended a drop-in advice service on 1 February
    2016 at Asylum Justice.  She  informed  Asylum  Justice  that  she  had
    spoken to Virgo Consultancy that morning on the telephone and had  been
    told that her solicitor had left the firm and that  they  were  unaware
    that her appeal had been listed for  5  February  2016.   She  informed
    Asylum Justice that Virgo Consultancy were  not  representing  her  and
    again requested Asylum Justice to  represent  her  at  the  forthcoming
    appeal hearing on 5 February 2016.

13. Asylum Justice agreed to help the appellant and arranged  to  meet  her
    the following morning in order  to  prepare  a  witness  statement  but
    unfortunately the responsible member of staff was taken ill for a  week
    and  as  a  result  the  appointment  was  cancelled.   Asylum  Justice
    instructed a barrister to attend the hearing but that in the  few  days
    remaining were unable to prepare a statement and bundle of evidence  on
    the appellant's behalf or to obtain medical evidence about  her  mental
    health.

14. Mr Lane submitted that in  refusing  the  adjournment,  the  judge  had
    misunderstood the position in para 13 when she concluded:

         "There has been ample opportunity to prepare the necessary  bundles
         and take a witness statement in that period".

15. Mr Lane, now not instructed by Asylum Justice, submitted that the judge
    had at least a  letter  from  Virgo  Consultancy  before  her  dated  4
    February 2016 which  stated  that  Virgo  Consultancy  were  unable  to
    continue representing the appellant as a "further  funding  certificate
    was refused".  The judge was, therefore, Mr Lane submitted  aware  that
    Asylum Justice had not been the appellant's representatives  throughout
    the period between early December 2015 and early February 2016.

16. Mr Lane also relied on the fact that  there  was  evidence  before  the
    judge, in the form of a medical report from Dr Alexa dated  22  January
    2016, that the appellant suffered from mental health problems and that,
    although she had capacity, she had  difficulties.   Mr  Lane  submitted
    that the judge failed to have proper  regard  to  this  in  determining
    whether it was fair that the appellant should give her account for  the
    first  time  before  the  judge  rather  than  in  a  prepared  witness
    statement.  Likewise, Mr Lane relied on the fact that the sexual  abuse
    allegation had only been  made  at  the  hearing  (although  previously
    raised in Dr Alexa's  report)  and  it  was  not  fair  to  expect  the
    appellant to deal with this for the first time in  her  examination-in-
    chief.

17. Finally, Mr Lane relied on the  fact  that  the  judge  referred  to  a
    direction given by the judge at the  earlier  adjourned  hearing  on  9
    December 2015 that there would be  no  further  adjournments  based  on
    problems relating to representation.  He submitted that the  judge  was
    not bound by what the previous  judge  had  said  who  could  not  have
    anticipated all the circumstances that could arise subsequently.

18. Mr Lane referred  me  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).  He relied on the head
    note which is in the following terms:

         "If a Tribunal refuses to exceed to an adjournment request, such  a
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects:  these  include  a  failure  to  take  into  account  all
         material considerations; permitting  immaterial  considerations  to
         intrude; denying the party concerned a  fair  hearing;  failing  to
         apply the correct test; and acting irrationally.  In  practice,  in
         most cases the question will be whether the  refusal  deprived  the
         affective party of his right to a fair hearing.   When  adjournment
         refusal is challenged on  fairness  grounds,  it  is  important  to
         recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether
         the FtT acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be applied  is  that
         of fairness: was there any deprivation  of  the  affective  party's
         right to a fair hearing?  See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284".

19. Mr Lane submitted that the refusal of the adjournment was, in  all  the
    circumstances, unfair.

20. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards submitted that  there  was  no
    unfairness.  He pointed out that it was  quite  common  to  proceed  in
    hearings before the First-tier Tribunal  without  a  written  statement
    from an appellant.  The appellant had had the  benefit  of  experienced
    Counsel in this  jurisdiction  and  Counsel  had  been  given  a  short
    adjournment on the day, which lasted 40 minutes, to  prepare  and  take
    instructions.

21. Mr Richards submitted that, as pointed out in para 15  of  the  judge's
    determination, it was agreed that the issue of sexual  abuse  could  be
    dealt with in examination-in-chief and cross-examination.

22. Further, the judge had the benefit of  a  psychiatric  report  from  Dr
    Alexa which, in para 6, stated that the appellant was  "quite  able  to
    talk about her problems and able  to  attend  a  court  case  and  give
    evidence".

23. Finally, Mr Richards submitted that the judge, whilst referring to  the
    earlier judge's comment about further adjournments,  it  could  not  be
    said that the judge had felt bound by those comments.

24. In relation to the judge's comments (at para 12)  that  the  Presenting
    Officer had made no objection in principle to an  adjournment  "on  the
    basis of the evidence regarding  the  appellant's  mental  health",  Mr
    Richards informed me that, having taken  instructions,  the  Presenting
    Officer was instructed to leave the matter of the  adjournment  to  the
    judge and not to actively oppose it.

25. In all the circumstances, Mr Richards  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    considered all the factors in paras 12-16, and had properly refused the
    adjournment in circumstances where  it  could  not  be  said  that  any
    unfairness resulted.

Discussion

26. The judge's reasoning leading her to refuse the adjournment is set  out
    at paras 12-16 of her determination as follows:

         "12. At the outset of the hearing an application was  made  for  an
             adjournment by Mr James.  Miss Jefferies had no  objection  in
             principle to an adjournment  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
             regarding the  Appellant's  mental  health.   The  adjournment
             request was on the following grounds:

             (i)   there  was  no  Appellant's  bundle  and   of   foremost
                  importance, no statement from the Appellant;

             (ii)     the vulnerability of the  Appellant's  mental  health
                  and because of that, her ability to give oral evidence;

             (iii)    Mr James was without clear  instructions  from  those
                  instructing him; and

             (iv)     the allegation of sexual abuse  that  was  now  being
                  raised by the Appellant.

         13.  In relation to adjournment requests (i) and (iii) this  appeal
             had  been  listed  for  hearing  on  two  previous  occasions.
             Initially, on 8 April  2015  and  then  on  9  December  2015.
             Directions in relation to the appeal were originally  made  on
             29 December 2014.  On the 9 December 2015, a  clear  direction
             was given by District Judge N Poole that  there  would  be  no
             further   adjournments   based   on   problems   relating   to
             representation.  The adjournment request on that date was as a
             result of an issue with  the  Appellant's  representation.   I
             refer to the letter dated 8 December 2015 from Ruth  Brown  of
             Asylum Justice where an adjournment was requested so that  the
             Appellant could be represented by them.  Mr James who  appears
             for the Appellant today is  instructed  on  behalf  of  Asylum
             Justice.   I  therefore  can  identify  no  grounds  for   the
             adjournment on the basis of (i)  and  (iii).   This  case  was
             listed for hearing today on 30 December 2015.  It is almost  2
             months since this case was previously listed for  hearing  and
             when Asylum Justice  advised  that  they  were  instructed  on
             behalf of the Appellant.  There has been ample opportunity  to
             prepare the necessary bundles and take a witness statement  in
             that period.  The fact that Mr James has been unable to  speak
             to Miss Brown this week because she is away is  not  an  issue
             for this tribunal.

         14.  In relation to the  mental  health  issues  and  the  concerns
             relating to the Appellant's ability to give  oral  evidence  I
             have been provided with a copy of a  medical  report  from  Dr
             Simina Alexa dated 22 January 2016.  I refer to paragraph 6 of
             that report which clearly indicates that  Dr  Alexa  does  not
             identify any difficulties with the Appellant  giving  evidence
             in court.

         15.  Finally, in relation to the allegation of  sexual  abuse.   At
             the time of the  adjournment  request  I  had  no  information
             pertaining to this although, Ms Jefferies for  the  Respondent
             did indicate that she was  unaware  of  what  it  related  to.
             There was no suggestion  that  it  would  require  any  expert
             evidence.  On that basis, it was agreed it was an  issue  that
             could be dealt with in examination in chief and cross-examine.

         16.  The adjournment request was refused as I  could  not  identify
             either singularly or cumulatively any reason  why  the  appeal
             should be  adjourned.   In  refusing  I  have  considered  the
             Overriding Objective (Rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure  (First
             Tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014)
             and my duty  to  deal  with  cases  fairly  and  justly  which
             includes  '(a)  dealing  with  the  case  in  ways  which  are
             proportionate to the importance of the case, the complexity of
             the issues, the anticipated costs and  the  resources  of  the
             parties  and  of  the  Tribunal;  (b)   avoiding   unnecessary
             formality and seeking  flexibility  in  the  proceedings;  (c)
             ensuring, so far as is practicable, that the parties are  able
             to participate fully in the proceedings; (d) using any special
             expertise of the Tribunal effectively; (e) avoiding  delay  so
             far as compatible with proper consideration  of  the  issues'.
             Further I have taken into account the guidelines set out in Ex
             parte Martin [1994] Imm AR 172 on the  various  matters  which
             should be taken into account when a judicial body is asked  to
             adjourn proceedings.  These include: (i) The importance of the
             proceedings and their likely consequences to the party seeking
             the adjournment; (ii) the risk of the party  being  prejudiced
             in the conduct to the  proceedings  if  the  application  were
             refused; (iii) the risk of prejudice or other disadvantage  to
             the other party if the  adjournment  were  granted;  (iv)  the
             convenience  of  the  court;  (v)  the  interests  of  justice
             generally and the efficient despatch of Court  business;  (vi)
             the  desirability  of  not  delaying   future   litigants   by
             adjourning early and thus leaving the court empty;  and  (vii)
             the extent to which the party applying for the adjournment has
             been responsible for creating the difficulty which has led  to
             the application.  I am  satisfied  that  the  refusal  of  the
             further adjournment of this appeal is in accordance  with  the
             overriding objective and the guidelines provided in  Ex  parte
             Martin."

27. I see no reason to call into question what is said by Asylum Justice in
    the grounds of appeal concerning their involvement with the  appellant.
    Mr Richards did not seek to challenge what  was  said.   It  is  clear,
    therefore, that the judge was under a misapprehension as to the  timing
    of the involvement of Asylum Justice and in concluding  that  they  had
    had almost two months to prepare for the  hearing.   The  fact  of  the
    matter is that, in reality, they had ceased to  be  involved  in  early
    January 2016 before Virgo Consultancy again took over representation of
    the appellant and had not, in the time available to  them,  been  in  a
    position to prepare the appellant's appeal for 5  February  2016.   The
    earliest that they next became involved was 1 February 2016 which  gave
    them three working days before the hearing which was due to take  place
    on 5 February 2016.  Given the letter from Virgo  Consultancy  dated  4
    February 2016, it is difficult to understand how  the  judge  (whatever
    the detail of information she was given)  could  conclude  that  Asylum
    Justice had been involved for "almost two months" since  the  case  was
    previously listed on 9 December 2015.

28. It is clear from the material before me  that  the  appellant's  (then)
    representatives, and Mr James who was  Counsel  at  the  hearing  on  5
    February 2016, were not in a position to fully and adequately represent
    the appellant.

29. There may well be cases where a written statement from an appellant  is
    not an essential forensic tool for a legal representative in order that
    proceedings will be fair, for example, facts may be little  in  dispute
    or of a narrow compass.  An assessment of  whether  proceeding  in  the
    absence of a witness statement is or is not fair  must  necessarily  be
    fact-sensitive.  Here the appellant was claiming asylum and  there  was
    at least some evidence that she was vulnerable based  upon  her  mental
    health.  Likewise, her account (at least latterly) involved allegations
    of sexual abuse.  These were matters which, if the appellant was to  be
    facilitated to give her best evidence before the  Tribunal,  cried  out
    for a witness statement based upon the obtaining of  full  instructions
    from the appellant.  Through no fault of the appellant, or  indeed  her
    representatives at the hearing on 5 February 2016,  the  appellant  was
    unable to give her representatives  those  instructions  prior  to  the
    hearing and produce  a  witness  statement  that  could  stand  as  her
    evidence-in-chief.  Whilst her Counsel was given a short adjournment  -
    it would appear of approximately 40 minutes - to take instructions from
    the appellant that cannot,  in  my  judgment,  overcome  the  potential
    prejudice to the  appellant  of  providing  full  instructions  to  her
    representatives in the usual way prior to the hearing.

30. I bear in mind, though it is not determinative,  that  the  appellant's
    mental health was also a matter of concern even if Dr Alexa was able to
    say that the appellant was able to talk about her problem and to attend
    her court case and give evidence.  The issue is  not  whether  she  had
    capacity to give evidence - that is not doubted -  but  rather  whether
    she has unfairly been deprived of the  opportunity  to  give  her  best
    evidence in support of her claim.  In my judgment, she has.

31. In addition, I also have concerns that Judge Thomas took  into  account
    what was apparently said by the judge  at  the  earlier  hearing  on  9
    December 2015 that there would be "no  further  adjournments  based  on
    problems relating  to  representation".   The  file  note  records  the
    judge's view that it was "unlikely that this case  would  be  adjourned
    again" (my emphasis).  It is not entirely clear to me what  weight,  if
    any, Judge Thomas gave to the earlier judge's comment,  which,  in  any
    event, she appears to have overstated.  Mr Richards may well  be  right
    that the "clear direction" was not taken as binding by Judge Thomas but
    she, nevertheless, referred to it and it is only reasonable to conclude
    that she considered  it  was,  at  the  very  least,  relevant  to  her
    decision.  It is difficult to see how it was relevant given  first,  it
    does not appear to be what the earlier judge had actually said; in  any
    event the earlier judge could not have considered the circumstances  as
    they appertained at the hearing on 5 February 2016;  and  the  judicial
    judgment whether to adjourn the hearing  was  entirely  one  for  Judge
    Thomas.

32. Applying the approach set out in  Nwaigwe,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    judge, in refusing the adjournment request, failed properly to consider
    all the relevant circumstances  (in  relation  to  the  involvement  of
    Asylum Justice) and in refusing the adjournment deprived the  appellant
    of  a  fair  opportunity  to  present  her  case  through   her   legal
    representatives.

Decision

33. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error  of  law.   That
    decision is set aside.

34. Given the nature of the error of  law,  the  proper  disposal  of  this
    appeal is to remit  it  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    rehearing before a judge other than Judge M M Thomas.


                                 Signed




                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date: 06 December 2016



