
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11667/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th July 2015                     |On 11th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                              OBIADULLAH NIAZI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Gilbert, Lawrence Lupin Solicitors, Wembley
For the Respondent:    Miss Fijiwala


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 1st January 1999.  He
    appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  11th  December
    2014 refusing to grant him asylum or other protection.  His appeal  was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Napthine on 31st March  2015.
    The appeal was dismissed in a determination promulgated on  13th  April
    2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Martin  on  8th  May  2015.
    The grounds of application assert that the First-tier Tribunal erred in
    rejecting the expert evidence, gave inadequate  reasons  for  rejecting
    the evidence of the Appellant and witnesses and failed to consider  the
    contents of a letter from the Afghan Embassy in London.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response from the Respondent.  This states that  the
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  directed  himself  appropriately  and  made
    reasonable sustainable findings that were properly open to him  on  the
    evidence.  The response states that at paragraphs  32  and  33  of  the
    determination the First-tier Judge correctly applied the principles  in
    Devaseelan about the  proper  starting  point,  which  is  the  earlier
    determination which  assessed  and  made  findings  of  fact  and  such
    findings, should not generally be departed from without evidence.   The
    response states that the judge gave  good  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    expert  evidence  before  him,  given  that  there   was   a   previous
    determination which the expert witness  was  not  made  aware  of.   At
    paragraph 43 of the determination the judge states that  he  considered
    all the evidence in the round and gives numerous  reasons  for  finding
    that the Appellant has failed to discharge the burden of proof  to  the
    requisite lower standard.  The response states  that  it  was  properly
    open to the First-tier Judge to conclude that the Appellant is  not  at
    risk of persecution or Article 2 or 3 ill-treatment and is not eligible
    for humanitarian protection on the facts and evidence before him.

The Hearing

 4. The Presenting Officer handed to me a Wikipedia article and a  judgment
    by Upper Tribunal Judge McCloskey and Upper Tribunal Judge Allen  of  a
    judicial review decision which, I was told could not be  considered  by
    the Appellant.  I rejected both of  these  pieces  of  evidence  as  no
    application had been made to lodge them.

 5. The Appellant's representative  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Judge
    rejected the expert evidence but gave inadequate reasons for doing  so.
    He referred to paragraph 29 of the determination - "Such general claims
    would no doubt apply to many if not most  Afghans  who  all  will  have
    tribal  links  to  various  insurgent/counter-insurgent  groups".    He
    submitted that this is a flawed statement when  the  expert  report  is
    analysed.  This  refers  to  the  Appellant's  father's  name  being  a
    contributing element in the Appellant's claim, giving the  Appellant  a
    risk profile on return and also the Appellant's tribe, the Niazi  tribe
    being very much identified with the insurgents.  He submitted that  the
    conclusions at paragraph 29 when this  information  is  considered,  is
    inadequate.

 6. At paragraph 33 of the determination it was submitted  that  the  judge
    was wrong when he states that Dr Giustozzi, the expert, places reliance
    on Ismail Khan, who gave evidence at the  Appellant's  father's  appeal
    and was found not to be credible.  The  representative  submitted  that
    the expert had the Appellant's father's determination when he  made  up
    his report so he had all the facts before him and what the  expert  did
    was take the Appellant's account and assess  plausibility  against  the
    background material.  The  representative  submitted  that  the  expert
    report fits with the background evidence.  What the  expert  states  is
    that the Appellant's account is plausible and the expert was not  under
    a misapprehension as is implied by the judge in the determination.

 7. The representative submitted that even if I do not accept that argument
    the material in the report is directly relevant to the issue before the
    judge.   The  judge  took  the   Appellant's   father's   determination
    promulgated in 2013 as his starting point which under Devaseelan he was
    entitled to do.

 8. Paragraph 27 of the expert report is referred  to  in  the  grounds  of
    application.  The representative submitted that the report  deals  with
    the specific issues in Parwan province and this is something the  judge
    should have taken into account.  I was referred to the determination by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie, on the Appellant's father's appeal,
    promulgated on 20th May 2013 and he  submitted  that  what  has  to  be
    considered is whether it is credible that the Appellant's father  could
    have returned to his village and been discovered by  Jamiat  Islami  in
    military uniforms and could then leave  the  area  and  whether  it  is
    credible that having left and returned to Kabul he would be pursued and
    discovered five months later.  The representative  submitted  that  the
    current evidence before the First-tier Judge was not before  the  judge
    in 2013 and this goes to the heart of this claim.   He  submitted  that
    had this evidence been before the judge in 2013  the  judge's  findings
    might well have been different.  He submitted that if  it  is  credible
    that the Appellant's father did get  taken  by  Jamiat  Islami  in  the
    village and was then let go,  would  he  be  at  risk  from  them.   He
    submitted that it is the family members of Jamiat  Islami  who  tracked
    him down to Kabul.  He submitted that it is not Jamiat  Islami  itself,
    which is interested in the Appellant's father but the family members of
    the Jamiat Islami fighters his uncle killed and the issue  is  a  blood
    feud.  He submitted that this is  the  catalyst  and  it  is  perfectly
    credible that the family members could have tracked him down to  Kabul.



 9. At paragraph 14 of the expert report it is stated  that  the  Appellant
    could well be at risk  from  specific  families  linked  to  Jamiat  as
    revenge killings are a  common  occurrence.   The  expert  states  that
    avenging a death is a matter of opportunity and it has been  known  for
    families to wait tens  of  years  before  making  an  attempt  to  take
    revenge.  I was referred to paragraph 35 of the expert report  and  the
    representative submitted that it is clear that the  expert  finds  that
    Jamiat Islami is not the danger, it is  the  blood  feud  that  is  the
    danger for the Appellant if he returns to  Afghanistan.   He  submitted
    that based on the expert report it is likely that the Appellant will be
    tracked down if he is returned to Afghanistan and  this  is  consistent
    with the evidence in the country guidance cases on Afghanistan.

10. The representative made reference to  the  Appellant's  uncle  who  was
    involved in killing 40 Jamiat Islami fighters. He submitted  that  this
    was not before the judge in 2013.  He submitted that the expert  report
    is relevant, even if he did not see the 2013 determination, as there is
    new evidence.  He submitted that it  was  improper  for  the  judge  to
    sideline the report. What the expert was doing in the report was giving
    evidence of the country situation.  The Respondent submitted  that  the
    expert has been praised in  other  determinations  on  Afghanistan  and
    should not have been disregarded by the judge.  He has demonstrated his
    independence and his reports have been considered reliable.

11. I was referred to paragraph 39 of the determination in which the  judge
    states that this Appellant's claim amounts  to  a  reiteration  of  his
    father's claim and the representative submitted that that  is  not  the
    case.  The Appellant gave his own experiences including evidence  about
    his contact with Jamiat Islami.  He also gave the  evidence  about  his
    uncle and the problems he is going to  face  from  the  Taliban  if  he
    returns to  Afghanistan  today.   He  submitted  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence is that his uncle will make him join the Taliban and  he  will
    be radicalised.  This is not what his father's evidence was.

12. At paragraph  42  of  the  determination  the  judge  states  that  the
    impression created is that no one is interested in giving a  clear  and
    honest  account  of  the  Appellant's  background   in   Pakistan   and
    Afghanistan.  He submitted that there was no reason for  the  judge  to
    state this.  It is not clear what evidence the judge  is  taking  issue
    with.

13. I was referred to the case of AK  (Turkey)  [2004]  UKIAT  00230  which
    states that it is for the judge to consider the medical and psychiatric
    evidence in a case.  He should do this and then decide what  weight  he
    is prepared to attach to it.  It is also incumbent upon  the  judge  to
    give proper intelligible and  adequate  reasons  for  arriving  at  his
    conclusions on that evidence.  The representative  submitted  that  the
    judge did not do that in this case.   He  submitted  that  the  judge's
    approach to the expert evidence is  flawed.   He  submitted  that  what
    seems to have happened is that the judge used the  Devaseelan  argument
    and because his father's claim was found not be  credible  he  rejected
    this Appellant's claim in  spite  of  the  differences  and  additional
    evidence produced.

14. The representative  submitted  that  the  judge  has  made  no  factual
    criticisms of the witnesses and he has misread the 2013  determination.
    He submitted that the judge  gave  no  weight  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant is a minor.  He submitted that the  judge should  have  given
    him the benefit of the doubt because of this.

15. The representative also submitted  that  there  is  now  an  additional
    witness who was not at the 2013 hearing and there is a letter  on  file
    dated 6th March 2015 from  the  embassy  of  the  Islamic  Republic  of
    Afghanistan in London requesting countries to suspend  the  deportation
    of Afghan migrants indefinitely, as the  ministry  cannot  provide  the
    necessary service to returning Afghans at present.  He  submitted  that
    this is also mentioned in the expert report at paragraph 33.

16. I was asked to find that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's determination based mainly on the fact that the judge  did  not
    properly consider the expert report and did not consider the additional
    evidence submitted since the 2013 decision was made.

17. The Presenting Officer made her submissions first of all  dealing  with
    the  expert  report.   She  submitted  that  at  paragraph  26  of  the
    determination the judge states that he has paid close attention to this
    report.  I was asked to find that that is correct.  She submitted  that
    the Appellant's representative has complained about paragraph 29 of the
    determination because the Niazi tribe is identified with the insurgents
    but, I was asked to read all of paragraph 12 of the  expert  report  as
    this refers to the Niazi being a tribe of the Ghilzai Confederation and
    being seen as key supporters to the insurgency of both the Taliban  and
    Hizb-e-Islami.  This paragraph  refers  to  the  Niazi  having  smaller
    groups in the Parwan province and she submitted  that  the  Appellant's
    representative has not considered paragraph 12  of  the  expert  report
    properly  and  that  there  is  no  error  in  paragraph  29   of   the
    determination.

18. With regard to the witness statement  of  Ismail  Khan  the  Presenting
    Officer submitted that the Appellant's representative has  stated  that
    the expert relied on this statement but that  is  not  the  case.   The
    evidence is that the expert read the statement and that is all.

19. At paragraph 11 of the  expert  report  there  is  no  mention  of  the
    father's application being rejected although the expert does state that
    the Appellant's father might have  faced  serious  problems  in  Parwan
    Province and that the situation there has worsened over the years.

20. The Presenting Officer referred me  to  paragraphs  12  to  16  of  the
    Appellant's statement.  This refers to the Appellant's  father's  claim
    and at paragraph 21 reference is made to  the  father  making  a  fresh
    claim to the Home Office in February 2014 which claim  pointed  to  the
    fact that his son, this Appellant, is now in the UK and his father  has
    been here for over seven years.  The Presenting Officer submitted  that
    as there is no mention of the Appellant's father's claim in the  report
    the judge was entitled to find that  it  had  not  been  given  to  the
    expert.  He was therefore entitled to conclude at  paragraph  33,  that
    the expert was under a strong misapprehension relating to the  findings
    in the Appellant's claim.  Because of this it was  submitted  that  the
    judge was entitled to conclude that the expert did not  deal  with  the
    claim properly.  He was entitled to find that the Appellant's claim was
    not plausible.

21. I was referred to the case of PM and Others (Afghanistan) [2007]  UKAIT
    00089.  In this case the expert  was  criticised.   The  expert  is  Dr
    Giustozzi as in this claim.  She submitted that similarly in  the  case
    of AK (Afghanistan) [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC) Dr Giustozzi's assessment was
    criticised.  She submitted that the Respondent is criticising paragraph
    12 of the expert report in this appeal.  This is  the  paragraph  which
    states  that  the  Niazi  tribe  is  very  much  identified  with   the
    insurgents.

22. With regard to the Devaseelan point the  Presenting  Officer  submitted
    that the Appellant's father's claim was based on fear of Jamiat Islami.
     The appellant's uncle was responsible  for  40  Jamiat  Islami  people
    being killed.  The Presenting Officer submitted that in the Appellant's
    father's determination the judge found that  the  Appellant's  father's
    account of the adverse interest in him from Jamiat Islami when  he  was
    in his home area and in Kabul is not credible and the  judge  does  not
    accept his evidence in that regard.  At paragraph 9 of the  Appellant's
    statement the  Appellant  refers  to  his  family  having  problems  in
    Afghanistan because he has gone against the word of his paternal  uncle
    who is a senior Taliban commander by refusing to attend a training camp
    to prepare himself for Jihad.  The Appellant refers to his uncle moving
    between Pakistan and Afghanistan and he states he  would  not  be  safe
    from him in either country.  The Presenting Officer submitted  that  at
    paragraph 10 of his statement it is clear that the Appellant is relying
    on historic events and he has no political profile  of  his  own.   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that that  makes  this  Appellant's  claim
    very similar to his father's claim and his father's claim was  rejected
    so the judge was right to  deal  with  the  matter  on  the  Devaseelan
    principle.   The  judge  refers  to  this  at  paragraph  39   of   the
    determination and it was submitted that he has a correct  understanding
    of  the  claim.   The  judge  does  not  accept  the  incident  in  the
    Appellant's account about his uncle and so the judge  was  entitled  to
    follow the decision in the Appellant's father's claim.

23. At paragraph  40  of  the  determination  the  judge  states  that  the
    witnesses who gave evidence in support of the  Appellant  were  largely
    those who had supported his father and had been found to be unreliable,
    as was his father.  The Presenting Officer submitted that there is only
    one different witness.  Three  of  the  witnesses  are  the  same.   At
    paragraph 40 of the determination the judge finds that these  witnesses
    are unreliable  and  the  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  he  was
    entitled to do so.  Because of this it was submitted that at  paragraph
    42 he was entitled to find that no one was interested in giving a clear
    and honest account  of  the  Appellant's  background  in  Pakistan  and
    Afghanistan.  She submitted that the judge did not need to set out  all
    his  reasons  for  rejecting  the  claim.   At  paragraph  47  of   the
    determination the judge  finds  that  the  Appellant  has  produced  no
    credible evidence to undermine the findings of Judge Devittie  in  2013
    concerning the lack of political  profile  of  either  the  Appellant's
    father or his uncle.  She submitted that the judge has  clearly  looked
    at all the evidence presented to him and found the Appellant's  account
    not to be credible.

24. With regard to the Appellant  being  a  minor  she  submitted  that  at
    paragraph 17 it is clear that the judge has taken this into account.

25. With regard to the Appellant's removal to Kabul the Presenting  Officer
    submitted that based on the background evidence the judge was  entitled
    to find that this would be a possibility for the Appellant based on the
    Human Rights Watch Report 2015 which is in the Respondent's bundle.

26. I was asked to dismiss the appeal.

27. The Appellant's representative referred  me  to  paragraph  17  of  the
    determination and submitted that this paragraph does not make it  clear
    that the judge dealt with the Appellant as a child.  He  simply  refers
    to the conduct of the hearing. and there is nothing  to  show  that  he
    dealt appropriately with this important matter.

28.  With  regard  to  Judge   Devittie's   determination   in   2013   the
    representative submitted that at paragraph 8 the  judge  in  that  case
    rejected credibility but there is now new evidence which the  judge  in
    2015 had to take into account.  He submitted that the  expert  did  not
    rely on Ismail Khan's statement and that his report is balanced.

29. The representative submitted that many of the facts in this  claim  are
    personal to the Appellant.  The judge has not addressed the blood  feud
    and the requirements in the said case of AK have  not  been  addressed.
    He submitted that the judge should have looked at  these  matters.   He
    submitted that it is not fatal or  even  relevant  whether  the  expert
    considered the  Appellant's  father's  determination  or  not.   I  was
    referred to the instructions to the expert which make it clear that the
    Appellant's father's appeal was dismissed.

Decision and Reasons

30. I have to decide if there is an error of law in the First-tier  Judge's
    determination.  The judge has based his determination on the Devaseelan
    principle, taking into consideration Judge Devittie's determination  in
    2013 relating to the Appellant's father's appeal and using this as  his
    starting point.  Judge Devittie made a  good  case  and  gave  adequate
    reasons for finding that the father's appeal lacked  credibility.   The
    appellant's father stated that his  difficulties  were  caused  by  his
    brother's profile in Afghanistan.  That is also the Appellant's  claim.
    Judge Devittie did not believe the Appellant's father's  account  about
    being traced to Kabul  by  Jamiat  Islami.   It  is  clear  that  Judge
    Devittie assessed the Appellant's appeal comparing it to the background
    evidence.  The judge does not believe any of  his  account  about  this
    group being interested in him because of  his  brother's  profile.   He
    found that Section 8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2006 applied as the Appellant's  father  absconded
    after claiming asylum and he does not accept the  Appellant's  father's
    account of the adverse interest in him from Jamiat Islami in  his  home
    area or in  Kabul.   He  finds  that  the  Appellant's  father  had  no
    political profile and was never involved in any political  activity  in
    Afghanistan.  He rejects the father's account regarding  his  brother's
    profile.  The judge also rejects his Article 8 claim.

31. When the facts of the Appellant's father's case  are  compared  to  the
    facts in the Appellant's case, they are very similar.  The  Appellant's
    claim is that he fears his uncle, as did his father.  The Appellant has
    no political profile and it has been  found  that  his  father  had  no
    political  profile.   Judge  Devittie  also  rejected  the  information
    relating to the Appellant's uncle.  He rejected  the  evidence  of  the
    witnesses and these witnesses are the same (apart  from  one),  as  the
    Appellant's witnesses.

32. At paragraph 26 of the determination the First-tier Judge  states  that
    he paid close attention to the report of Dr Giustozzi in his assessment
    of the Appellant's claim and the assessment of the overall situation in
    Afghanistan.  There is nothing in  the  determination  which  makes  me
    believe that that is not the case.  Dr Giustozzi refers to a blood feud
    and the judge notes this at paragraph 27 of the determination.  I  find
    there to be no error in paragraph 29 of the determination  and  I  find
    that Dr Giustozzi, even if he did not  see  the  determination  in  the
    Appellant's father's appeal, was aware that  his  father's  application
    for asylum had been rejected.  There was no error in the judge  dealing
    with the case on a Devaseelan basis.   This  is  the  correct  starting
    point.  At paragraph 32 he states that no  new  credible  evidence  has
    been placed before him to in any way undermine the  findings  of  Judge
    Devittie.

33. The judge may not be correct in finding that Dr Giustozzi has  laboured
    under  a  strong  misapprehension  which  has  nullified  his  findings
    concerning the Appellant's claim but, I believe that the judge did give
    weight to Dr Giustozzi's expert report when  making  his  decision  and
    considered everything before  him  in  the  round.   He  refers  to  Dr
    Giustozzi's general observations and he  takes  into  account  the  COI
    Report, the Operational Guidance Note for 2013, (reissued  in  February
    2015), the documentary evidence submitted by the Appellant and the case
    law  from  both  sides.   There  is  additional  evidence   since   the
    Appellant's father's claim  but  the  judge  clearly  found  that  this
    evidence made no discernable difference to the claim.  At paragraph  45
    he refers to the Appellant's age finding that the Appellant is a  minor
    acting under instruction and finding that that instruction was given by
    his father, whose account  was  found  to  lack  credibility.  This  is
    important when the issue of the Appellant being a minor is pursued.

34. The judge refers to the case  of  AA  (Afghanistan)  [2012  UKUT  00016
    (IAC).  This relates  to  minors  from  Afghanistan.   The  Appellant's
    mother is in contact with the Appellant  and  the  Appellant's  father.
    The judge notes that the Appellant is not an unaccompanied  minor.   He
    has considered everything  before  him  and  made  a  decision,  giving
    adequate reasons for his decision.

Decision

35. There is no material error of law in the judge's determination and  his
    decision, promulgated on 13th April 2015, must stand.

36. This Appellant's asylum appeal is dismissed and his human rights appeal
    is dismissed.

37. Anonymity has not been directed.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray

