
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11030/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 November 2016                       |On 20 January 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN



                                   Between

                              MIRAN ABDULZARDA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, instructed by Greater Manchester
                  Immigration Aid Unit.
For the Respondent:  Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal has a long and involved history.  The appellant appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal against a  decision  of  the  respondent  on  5
    December 2013 to give  directions  for  his  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant  is  Kurdish  and  claimed  to  be  of  Iranian
    nationality.  The proposed destination for his  removal  was  therefore
    nominated as Iran.  That appeal came for a hearing before Judge  Thorne
    in  Manchester  on  7  February  2014.   Judge  Thorne  heard  evidence
    including oral evidence from the appellant.   He  did  not  regard  the
    appellant as  a  witness  of  credit  and  firmly  concluded  that  the
    appellant had failed to establish even to the lower standard applicable
    that he was or ever had been a  national  of  Iran.    He  went  on  to
    dismiss the appeal, essentially on the basis that the appellant had not
    established any  of  the  grounds  on  which  he  might  succeed.   The
    appellant then appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  The ground was that the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  give  any  or   any   adequate
    consideration to whether the appellant "as a non-Iranian Kurd" would be
    at risk if returned to Iran.  That appeal was heard before Deputy Upper
    Tribunal Judge Harris, who concluded that the ground was made  out  and
    remitted  the  appeal  to  Judge  Thorne  for  consideration  of   this
    outstanding matter.

 2. By the time the appeal came before Judge Thorne  again,  on  6  October
    2014, the position was that the Secretary of State had recognised  that
    removal to Iran was in  practical  terms  impossible  (because  of  the
    finding as to the appellant's nationality), but had not  withdrawn  her
    decision.  Judge Thorne reasoned in his determination  that  he  simply
    could not close his eyes to the reality of the situation that there  is
    absolutely no prospect that the appellant would ever  find  himself  in
    Iran as a result of any action taken by the UK  authorities.   He  said
    that the hypothesis of the appellant's  being  in  Iran  was  "entirely
    fanciful and not worthy of further analysis".  In paragraph 24 he wrote
    as follows:

          "In any event, even if  I  were  to  allow  myself  to  enter  the
          hypothetical world pressed  upon  me  by  Mr  Nicholson  [for  the
          appellant]  and  accept  the  fantastical  premise  that   somehow
          (despite the  practical  impossibility)  the  appellant  has  been
          transported by airplane to Tehran airport, there is  no  objective
          evidence to establish that a non-Iranian Kurd like  the  appellant
          would be subjected to serious harm at the airport by  the  Iranian
          authorities as opposed  to  merely  being  refused  entry  at  the
          airport.  I was  shown  a  great  deal  of  objective  information
          concerning the treatment of Iranian Kurds in Iran  (including  the
          expert report of EGH Joffe) but there is  no  evidence  concerning
          the treatment of non-Iranian Kurds."

    Judge Thorne therefore dismissed the appeal again.

 3. There was then a further appeal to this Tribunal, on the  ground  that,
    contrary to what he had said in his  determination,  Judge  Thorne  was
    obliged to determine the appeal on the hypothesis of removal  to  Iran.
    Permission was granted in November 2014.  There was (as is  evident)  a
    considerable administrative delay before the matter  came  before  this
    Tribunal again.

 4. Mr Brown told us, as Mr Nicholson  had  told  Judge  Thorne,  that  the
    primary finding that the appellant is not a national of  Iran  was  not
    being challenged.  Mr Brown proposed to adduce further evidence  before
    us as to the situation of  non-Iranian  Kurds  in  Iran.   No  previous
    application to this effect had been made.

 5. We are confident that it is right that, despite the  impracticality  of
    the proposal, the First-tier Tribunal  was  obliged  to  determine  the
    appeal on the hypothesis of removal in accordance with the  directions.
    The relevant ground of appeal, set out in s 84(1)(g) of  the  2002  Act
    was (before amendment by the 2014 Act):

          "That  removal  of  the  appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  in
          consequence of the immigration decision would  breach  the  United
          Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee  Convention  or  would  be
          unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998  as  being
          incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights."

 6. Regulations required the Secretary  of  State  to  nominate  a  removal
    destination, precisely so that that ground could be considered in  some
    sort of concrete way.  The actual  removal  of  the  appellant  to  the
    destination specified was irrelevant:  the  question  was  whether  his
    removal would  breach  his  rights  under  either  of  the  conventions
    specified.  To that extent  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
    failing to consider the issue.

 7. Reality, practicality and evidence do, however, have a role.   Where  a
    national of a country is removed by air to  the  principal  airport  of
    that  country,  the  assumption  will  normally  be  that,  using   the
    nationality documentation that he either retains or has  been  provided
    with for the  journey,  he  will  be  admitted  through  the  country's
    immigration procedures as one  of  its  citizens.   Where,  however,  a
    person arrives at the airport in  a  country  of  which  he  is  not  a
    national,  and  for  which  he  has  no  visa  or  any  other  relevant
    immigration documentation, there is no reason at all to suppose that he
    will be admitted.

 8. In the present case, the appellant has no claim to be allowed to  enter
    Iran.  The hypothesis covered by the destination named  in  conjunction
    with the removal decision against which he appeals is therefore limited
    to his arrival at Tehran airport.  There is no evidence that  he  would
    be admitted, nor any reason to suppose that he would be  admitted.  His
    experience on the soil of Iran can therefore be assumed to  be  limited
    to being refused admission and being returned to  the  Untied  Kingdom.
    There is,  as  Judge  Thorne  said  in  the  paragraph  of  his  second
    determination that we have set out above, no evidence that  that  would
    pose any risk  to  the  appellant.   So  far  as  concerns  Mr  Brown's
    suggestion that evidence on that or any other topic be admitted now, we
    see no reason to grant the application made, apparently without notice,
    and so late.

 9. This appeal stands or falls on the  basis  of  the  material  that  was
    before Judge Thorne.  He correctly dismissed the appeal for the reasons
    given in his paragraph 24; and it follows that any other error  in  the
    determination does not merit its being set aside.  We therefore  affirm
    it and dismiss this appeal.





                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 8 December 2016
