
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11631/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th June 2015                        |1st July 2015                        |
|                                         |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                          ZINASH WONDAFRASH TADDES
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Solicitor of Morden Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. On 23rd March 2015 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  N  Osborne  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal C Mather in which she dismissed the  appeal  on
    all grounds against the decision of the respondent  to  refuse  asylum,
    humanitarian and human rights protection to the appellant  claiming  to
    be an adult citizen of Eritrea.

 2. The decision of Judge Osborne summarises the  grounds  of  application.
    It was contended that the judge was wrong  to  attack  the  appellant's
    credibility on the basis that she had stated in  interview  she  was  a
    Protestant when she was of the Pentecostal faith which was  a  form  of
    evangelical Protestantism.  Additionally  it  was  contended  that  the
    judge had provided inadequate reasoning for finding the details of  the
    appellant's escape from  detention  incredible,  that  she  was  not  a
    Pentecostal Christian and for failing to take  into  consideration  the
    evidence of the witness attending the appellant's church in the  United
    Kingdom.  It was also  argued  that  the  judge  had  given  inadequate
    reasons for rejecting  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  left  Eritrea
    illegally or to have perceived to have left the  country  illegally  on
    the basis covered by country guidance notably MO (Illegal exit  -  risk
    on return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKAIT 190.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Osborne on the basis that the
    judge's assessment of the appellant's credibility in the context of her
    stated religion gave rise to arguable errors in an  important  part  of
    the  appellant's  case.   All  grounds  were,  however,  stated  to  be
    arguable.

 4. Although not referred to in the permission decision, the  grounds  also
    contended that the determination contained wording that  was  virtually
    identical to paragraphs in another of the judge's First-tier decisions.
     It was also contended that the judge's consideration of  private  life
    under paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules  is  flawed  because
    inadequate reasons were given for concluding that  there  would  be  no
    significant obstacles to the appellant's  reintegration  into  Eritrean
    society.  It was also submitted that the judge  did  not  consider  the
    persecutory risk that the appellant would face on return to Eritrea  as
    a lone female and as a failed asylum seeker, generally,  having  regard
    to the appellant's medical condition and the  respondent's  Operational
    Guidance Note.

 5. Mr Howard confirmed that the  appellant  relied  on  the  grounds.   In
    relation to the findings about the  appellant's  Pentecostal  faith  he
    drew attention to paragraph 16 of the  decision  which  indicated  that
    someone from  the  appellant's  church  had  attended  to  support  the
    appellant's claims.  He also requested that, if errors were found, a re-
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal would be appropriate in view  of
    the fresh findings of fact that would be required.  He also  handed  to
    me objective material which could be used in that respect including BBC
    and UNHCR reports.

 6. Mr McVeety reminded me that the Secretary  of  State  had  submitted  a
    response although that was limited for the reasons which  it  contains.
    He thought that the judge had given reasons in all areas where  it  was
    stated she had not.  As to the appellant's faith no qualified  minister
    from the appellant's claimed church had attended to give  evidence  and
    this was recorded by the judge.  He also reminded me that  the  judge's
    reference to the appellant's statement that she was a "Protestant"  was
    an issue raised in paragraph 20 of the refusal  letter  and  not  dealt
    with by the appellant.  Whilst he conceded that the judge's findings in
    relation to country guidance were not lengthy  he  asserted  that  they
    were not wrong.  He also questioned how the judge could have  made  any
    different decision in relation to the appellant's private life  in  the
    United Kingdom in view of the short period of time she had been here.

Conclusions

 7. The allegation that the judge's material findings, as specified in  the
    grounds, are inadequately reasoned is without  foundation.   Whilst  it
    might be arguable that the judge  made  too  much  of  the  appellant's
    initial statement, in screening, that she was a Protestant by  religion
    when she later claimed to be of the  Pentecostal  faith,  this  was  an
    issue which the appellant did not cover in her evidence even though  it
    had clearly been raised in  the  respondent's  refusal.   Whilst  post-
    hearing information is produced to suggest that the  Pentecostal  faith
    is a form of Protestantism it does not mean that the  judge  could  not
    refer to the differences in terminology  in  the  appellant's  evidence
    when reaching credibility findings.  It was certainly open to the judge
    to conclude that it was significant that a person claiming to be of the
    Pentecostal  faith  as  a  basis  for  persecution  would   not   refer
    specifically to her faith when asked at the outset  about  her  reasons
    for claiming asylum.  It  is  also  clear  that  the  inconsistency  in
    evidence in this respect was only one of several material reasons given
    by the judge for concluding that the appellant's claims  could  not  be
    believed.

 8. The judge was not in error in pointing out that the appellant had  said
    in substantive interview that her husband was a  Pentecostal  Christian
    yet in other evidence (identified in paragraph 15(w) of  the  decision)
    that he was not.  It was also open to  the  judge  to  comment  on  the
    significant difference in dates given in 2005 for the police raid on  a
    secret prayer meeting and also to conclude that the appellant would not
    have been able to escape from arrest at  that  meeting  if  police  had
    specifically attended to apprehend the individuals  there.   The  judge
    also  points  to  the  appellant  having  no  difficulties   with   the
    authorities or police following  the  earlier  incident  when,  despite
    claims to  the  contrary,  the  appellant  appeared  to  be  leading  a
    relatively normal life by attending hospital for  surgery  and  working
    two days a week as a hairdresser.   The  judge  was  also  entitled  to
    regard the appellant's claims about her mode of entry into  the  United
    Kingdom as not credible for the reasons given.  These are all  material
    reasoned findings entitling the judge to draw unfavourable  conclusions
    about the appellant's credibility.

 9. Additionally, in relation to the appellant's claimed faith,  the  judge
    was entitled to draw attention to the fact that the minister  from  the
    Agape Church in Stoke-on-Trent did not attend the  hearing  to  support
    the appellant's claim to be a Pentecostal  Christian.   The  judge  was
    evidently aware of  the  appellant's  witness  evidence  and  correctly
    referred to the principles and guidelines set out in  the  decision  of
    Ali Dorodian (01/TH/1537).  There was no supporting evidence  from  the
    church minister, as opposed to just a congregation member,  to  explain
    how the minister reached  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  was  a
    genuine Pentecostal Christian.  As to the appellant's  claimed  illegal
    exit from the country the judge was not wrong to refer to the  relevant
    part of the decision of the Upper Tribunal in MO which  concludes  that
    illegal exit cannot be assumed where, as in this  case,  the  appellant
    had been found to be wholly incredible in relation to the main elements
    of her claims. MO also makes  it  clear  that  failed  returned  asylum
    seekers are not at real risk of persecution.

10. The judge's consideration of human rights issues  is  relatively  brief
    although it does concentrate on private  life  issues  under  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules and  the  stage  process  under  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27.  The judge's consideration of  these  issues  does  not
    make specific reference to the appellant's state of health  as  someone
    who had undergone heart surgery in Eritrea in 2006 for  which  she  was
    taking medication.  However, it is not evident that health was an issue
    raised before the judge and it is certainly  not  referred  to  in  the
    grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  The judge was  right
    to refer to the precariousness of the appellant's immigration status in
    the  United  Kingdom  when  assessing  private  life  on  the   limited
    information available for someone who, at the date of hearing, had only
    been in the United Kingdom for about twenty months.

11. Finally, the allegation that the judge has used similar  wording,  when
    considering risk on  return,  to  that  used  in  an  earlier  decision
    relating to another Eritrean national does not establish that the judge
    did not apply her mind specifically to the circumstances of this appeal
    when, quite evidently from her findings of fact, she did.  The  anxious
    scrutiny  required  in  consideration  of  asylum  appeals  is  clearly
    applied.

12. For the reasons given I conclude that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge does not show a material error on a point of law and shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show an error  on  a  point
of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested before me or before the First-tier Tribunal  nor
do I consider it appropriate in this case.







Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt


