
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11308/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 December 2016                           |On 20 January 2017           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     M K
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G McGowan, Solicitor, Quinn, Martin & Langan
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
   Fox dismissing an appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

2) The appellant was born on 10 August 1989  and  is  a  national  of  Iran.
   There were two grounds to his asylum claim.  The  first  was  that  Sepah
   officials had confiscated his family's farm land.  In a  protest  against
   this by his family and other villagers it was said  that  a  soldier  had
   been killed and the appellant was accused  of  his  murder.   The  second
   ground was that the appellant claims to  be  at  risk  as  a  convert  to
   Christianity.

3) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found  the  appellant's  lacking  in
   credibility in respect of both claims.

4) There were two grounds on which the appellant  sought  to  challenge  the
   judge's decision.  The first of these was that there were a  considerable
   number of errors in the decision.  These had not been  corrected  by  the
   judge  by  revising  or  proof  reading  the  decision   prior   to   its
   promulgation.  This indicated that the judge had not given the  case  the
   scrutiny it should have received.

5) The second ground was that the judge had made certain errors in  relation
   to the evidence.  For example, the judge stated at paragraph 13 that  the
   appellant was claiming to be a Pentecostal  Christian  but  the  evidence
   adduced by the appellant was not that the  appellant  was  a  Pentecostal
   Christian but that he  was  associated  with  an  Evangelical  Protestant
   Church.  Criticism was made of paragraphs 28  and  29  of  the  decision,
   where the judge addressed the evidence of a witness from the  appellant's
   church.

6) At the hearing before us Mrs O'Brien  referred  to  a  rule  24  response
   dated 15 September 2016 on behalf of the respondent.  This accepted  that
   there were some errors in the decision but it was not  difficult  to  see
   what the judge was saying and there was no indication that there was  any
   lack of clarity in the judge's understanding  of  the  appellant's  case.
   The judge made credibility findings which were open to him.  Mrs  O'Brien
   acknowledged that having examined the decision she found it difficult  to
   support  these  submissions  in  their  entirety.   Not  only  were   the
   typographical errors damaging to the decision but there  was  uncertainty
   over the findings made by  the  judge  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
   claimed conversion to Christianity.  Having discussed the issue  with  Mr
   McGowan for the appellant, both sides had agreed that the  proper  course
   would be to remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  hearing
   before a different judge.

7) For our part we were concerned that the findings made  by  the  Judge  of
   the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  not  accepting  the  appellant's  claimed
   conversion, particularly at paragraphs 28 and 29 of the decision,  seemed
   to be based on reasons which were less than adequate.  We agreed that the
   proper course was for the appeal to be heard again.

Conclusions

8) The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of errors on points of law.

9) The decision is set aside.

10) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  re-made  at  a
   hearing before a different judge with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

11) The Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  order  for
   anonymity.  As the appeal is to be reheard, we  consider  it  appropriate
   that an order should be made at least on an interim basis to preserve the
   anonymity of the appellant until such time as his appeal  is  determined.
   Accordingly unless and until  a  Tribunal  court  orders  otherwise,  the
   appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
   directly or indirectly identify him or any witness in these  proceedings.
   This order applies to both the appellant and to the respondent.   Failure
   to comply with this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans


