
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA117522015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 June 2016                                |On 14 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                                    [E N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms O Taiwo, Legal Representative, Mount Azure
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Myanmar born on [ ]  1976.  She  appealed
    against the decision of the respondent dated 17  August  2015  refusing
    her claim for asylum and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.

2.   Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Macdonald  on  22  April  2016
    granted permission to appeal against the respondent's decision, stating
    that it is arguable the judge did not follow the country guidance  case
    of TS (Political opponents - risk) Burma/Myanmar  CG  [2013]  UKUT  281
    which is binding and authoritative.  Judge Macdonald stated that  while
    it is arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  consider
    whether the changes in Myanmar were durable and had translated  into  a
    real change so far as affecting persons such as the appellant.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  the  following  findings  which  I
    summarise.  At paragraph 30 of  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  the
    respondent made a number of significant  concessions  which  the  judge
    listed.  He then  stated  that  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been
    detained in 2003 is not accepted and the rationale for  rejecting  this
    is set out at paragraph 19 of the reasons for  refusal  letter.  During
    the course of her screening interview, the appellant suggested her name
    had not appeared on the list when the local  authorities  attended  her
    house.  Although the appellant produced  an  arrest  warrant  dated  23
    February 2015 the  respondent  was  not  inclined  to  accept  this  as
    carrying any weight.

4.   The judge noted that the circumstances in Myanmar have  changed  beyond
    almost all recognition since the decision in TS.  The  political  party
    supported by the appellant and her family for  many  years  is  now  in
    power.  They hold a huge majority of the seats in Parliament as well as
    the presidency of Myanmar.  The judge stated at paragraph 29 that:

         "Whilst I acknowledge the fact that the military is  still  engaged
         in government and continue to hold a number of important posts  and
         departments, I find it inconceivable that if  there  is  an  arrest
         warrant issued because of the political activities of the appellant
         on behalf of the ruling party that she  would  be  the  subject  of
         persecution upon her return."


6.   It is worthy of  note  that  in  the  skeleton  argument  submitted  in
    support of the appellant's claim having been drafted on 16 March  2016,
    the change of government in Myanmar has  been  entirely  ignored.   The
    argument concentrates solely on the prospect of persecution  by  reason
    of the appellant's ethnicity.

7.   The changes in Myanmar have overtaken the current country  guidance  in
    relation to the political opponents of the former regime and that it is
    not appropriate to follow that guidance and that the  comment  made  at
    paragraph 11 of the head note of TS is a point well-made.

8.   It was submitted that circumstances have  not  permanently  changed  in
    Myanmar.  The judge found however that there is no evidence to  suggest
    any  instability  within  the  current  regime  and  as  real  as   the
    appellant's concerns may be to her it is without any  foundation.   The
    judge found that the appellant has not discharged her burden  of  proof
    and dismissed the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human
    rights grounds.

9.   The grounds of appeal state that the judge erred in his  interpretation
    and application of the country guidance  of  TS.  The  grounds  further
    state that the First-tier Tribunal Judge acted ultra vires by  deciding
    not to follow TS, which remains good law until  and  unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal makes a new country guidance, or until any higher courts  such
    as the Court of Appeal repeals it. The grounds state:

         "Although changes have happened politically in Burma recently there
         is a lot of information available in the public domains which state
         that as long as the pro-military Constitution  is  in  force  which
         allows military to operate outside civilian oversight, to fill  25%
         of seats in the Parliament with military officers handpicked by the
         commander-in-chief, to maintain a  national  defence  and  security
         council with powers to make  final  decisions  on  security-related
         matters, to appoint military generals of their choice as  ministers
         for defence, home affairs and border security ministries,  to  take
         over power from civilian government whenever  they  deem  necessary
         for  security  reasons  etc.   Burma  cannot  claim  to  be   truly
         democratic.  Furthermore, it  is  internationally  recognised  that
         persecution of ethnic and religious minorities has been on the rise
         in recent  years  in  Burma.   The  situation  in  Burma  is  quite
         complicated with progress in some areas while setbacks in others."


    Therefore, it is appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to set  out  a  new
    country guidance if required to do so.


10.  The Rule 24 response by the  respondent  states  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal are wholly without merit and the judge is able  to  depart  from
    current country guidance where cogent evidence is provided to do so and
    cited the case of DSG  &  Others  (Afghan  Sikhs:  departure  from  CG)
    Afghanistan where it is stated that:

         "...unless it has been expressly  superseded  or  replaced  by  any
         later 'CG' determination, or is inconsistent with  other  authority
         that is binding on the Tribunal, such a country  guidance  case  is
         authority in any subsequent appeal so far as that appeal."


    However, it was recognised that the principle of departure exists.

11.  In the case of SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 940 the Court of  Appeal  made
    it clear at paragraph 47

         "... that decision makers and Tribunal Judges are required to  take
         country guidance determinations into account  and  to  follow  them
         unless very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence are adduced
         justifying their not doing so.


    To do otherwise would amount to an error of law.   The  judge  has  not
    given good reasons  as  to  why  the  country  guidance  case  was  not
    applicable to the appellant in this case.


12.  At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
    there was an error of law in the  decision.  Ms  Taiwo  relied  on  the
    arguments in the grounds of appeal and said although there is  evidence
    of political change the country guidance case is still binding  on  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  military  has  retained  seats   in
    Parliament and the Secretary  of  State  conceded  that  the  appellant
    carried out political activities.

13.  Mr Norton relied on the Rule 24 response and said that the Tribunal  is
    a trier of fact and there was sufficient evidence before the  judge  to
    depart from the country guidance case and that the regime  has  changed
    in 2013 and now we are in 2016 and the National League Democratic Party
    is in charge.  The judge  was  entitled  to  depart  from  the  country
    guidance case.

Decision as to whether there is an Error of Law in the Determination

14.  The main point in the appeal argued before me is that the judge  should
    have followed the country guidance  case  and  his  failure  to  do  so
    amounts to an error of law. The judge stated at paragraph  28  that  if
    the  circumstances  in  Myanmar  had  been  the  same  as  those   that
    appertained in TS no doubt the appellant would have been granted asylum
    and humanitarian protection in this country.

15.  The judge however noted that the circumstances in Myanmar have  changed
    beyond all recognition and the party  that  the  appellant  has  always
    supported is now in power.  I find that the judge was entitled to  take
    into account background and recent events in Myanmar  and  depart  from
    the country guidance case of TS. In the case of  SG  cited  above,  the
    court of appeal made it clear that decision makers and Tribunal  Judges
    are required to take country guidance determinations into  account  and
    to follow them unless very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence
    are adduced justifying they're not doing so.

16.  For the judge  to  have  slavishly  followed  TS,  notwithstanding  the
    changes in Myanmar since 2013 would have amounted to an error  of  law.
    It was rightly pointed out by the senior presenting officer that we are
    now in 2016 and the changes in the government  have  now  crystallised.
    The evidence before the judge was very clear  that  there  has  been  a
    regime change in Myanmar. The judge however was mindful of the argument
    put forward by the appellant that the  military  is  still  engaged  in
    government and continues to  hold  a  number  of  important  posts  and
    departments in paragraph 29 of his decision. This demonstrates that the
    judge made his decision after taking into account  all  the  background
    evidence. The judge was entitled to find that it inconceivable that  if
    there is an arrest warrant for  the  appellant  due  to  her  political
    activities on behalf of the ruling party and  that  she  would  be  the
    subject of persecution upon her return for this reason.

17.  At the hearing I asked Ms Taiwo whether  there  is  any  evidence  that
    anyone who has returned to Myanmar having supported the current  regime
    has been persecuted or any charges have been filed  against  them.  She
    was not able to produce any such evidence which  suggests  to  me  that
    none exists. I find that the judge was entitled to reach his conclusion
    that it is inconceivable that persecution would befall a person who has
    supported the regime in the past which is currently in  power.  I  find
    that there is no perversity to this conclusion.

18.  I have considered all the arguments on behalf of the  appellant  and  I
    find that there is no material error of law in  the  determination  and
    the judge was entitled and duty-bound to find that the country guidance
    case should no longer be followed and that it  has  been  overtaken  by
    cogent evidence.

Notice of Decision

I therefore dismiss the appellant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date 13th day of June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal.  There can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 13th day of June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana
