
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11419/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 July 2015                       |On 16 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               pc (sri Lanka)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzari, Counsel instructed by Uma Duraisingham
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the reconsideration  of  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  to  recognise  him  as  a
    refugee, or as otherwise requiring international protection.  The First-
    tier Tribunal made  an  anonymity  direction,  and  I  consider  it  is
    appropriate to maintain the appellant's anonymity for these proceedings
    in the Upper Tribunal.



The Evidence

 2. The evidence before me comprises the evidence that was before the First-
    tier Tribunal, and the supplementary  evidence  which  the  appellant's
    solicitors served, albeit late, pursuant to a direction which I made on
    30 April 2015 permitting the appellant to adduce new evidence that  was
    not before the First-tier Tribunal on (a) diaspora activities in the UK
    and (b) risk on return to Sri Lanka.   The  new  evidence  comprises  a
    supplementary  bundle  of  "subjective  evidence"   compiled   by   the
    appellant's solicitors, and a bundle of objective material compiled  by
    Ms Anzari.  On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Melvin provided the
    latest country information and guidance  on  Tamil  separatism  in  Sri
    Lanka  published  by  the  Home  Office  on  28  August   2014.    Both
    representatives provided skeleton arguments, and  both  representatives
    made reference to GJ (post civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]
    UKUT 319 (IAC) and to MP and Another v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 829.

The Appellant's Material History

 3. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose date of birth is 22 May
    1983.  On 25 March 2008 a valid Sri Lankan passport was issued  to  him
    in Sri Lanka.  This is valid until 25 March 2018.  On 2 September  2010
    he applied for entry clearance as a Tier 4 Student, and he  was  issued
    with entry clearance in this capacity for  the  period  16th  September
    2010 until 23 May 2011.  He left Sri  Lanka  on  16  October  2010  and
    travelled on a direct flight to the UK.  He arrived on the same day.

 4. The appellant applied for leave to remain as  a  student  on  30  April
    2011.  This was refused on 16 June 2011.  He made a second  application
    for leave to remain as a student on 15 August 2011, but his application
    was considered void on 20 September 2011.  He made a third  application
    for leave to remain as a student on 10  November  2011,  and  this  was
    refused on 14 December 2011.  The appellant lodged a fourth application
    for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student Migrant on 29 March  2012,  and
    this was refused on 20 June 2012.  His appeal rights  are  recorded  as
    having been exhausted on 5 October 2012.

 5. The appellant claimed asylum on 19 October 2012 at the Asylum Screening
    Unit in Croydon.  He was given a screening interview. He said he had no
    medical conditions,  and  he  was  not  on  medication.   He  had  been
    fingerprinted in Sri Lanka for his student visa only, not for any other
    reason.  He had come to the United Kingdom to claim asylum, but changed
    his mind as he wanted to study.  His reason for coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom to claim asylum was that he had spent one year in detention and
    the authorities were after him to arrest him.  He was  asked  how  many
    times he had been arrested or detained in Sri Lanka.  He  said  he  had
    been arrested once but he was being searched for before 2006 and he had
    managed to hide by living in an LTTE  controlled  area.   He  had  been
    arrested in 2008 and released in 2010,  so  he  was  detained  for  two
    years.

 6. He was asked why he was detained in 2008.  He said he went to India  to
    attend his sister's wedding.  On his way back to Mannar he was  stopped
    by the authorities.  His ID was checked  and  he  was  found  to  be  a
    resident of Jaffna.  He was arrested and taken to an army camp.  He was
    accused of being a supporter of the  LTTE.   Initially  he  had  denied
    this, but later on he admitted this because  of  the  torture.   Before
    2006 he had been searched for because of his father's past  involvement
    with  the  LTTE  and  his  own  role  as  a  helper  with  the  student
    organisation of the LTTE.  His father's whereabouts since 1994 had  not
    been known.  His father used to help  the  LTTE,  and  he  was  on  the
    political wing of the LTTE.

 7. He was asked whether he was a member or  supporter  of  the  LTTE.   He
    answered he was a supporter, and had been so since 2003.   He  used  to
    supply them with food.  The LTTE members kept on  visiting  their  home
    asking for his father's  whereabouts.   He  helped  them  to  construct
    bunkers and he also helped members of the public  living  in  the  LTTE
    area.  During the first year of his detention he was kept  in  an  army
    camp and he was then transferred to a  prison.  His  family  could  not
    trace him.  He managed to secure his release through his uncle paying a
    bribe with the help of an agent to secure his release.

 8. He had studied in London at the London Hotels School.  He was asked why
    it had taken two years to come  and  claim  asylum.   He  said  he  was
    studying and not thinking to come and claim asylum.  He  was  asked  to
    explain briefly why he could not return to his home country.   He  said
    there was an arrest warrant issued for him and he would be tortured  by
    the army and the police.  The authorities had visited his  home  asking
    for his whereabouts.  The arrest warrant was issued in 2012 on  account
    of his past history in Sri Lanka and  his  past  involvement  with  the
    LTTE.  He was asked why the arrest warrant had been  issued  two  years
    after he left the country.  He answered his mother was living elsewhere
    and recently she had returned to their native village in  Jaffna.   She
    went to register with the army, and ever since the authorities had been
    looking for him.

 9. The appellant attended a substantive asylum interview  on  23  November
    2012.  There was only one mistake in the  screening  interview  record.
    He was stopped in Mannar, not on his  way  to  Mannar.   He  was  asked
    whether he had any medical conditions.  He said for the  last  week  he
    had been suffering from leg pain and had been unable to walk.  The pain
    was in his knee as well as his leg.  Initially,  he  took  paracetamol,
    but later the pain increased so he could not bear it.  So he  had  seen
    his GP on the 19th and he had given him some ibuprofen.   He  mentioned
    earlier that the doctor stated that this might have  been  due  to  the
    torture he had suffered.  He was asked why the doctor thought that.  He
    said the doctor had asked him about his past so he had told him and the
    doctor had asked him if anything had happened to him.

10. Initially he had said he had stopped studying in  May  2011.   He  then
    said that he had followed an English  language  course,  which  he  had
    finished in July 2011.  He had not done anything since completing  this
    course.

11. At the beginning of the interview,  the  appellant  handed  in  various
    documents.  At the time these were handed in without translations.  The
    documents which he handed in included a summons, an arrest  warrant,  a
    letter from his mother and a release document in respect of his father.

12. In a letter dated 10 March 2012, his mother asked him how  his  studies
    were progressing.  She was afraid to write  letters  because  the  army
    were coming here and enquiring about him.  They had warned her that  if
    she knew where he was, she had to inform them  immediately.   She  said
    that he should concentrate on his studies and  not  think  of  anything
    else.  In a letter dated 20 June 2012, she  asked  him  again  how  his
    studies were  progressing,  and  informed  him  that  Brintha  had  got
    married.  She asked him if he was speaking  to  his  sister.   She  was
    afraid to write letters because the army were coming here and enquiring
    about him.  They also monitored everybody  who  came  to  their  house.
    Lastly, they had said that the government had ordered his arrest.   One
    day when they came here, Jeevan was here.  They asked who  Jeevan  was,
    and she told them that he was his sister's son.  He was released later.
     If he returned to Sri Lanka, she did not know  what  would  happen  to
    him.

13. The arrest warrant  was  purportedly  issued  on  14  June  2012  by  a
    magistrate in Mallakam.  It was addressed to the officer in  charge  at
    the police station in Chunnakam.  The  person  to  be  arrested  was  a
    person by the appellant's name living at an address  in  Erlalai  West,
    Jaffna.  The particulars of the alleged offence or the reasons for  the
    issue of the warrant were "involvement with terrorism".

14. The court summons dated 28 February 2012 was purportedly issued by  the
    same magistrates' court in Mallakam.  Page 2 of the summons  stated  as
    follows:

         "Whereas the  above  proceedings  have  been  instituted/the  above
         information has been received/  against  you  in  this  court,  you
         hereby require to appear in person  before  this  court  with  your
         witnesses, if any on year 2012 month 03 date 28 time 900 hours

         To answer the complaint made  against  you  (a  copy  of  which  is
         annexed hereto, together with a list of the names and addresses  of
         the witnesses for the prosecution), and to be  further  dealt  with
         according to law."

    The copy of the complaint, together  with  a  list  of  the  names  and
    addresses of the witnesses for the prosecution, was not annexed to  the
    summons.

15. The release document said to relate to his father  was  a  court  order
    directed to the director of the custody prison in Colombo on  2  August
    1994.  The court order related to  five  suspects  in  a  case  with  a
    reference number.  These five suspects were taken into  custody  on  30
    July 1994, and the court ordered that  they  be  released  immediately.
    Suspect number 3 had the same surname as the appellant's surname.   The
    first name of the third  suspect  was,  according  to  the  translator,
    illegible, but began: "Rasaratn..."

16. In interview, the appellant said his sister was in Canada.   His  uncle
    was in Trincomalee, his Auntie was  in  Jaffna  in  Earlalai,  and  his
    mother had moved into her house.  He had been educated up  to  A-levels
    at Union College in Telipillai.  He had finished his education  in  May
    2003.  He had been involved in student demonstrations in 2001.  He  did
    not know any details about his father's involvement  in  the  political
    wing of the LTTE.  His mother said he was in  the  political  division,
    and she did not know any details about it.  He was asked  his  father's
    name.  The appellant began by saying that his father's first  name  was
    Rasaratnam, but then changed his first  name  to  Rajaratnam.   He  was
    asked why he did not know his father's name, but had needed to look  at
    documents in order to confirm it.  He said he wanted to  check  whether
    it was a J or an S.  His mother had told him his father was arrested at
    a lodge in Colombo because he was involved with the LTTE.   His  father
    never returned from Colombo.   His  mother  had  obtained  the  release
    document when she went to the police station.  She was given that piece
    of paper, and told he  was  already  released.   His  mother  had  been
    looking for him ever since.  She had gone to her MP and complained, but
    he was still missing.

17. He was living in Earlalai, Jaffna when he started supporting the  LTTE.
    They came and asked about his father during  the  peacetime,  and  they
    requested that he take training.  His mother refused to  send  him  for
    training because he was the only son left.  When he moved  to  an  LTTE
    controlled area in 2006, the LTTE asked him to  join  (again)  but  his
    mother repeated that his father was in the LTTE, and he  was  the  only
    son left.

18. Although he refused to undertake LTTE training in 2003,  they  provided
    food for the LTTE.  He also helped them to decorate at their  functions
    such as Great Heroes Day, and asked him to  clean  the  LTTE  cemetery.
    This was all during the ceasefire period when the  LTTE  were  able  to
    travel openly.

19. He was asked to confirm that the only assistance that  he  provided  to
    the LTTE was providing food, helping to decorate at functions  such  as
    Great Heroes Day, and cleaning the LTTE cemetery.  At  question  84  he
    confirmed that he did not do anything else.  It was put to him that  in
    his screening interview he said he had also constructed  bunkers.   The
    appellant said that only took place in 2006, so that is why he had  not
    mentioned it.  The help that he had previously given to the LTTE ceased
    in 2005 because  the  ceasefire  agreement  failed,  and  so  the  LTTE
    withdrew from Jaffna.  In 2006  he  moved  to  Kilinochchi.   This  was
    because the army started to look for him as he  had  been  involved  in
    student demonstrations, and he had helped the LTTE.  So  they  came  to
    look for him in October 2006.  He was not at home at  the  time.   They
    went inside the house and broke the furniture and arrested  his  cousin
    K.  Until now they did not know what had happened to his cousin K.  The
    army had not arrested him in 2001, as he was a  student  at  the  time.
    The reason they wanted to  arrest  him  in  2006  was  because  he  was
    president of the  student  union  in  2001,  and  he  was  leading  the
    demonstrations.  He was asked how the army knew he had been helping the
    LTTE between 2003 and 2005.  He said he did not know it  at  the  time,
    but the army's intelligence in civilian clothing  had  been  monitoring
    them.  The army had come looking for him at the family home  in  Jaffna
    on 25 October 2006.  He was not in the house, because  he  was  at  his
    auntie's house at the time.  He had moved to  Kilinochchi  in  November
    2006 with the assistance of  an  agent.   This  involved  a  five  hour
    journey by sea.  He started helping the LTTE  again  in  January  2007,
    having not helped them since the end of 2005  when  the  LTTE  withdrew
    from Jaffna.  The help which he had provided the LTTE in  2007  was  to
    dig bunkers and clean the LTTE cemetery.  He  dug  bunkers  to  protect
    from shell attacks and bombing from planes.  He  did  this  many  times
    until April 2008.  He also supplied food to the  LTTE  members  at  the
    sentry point.  On 3 May 2008 he went to India for his sister's wedding.
     He got a tourist visa with the  assistance  of  an  agent.   This  was
    arranged by his sister's in-laws.  They needed an agent as they were in
    an LTTE controlled area.  He was asked  how  he  managed  to  obtain  a
    passport.  He said the army were looking for him in Jaffna,  but  maybe
    they had not sent his details to other areas at the time.  He  returned
    from India on 19 June 2008, and was arrested in Mannar on the same day.
     He was arrested because they checked his ID, and they saw he  had  the
    Jaffna address on it.  He was arrested on suspicion of  being  an  LTTE
    member, and he was taken in a truck to Thallady  Camp.   He  spent  one
    year in camp, and one year in jail.  As soon as he  was  taken  to  the
    camp, he was beaten up.  They accused him of being a Tamil  Tiger.   He
    did not suffer any injuries, but he had pain all over his  body.   Also
    he had a pain in his leg.  Sometimes he got a pain in  his  chest  even
    now.  He took paracetamol for that.  He also suffered from  back  pain.
    He was transferred to jail in April 2009.  He did not know why  he  was
    transferred to jail.  He was not taken to court.

20. On the second day in the camp, he had told them  the  truth.   He  told
    them that he was not an LTTE member, but just a helper.   He  had  told
    them exactly what help he had provided.  He  had  been  transferred  to
    Welikade Jail.  As soon as he was taken there, they took  a  photograph
    of him.  He came out of Welikade Prison in July 2010.  He was  released
    because his uncle helped him.  He paid a bribe  about  25  laks  to  an
    agent.  His uncle was a businessman.  He was  asked  what  business  he
    had.  After a period of reflection, the appellant said he had an import
    and export business.  He was asked to give  the  name  of  his  uncle's
    business.  He is recorded as thinking for a very long  time,  and  then
    saying he did not know the name.  This  was  because  he  had  not  had
    contact with his uncle for a long time.  He was asked therefore how  he
    had been able to contact his uncle.  He said he had his uncle's address
    in his mind, and sent him a letter.  He had not seen  his  uncle  since
    2002.  He was released by the army and the police.  Officers  from  the
    army and police officers were there when he was released.  He  was  not
    given any release papers.  The agent who  helped  secure  his  release,
    advised his uncle it was not safe for him to remain in Jaffna,  and  he
    arranged a student visa for him.  To get this visa, he  had  to  supply
    his O-level and A-level certificates.

21. He was asked about the summons and arrest warrant.  He said the  police
    had given them to his mother, and they had come by post.  He was  asked
    why they were still looking for him.  He answered he was  not  released
    officially, he came out illegally.

22. It was put to him that  according  to  his  visa  application,  he  had
    completed a six unit higher national  diploma  course  at  the  British
    College of Applied Studies in Colombo in 2005.  He said he did not know
    anything about this course.  The application also showed  that  he  had
    completed an advanced  diploma  in  computer  hardware  and  networking
    departments, and had taken exams in 2008 and 2009.  He  confirmed  that
    his case was that he had submitted fake certificates to gain  entry  to
    the United Kingdom.  It was put to him that earlier he had  been  asked
    what documents he had submitted for his visa, and he had  said  he  had
    submitted  his  O  and  A-level  certificates  from   1999   and   2003
    respectively.  But the application form did not make any  reference  to
    such certificates.  The appellant insisted  that  he  had  given  these
    documents to the agent.

23. He was asked when was the last time the army came looking for him.   He
    said he did not know exactly when, as he did not have any contact  with
    his mother now.

The Reasons for Refusal

24. On 30 November 2012  the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her  reasons  for
    refusing  to  recognise  the  appellant  as  a  refugee.   There   were
    inconsistencies and discrepancies in his account of claimed  events  in
    Sri Lanka, and it was  therefore  not  accepted  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities had an adverse interest in him or that  they  had  arrested
    and detained him as he claimed.  But even if it was true  that  he  had
    helped the LTTE in the manner which he described, the war in Sri  Lanka
    had come to an end and his claimed profile in the LTTE  was  not  of  a
    significant nature to warrant the continuing adverse  interest  on  the
    part of the Sri Lankan authorities.  Applying TK, the  principal  focus
    of the authorities continued to be not Tamils from the north or east as
    such, but persons considered to be either  LTTE  members,  fighters  or
    operatives or persons who played an active role  in  the  international
    procurement network responsible for financing the LTTE and ensuring  it
    was supplied with arms.  He did not fall into any of these categories.

25. He claimed that the court summons had been posted to him in  Sri  Lanka
    (AIR 217).  But this was inconsistent with the  objective  information,
    which was that summonses were always served in person by an officer.

The Appellant's Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

26. The appellant signed a witness statement on 17 January 2013 in  support
    of his appeal against the refusal decision.  In the statement, he  made
    reference to an earlier witness statement of April  2012.   I  enquired
    about this statement at the hearing  before  me,  but  the  appellant's
    solicitor, who was present in court, was unable to produce it.

27. In the 2013 statement, the appellant said he had  sat  for  an  English
    language exam in 2005 and 2006, and on both occasions had  obtained  an
    ordinary pass.  He  had  also  completed  computer  courses  in  Jaffna
    between 2004 and 2006.  But in the time he was in school  between  1987
    and 2003, there was a civil war in Sri Lanka.   He  assisted  the  LTTE
    when they came to their school, and requested their help during  Heroes
    Day or for a funeral of one of their members.   He  was  elected  as  a
    student union leader in 2001.  This was for a period of two years.   In
    that period, he  had  cooperated  and  coordinated  with  other  school
    leaders to organise demonstrations and  processions.   When  the  peace
    accord was signed in February 2002, they had a peaceful life.  The army
    had noted his activities and wanted to arrest him, but the  arrest  was
    prevented by the peace accord.

28. Following the army's visit to the family home on 25  October  2006,  he
    had moved to Vanni which was controlled by the LTTE.  When  he  was  in
    the camp and then in prison, the army had taken  his  fingerprints  and
    photograph.  They also had recorded all his family details.

29. After arriving in the UK, he had made an application for further  leave
    to remain just before the expiry of his student visa.  At the  time  of
    his  application,  UKBA  had  introduced  a  policy  that  an   English
    certificate should be obtained before making any further  applications.
    As he had not obtained this certificate, his application  was  refused.
    After his attempts to obtain leave to remain  proved  unsuccessful,  he
    had decided to return to Sri Lanka as there was no more war between the
    government and the LTTE.  But his mother begged him not  to  return  as
    she had received the summons and arrest warrant.  So he  had  no  other
    alternative than to claim asylum.

30. Responding to various points in the refusal letter, he had confirmed he
    had studied the HND course in Jaffna and sat for the examination there.
     It was true that educational certificates were obtained on  11  August
    2008 and 8 July 2009 as indicated in the entry  clearance  application.
    But the certificates related to O-levels which he had sat in  1999  and
    2000,  and  A-levels  which  he  had  sat  in  2003  and  2004.   These
    certificates were obtained in 2008 and 2009 in  order  to  release  him
    from detention, using these  certificates.   They  were  also  used  to
    obtain his student visa at a later stage.  The agent has  used  further
    forged documents  in  order  to  obtain  the  student  visa.   But  the
    certificates of 2008 and 2009 were not forged.

31. He had tried  to  contact  his  family  in  Sri  Lanka  by  letter  and
    telephone.  He could not get any replies from his family.  He now heard
    from the news that letters were opened and checked for  what  had  been
    written.  Also he had heard that telephone calls were being hacked.  He
    now believed that might be the reason he had not received  any  replies
    to his letters or telephone calls.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

32. The appellant's appeal came before Judge M R Oliver sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  19  February  2013.   In  his
    subsequent determination, Judge Oliver recorded the oral evidence which
    the appellant gave.

33. In cross-examination, he said he had been permitted to send a letter to
    his uncle from detention towards the end of 2009.  It was  put  to  him
    that when he was released in July 2010 this was at  a  time  when  many
    people were released as a result of the end of the war.  The  appellant
    said he had stayed in Colombo for about three months, and had not  been
    arrested in that period, because his uncle  had  arranged  for  a  safe
    place for him to stay.

34. In answer to questions from the judge, the appellant said that  he  had
    spoken to his mother before claiming asylum, but not since then.   This
    was because the authorities checked phone calls.  He was asked how  his
    mother knew where to send the summons and arrest warrant.  He explained
    his mother had  some  friends  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  that  he
    currently resided with these friends.

35. Judge Oliver went on to find that while there might be  some  truth  in
    various parts of his story, the essential details  in  support  of  his
    claim had been fabricated, and in the light of all the evidence he  did
    not accept the authorities in Sri  Lanka  had  ever  had  any  specific
    adverse interest in him.

The Decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss

36. Following an error of law hearing at Field House on  29  May  2013,  at
    which Ms Anzani of Counsel appeared on behalf of the  appellant,  Judge
    Juss gave his reasons for finding that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was vitiated by  a  material  error  of  law,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 11 September 2013.  His reasons for finding an error  of
    law, and for going on  to  remake  the  decision  in  the  respondent's
    favour, are set out in paragraphs 15 to 22 of  his  decision,  and  for
    convenience I have reproduced these paragraphs verbatim below:

         "Error of Law and Remaking the Decision

         15.  I am satisfied that the making of the decision  by  the  judge
             involved the making of an error on a point of law (see Section
             12(1) of TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside that decision
             and remake the decision (see Section 12(2) of TCEA 2007).   My
             reasons are as follows.  This  is  a  case  where  the  judge,
             notwithstanding his comprehensive and detailed analysis of the
             facts, failed to cite and apply the country guidance  case  of
             LP [2007] UKAIT 00076 and TK (Tamils - LP updated)  Sri  Lanka
             CG [2009] UKAIT 00049, before determining the appeal.  This is
             an error.  I do not, however, find the judge to have erred  in
             any other respect.

         16.  This is because what was absolutely forefront in the  mind  of
             the judge was the finding that  he  made  that  the  Appellant
             arrived as a student on his own passport.  He applied  for  no
             less  than  four  extensions  of  stay.   All  of  these  were
             rejected.   Then  two  weeks  after  his  appeal  rights  were
             exhausted  in  relation  to  those  student  applications,  he
             applied for asylum.  The details that the Appellant then  gave
             with respect to his claim were not credible.   The  judge  set
             these out at paragraph 22.  The judge did not believe that the
             Appellant was released on the payment of a bribe, and  he  did
             not believe that the Appellant was released on the payment  of
             a bribe, and he did not believe that the Appellant intended to
             apply for asylum all along when he left Sri Lanka because of a
             genuine fear of persecution.

         17.  In fact, the  judge  referred  to  the  Appellant's  'unlikely
             circumstances in his narrative' and found his  claim  to  have
             been entirely 'fabricated'  (paragraph  22).   Therefore,  the
             failure to specifically deal with the Appellant  being  a  low
             level past activist with the LTTE, or a failure to  deal  with
             the   Appellant's   father's   alleged   disappearance,    are
             immaterial.  They are not material to his decision,  which  is
             to disbelieve the Appellant comprehensively.

         18.  It is in this context that I must remake the decision.   I  do
             so on the basis of the findings of  the  original  judge,  the
             evidence before the original judge, and the  country  guidance
             case that applies as of today.  The country guidance  case  of
             LP [2007] established that Tamils are not per se  at  risk  of
             serious harm from the Sri Lankan authorities in Colombo.  This
             is manifestly the case with respect to the Appellant,  on  the
             basis of the findings by the judge, who has travelled  on  his
             own passport, being earlier able to leave Sri Lanka to  go  to
             India for his sister's wedding, and  who  has  now  failed  to
             demonstrate any basis for ill-treatment, as the judge found.

         19.  There  are  a  number  of  non-exhaustive  factors  which  may
             increase the risk and twelve risk factors were  identified  in
             that  case.    Considering   these   both   individually   and
             cumulatively (see paragraph 238 of that case) I find that  the
             Appellant is not at risk.  The test is  reasonable  degree  of
             likelihood of ill-treatment or persecution, as the judge found
             (see his paragraph 17), and I find that this test has not been
             met in this appeal.  I have also considered the later case  of
             TK [2009] UKAIT 00049, which confirmed the risk factors  taken
             from LP.  Taking into account the Appellant's Tamil ethnicity,
             his previous record as alleged, his previous  criminal  record
             as alleged, any prospect of his having jumped bail or escaping
             custody, his having signed a confession or similar document or
             otherwise, his having been asked by security forces to  become
             an informer if that was the case,  any  presence  of  scarring
             which is absent in this case, his return from London or  other
             centre of LTTE fund raising, and his  illegal  departure  from
             Sri Lanka which is not the case on the facts of this  case,  I
             find that the Appellant is not at risk.

         20.  On any view this is a last ditch attempt by the  Appellant  to
             seek to remain in the UK when all else had failed.   No  doubt
             he would much have preferred to have succeeded in  his  desire
             to remain in the UK as a student.   He  certainly  made  every
             effort to secure residence on this basis.   It  is  only  when
             that has failed that he has put in an asylum claim as  a  last
             resort.

         21.  The case of EG v The  United  Kingdom  41178/08  [2011]  ECHR,
             decided on 31st May 2011,  by  the  European  Court  of  Human
             Rights also holds that 'given  the  end  of  hostilities,  the
             likelihood of a Tamil returning to Colombo being  the  subject
             of adverse interest on the part of the Sri Lankan  authorities
             has, if anything, declined' (paragraph 69).  If there was  any
             case to which this was more relevant, it  is  to  the  present
             case.

         22.  The findings of fact made by the original judge,  before  whom
             the  Appellant's  claim  has  been   found   'to   have   been
             fabricated', and where the judge found that, 'his  failure  to
             claim asylum on arrival and until his four applications for an
             extension of his student visa had been  refused  fundamentally
             undermine his credibility', make this only too clear."



The Order of the Court of Appeal

37. On 18 December 2014 Beatson LJ made the following order by consent:

         "1.  The appeal against the determination  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
             (Immigration and Appeal Chamber) dated 11 September  2013,  be
             allowed to the extent noted in paragraph 2, below

         2.   The appellant's statutory appeal  be  remitted  to  the  Upper
             Tribunal    (Immigration    and    Asylum     Chamber)     for
             reconsideration."

The Agreed Scope of the Reconsideration

38. This case was initially listed before me on  30  April  2015.  On  that
    occasion, Mr Spurling of Counsel appeared on behalf of  the  appellant.
    It was agreed by the parties that the error of law  decision  by  Judge
    Juss should stand.  It was also agreed that my task was  to  reconsider
    the appeal on its merits, having regard to the new evidence as  to  the
    appellant's claimed sur place activities in the  UK  and  applying  the
    latest country guidance.

The Resumed Hearing on 6 July 2015

39. The appellant gave evidence through a Tamil interpreter whom he clearly
    understood.  He adopted a supplementary witness statement dated 6  July
    2015.  Since his last statement made on 17 January 2013, he had  joined
    the British Tamil Forum, the Transitional Government of Tamil Eelam and
    the National  Liberal  Party.   He  had  signed  several  petitions  in
    relation to missing persons in Sri Lanka.  He had also provided written
    evidence under oath to submit to  the  UN  and  other  commissions  and
    prosecutions.   The  International  Centre  for  the   Prevention   and
    Prosecution of Genocide believed that he could  one  of  the  potential
    witnesses to be asked in person to  give  evidence.   He  had  attended
    meetings held by the  National  Liberal  Party,  issuing  leaflets  and
    taking part in demonstrations.  He had taken part in a protest when the
    new Sri Lankan President came to the UK on 9 March 2015.   As  the  Sri
    Lankan Government had banned the BTF, the TGTE  and  other  groups,  he
    feared that if he returned to Sri Lanka, he would be killed.

40. The supplementary bundle prepared for  the  resumed  hearing  contained
    correspondence from the ICPPG, the NLP, the TGTE and the BTF.  It  also
    contained various photographs which the appellant said had  been  taken
    of him at various demonstrations,  and  a  photograph  (photograph  16)
    which the appellant said had been taken of him giving an interview to a
    Tamil TV channel recently.

41. Ms Anzani took the appellant through the photographs in  order  to  get
    him to identify precisely when and in what circumstances each  of  them
    had been taken.  The appellant was  extensively  cross-examined  by  Mr
    Melvin about his claimed involvement with the ICPPG, NLP, TGTE and BTF.
     The appellant also answered questions for clarification purposes  from
    me.

Discussion and Findings

42. I set out the country guidance given in GJ and Others at paragraph  356
    of the determination in full:

         "356.    Having considered and reviewed all the evidence, including
             the latest UNHCR guidance, we consider that the change in  the
             GOSL's approach is so significant that  it  is  preferable  to
             reframe the risk analysis for the present political  situation
             in Sri Lanka. We give the following country guidance:

             (1)  This determination replaces all existing country guidance
                  on Sri Lanka.

             (2)  The focus of the  Sri  Lankan  government's  concern  has
                  changed since the civil war ended in May 2009. The LTTE in
                  Sri Lanka itself is a spent force and there have  been  no
                  terrorist incidents since the end of the civil war.

             (3)  The government's present objective is to  identify  Tamil
                  activists in  the  diaspora  who  are  working  for  Tamil
                  separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state
                  enshrined in Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution
                  in 1983, which prohibits  the  'violation  of  territorial
                  integrity' of Sri Lanka. Its focus is on  preventing  both
                  (a) the resurgence  of  the  LTTE  or  any  similar  Tamil
                  separatist organisation and (b) the revival of  the  civil
                  war within Sri Lanka.

             (4)  If a person  is  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  security
                  services there remains a real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or
                  harm requiring international protection.

             (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka for
                  a person at real risk from  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,
                  since the government now controls the whole of  Sri  Lanka
                  and Tamils are required to return to a named address after
                  passing through the airport.

             (6)  There are no detention facilities at  the  airport.  Only
                  those whose names appear on a 'stop' list will be detained
                  from the airport. Any risk  for  those  in  whom  the  Sri
                  Lankan authorities are or become interested exists not  at
                  the airport, but after arrival in their home  area,  where
                  their arrival will be verified by the CID or police within
                  a few days.

             (7)  The  current  categories  of  persons  at  real  risk  of
                  persecution or  serious  harm  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,
                  whether in detention or otherwise, are:

                  (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat
                      to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka  as  a  single  state
                      because  they  are,  or  are  perceived  to  have   a
                      significant role in relation to  post-conflict  Tamil
                      separatism within the diaspora and/or  a  renewal  of
                      hostilities within Sri Lanka.

                  (b)  Journalists (whether in  print  or  other  media)  or
                      human rights activists, who,  in  either  case,  have
                      criticised the Sri Lankan government,  in  particular
                      its human rights record, or who are  associated  with
                      publications critical of the Sri Lankan government.

                  (c)  Individuals who have given evidence  to  the  Lessons
                      Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the
                      Sri Lankan security forces, armed forces or  the  Sri
                      Lankan authorities in alleged war crimes. Among those
                      who  may  have  witnessed  war  crimes   during   the
                      conflict, particularly in the No-Fire  Zones  in  May
                      2009,  only  those  who   have   already   identified
                      themselves by giving such evidence would be known  to
                      the Sri Lankan authorities and  therefore  only  they
                      are at real risk of adverse attention or  persecution
                      on  return  as  potential  or   actual   war   crimes
                      witnesses.

                  (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised  'stop'
                      list accessible at the airport, comprising a list  of
                      those against whom there is an extant court order  or
                      arrest warrant. Individuals whose name appears  on  a
                      'stop' list will be stopped at the airport and handed
                      over to the appropriate Sri  Lankan  authorities,  in
                      pursuance of such order or warrant.

             (8)   The  Sri  Lankan  authorities'  approach  is  based   on
                  sophisticated intelligence, both as to  activities  within
                  Sri Lanka and in the diaspora. The Sri Lankan  authorities
                  know that many  Sri  Lankan  Tamils  travelled  abroad  as
                  economic migrants and also that everyone in  the  Northern
                  Province had some  level  of  involvement  with  the  LTTE
                  during the civil  war.  In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,  an
                  individual's past history will be  relevant  only  to  the
                  extent that it is perceived by the Sri Lankan  authorities
                  as indicating a present risk to  the  unitary  Sri  Lankan
                  state or the Sri Lankan Government.

             (9)  The authorities maintain a computerised  intelligence-led
                  'watch' list. A person whose name  appears  on  a  'watch'
                  list is not  reasonably  likely  to  be  detained  at  the
                  airport but will be monitored  by  the  security  services
                  after his or her  return.  If  that  monitoring  does  not
                  indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist working to
                  destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  revive  the
                  internal armed conflict, the  individual  in  question  is
                  not, in general, reasonably likely to be detained  by  the
                  security forces. That will be a question of fact  in  each
                  case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out  by
                  such an individual.

             (10) Consideration must always be given  to  whether,  in  the
                  light of an individual's activities  and  responsibilities
                  during the civil war, the exclusion  clauses  are  engaged
                  (Article 1F of the Refugee Convention and Article 12(2) of
                  the Qualification Directive). Regard should be had to  the
                  categories for  exclusion  set  out  in  the  'Eligibility
                  Guidelines  For  Assessing  the  International  Protection
                  Needs of Asylum-Seekers  from  Sri  Lanka',  published  by
                  UNHCR on 21 December 2012."

43. On the question  of  diaspora  activities,  the  Tribunal  reached  the
    following conclusion at paragraph 351:

         "Our overall conclusion regarding diaspora activities is  that  the
         GOSL has sophisticated  intelligence  enabling  it  to  distinguish
         those who are actively involved in seeking to  revive  and  re-fund
         the separatist  movement  within  the  diaspora,  with  a  view  to
         destabilising the unitary Sri Lankan state.  Attendance at one,  or
         even several demonstrations  in  the  diaspora  is  not  of  itself
         evidence that a person is a committed  Tamil  activist  seeking  to
         promote Tamil separatism within Sri Lanka.  That will be a question
         of fact in each case, dependent on any diaspora activities  carried
         out by such an individual."

44. On his own case, the appellant began his  anti-governmental  activities
    as a student leader in 2001 while the civil war was still ongoing.   So
    if he had attracted the adverse interest of the  army  at  that  stage,
    there would have been no barrier to him being arrested and detained  in
    consequence.  It is not  a  satisfactory  explanation  for  the  army's
    inaction that they were prevented from acting against him by the  peace
    accord, as the peace accord was not signed until 2002.

45. Following the renewal of the civil war in 2006, it is not credible that
    the appellant just happened to be at his aunt's house in the same  area
    (the appellant said that the distance between his aunt's house and that
    of his mother was 30 minutes by bicycle) when the army  allegedly  came
    to arrest him.

46. The civil war was at its height when the appellant returned from  India
    on 19 June 2008. To  that  extent  the  appellant's  account  of  being
    arrested in Mannar on suspicion of being an LTTE  member  or  supporter
    because he did not originate from Mannar, but from Jaffna, does not run
    counter to the background  evidence.   However,  his  eventual  release
    without charge, and without there being any conditions being put on his
    release, is much more consistent with the  authorities  having  decided
    that he was a person of no interest  to  them,  than  it  is  with  the
    authorities continuing to have an adverse interest in him.

47. The alleged adverse interest of the army in 2006 is also undermined  by
    the fact that the appellant was able to  obtain  a  passport  in  2008.
    Given the sophisticated record keeping of the Sri  Lankan  authorities,
    it is not credible that the appellant could have obtained a passport in
    2008, at the height of the civil war, if the army was looking  for  the
    appellant as a suspected LTTE operative.

48. The appellant's evidence of prolonged detention between 2008  and  2010
    is severely undermined by his admission as to the authenticity  of  the
    2008 and 2009 educational  certificates.   Even  though  he  says  they
    relate back to qualifications which he obtained between 1999 and  2003,
    the very fact that the certificates were obtained in 2008 and  2009  is
    totally incompatible with the notion that the  appellant  was  in  that
    period being detained by  the  authorities.   Moreover,  the  appellant
    claims that neither his uncle  nor  his  mother  knew  his  whereabouts
    until, in his mother's case towards the end of 2009, and until, in  his
    uncle's  case,  even  later.   It  is  entirely   credible   that   the
    certificates were obtained in 2008 and 2009  in  order  to  support  an
    application for entry clearance as a student by the appellant in  2010.
    It is entirely incredible that the certificates were also  obtained  in
    this period for  the  parallel  purpose  of  securing  the  appellant's
    release from detention.  There is nothing  in  the  objective  evidence
    which  supports  the  proposition  that   production   of   educational
    certificates would have assisted in the release  of  a  suspected  LTTE
    member  or  supporter;  and,  in  any  event,  at  the  time  that  the
    certificates were obtained, the appellant's whereabouts were  allegedly
    not known to his family.

49.  The  appellant's  general  credibility  is  also  undermined  by   the
    inconsistent evidence which he has given about being fingerprinted  and
    about his medical condition.  In his screening interview he said he had
    not been fingerprinted other than in connection with his  student  visa
    and that he had no medical conditions. Subsequently he has  claimed  to
    have been fingerprinted following his detention  in  2008  and  in  his
    asylum interview he claimed he had been suffering from a  pain  in  his
    leg which he attributed to the ill-treatment which he had  received  in
    detention in 2008.  Although he claims that his  GP  supported  him  in
    this hypothesis, he has not produced any medical evidence or records to
    support this assertion.  If he had suffered chronic pains as  a  result
    of ill-treatment in detention,  he  would  have  consulted  a  GP  much
    earlier than the late autumn of 2012.  It is wholly incredible that the
    appellant only began to suffer pains in his body of such severity as to
    require the intervention of a GP in the late autumn of 2012,  if  their
    origin lay in ill-treatment which he had received some years earlier.

50. I accept that the appellant's ability to exit  Sri  Lanka  on  his  own
    passport in 2010 does not mean that he  was  not  in  fact  of  adverse
    interest to the authorities.  But it  is  nonetheless  more  consistent
    with the appellant not being of adverse  interest  to  the  authorities
    than the contrary.

51. Following Tanveer Ahmed, the burden rests with the  appellant  to  show
    that the documents emanating from Sri Lanka are documents which can  be
    relied upon.

52. The release document is of little probative value.  It  does  not  show
    that the appellant's father disappeared in 1994,  still  less  that  he
    disappeared because he was of adverse interest to  the  authorities  on
    account of his known involvement with the political wing of  the  LTTE.
    On the contrary, its implication is that the persons referred to in the
    document  were  officially  detained,  and  then  officially  released.
    Moreover, it is not shown even to the lower standard of proof that  the
    appellant's father was one of the detainees. The surname of  suspect  3
    is not  legible,  and  after  a  lengthy  period  of  deliberation  the
    appellant gave a different first name for his father than that which is
    attributed to suspect 3.

53. The appellant claims that he was in contact with his  mother  up  until
    the  time  that  he  claimed   asylum.    The   appellant   has   never
    satisfactorily explained why he delayed  claiming  asylum  between  the
    date when the court summons allegedly reached  his  mother,  either  by
    being served in person on her or by being sent through the post to  his
    mother.  The Secretary of State interpreted the appellant as stating in
    interview that the summons had arrived at his mother's house  by  post.
    The appellant did not challenge this interpretation of his evidence  in
    his subsequent witness statement, and he has also  not  challenged  the
    objective evidence relied on by the respondent to the effect that court
    summonses are never  sent  by  post.   But  however  the  document  was
    received, his mother would  have  been  in  a  position  to  alert  the
    appellant to its contents in  early  March  2012.   But  she  makes  no
    reference to the court summons in the letter which she purportedly sent
    in March 2012, or in the later letter of June 2012. She also  does  not
    in terms refer to the receipt of an arrest warrant  in  her  June  2012
    letter.

54. The court summons also lacks internal credibility for two reasons.  The
    first is that it is incomplete.  The second reason is its timing.  As a
    result of their sophisticated intelligence, the authorities would  have
    known at the beginning of 2012 that the appellant was not  involved  in
    terrorism, and (if credence is given to the appellant's "confession" in
    detention in 2008) that all the he had done for the LTTE  in  2007  and
    2008 was to dig bunkers and help in an LTTE cemetery.  So he was not  a
    former LTTE combatant or cadre.  He had not been employed by  the  LTTE
    in functions within the administration, intelligence,  computer  branch
    or media.  He had not been involved in sheltering or transporting  LTTE
    personnel, or the supply and transport of goods for the LTTE.  Although
    he claimed to have a family link to the LTTE through his father, on his
    own case his father had not been involved in the LTTE since his alleged
    disappearance in 1994.  So he was not somebody who had  more  elaborate
    links to the LTTE, such as to bring himself in the scope of  the  UNHCR
    guidelines discussed in GJ and Others.

55. Moreover, the appellant has given inconsistent explanations as  to  why
    the authorities decided to prosecute him in February 2012,  nearly  two
    years after his release, and as to why there was a delay on his part in
    reacting to the court summons and subsequent arrest warrant.

56. As to the latter, his initial explanation was that his mother had  been
    living elsewhere, and only recently returned  to  the  family  home  in
    Jaffna.  But before me, he confirmed that his mother had been living in
    the family home for many years before the summons  and  arrest  warrant
    were allegedly received at the family home. So there  should  not  have
    been any delay, if either of these documents had been genuinely served.

57. As to the former, the appellant did  not  initially  suggest  that  the
    reason for the renewed interest in him in February 2012 was because  of
    his diaspora activities in the UK.  He only advanced  this  explanation
    for the first time before me.  The difficulty with this explanation  is
    that all the appellant's alleged diaspora activities in the UK postdate
    the refusal of his asylum claim on 3 November 2012.

58. Mr Melvin put to the appellant that the only reason for him engaging in
    sur place activities at all was to enhance his asylum  claim,  and  not
    because he was a genuine activist.  The appellant said in response that
    it had taken him time to become aware of the organisations  in  the  UK
    which he has now joined.  But, on  his  own  case,  he  was  not  doing
    anything after he completed his  studies  in  2011,  and  his  complete
    inaction as an activist between  2011  and  when  he  says  he  started
    becoming active in 2013 is wholly inconsistent with him being a genuine
    and committed activist either here or in Sri  Lanka  between  2001  and
    2008.

59. On the evidence of the photographs and the supporting letters, I accept
    that the appellant has had some recent involvement with  the  NLP,  the
    TGTE and the BTF.  But the appellant has not discharged the  burden  of
    proving that his involvement with these organisations  is  at  a  level
    which places him at risk.

60. I attach no credence whatsoever to the letter of 22 June 2015 from  the
    ICPPG stating that he has provided written evidence under  oath  to  be
    submitted to the UN and other commissions and prosecutions; and that he
    may be one of the potential witnesses who may be  asked  in  person  to
    give evidence.  In answer to questions for clarification  purpose  from
    me, he appeared not to understand what giving written  evidence  "under
    oath" involved.  He said he had just been given  a  form.   If  he  had
    given written evidence under oath, there would be an affidavit which he
    would be able to produce for inspection by the court.  But he  has  not
    produced any such affidavit.  He also said that he had  not  given  any
    documents to the ICPPG in support of his evidence, save  for  his  Home
    Office ID card.  I am wholly unpersuaded, even to the lower standard of
    proof, that the appellant has given evidence to the  ICPPG  in  a  form
    which could credibly be submitted to the UN.

61. The appellant has also not shown even to the lower  standard  of  proof
    that he has acquired any kind of public profile as an activist,  either
    on the internet or on television or  in  any  other  media.   The  high
    watermark of the appellant's case in this regard is simply a photograph
    which could be the appellant giving an  interview.   But  there  is  no
    surrounding  or  supporting  evidence,  beyond  the  appellant's   mere
    assertion in oral evidence, as to the context in which  the  photograph
    was taken, and there is no proof that footage of the  appellant  giving
    the interview has in fact been published to the world at large.   There
    is also, as Mr Melvin points out, no transcript of the interview  which
    the appellant allegedly gave, and there is no evidence of  publication.



62. In his letter of 12 May 2014, Mr Yogalingam, Member of  Parliament  for
    the TGTE and an executive committee  member  of  the  National  Liberal
    Party, said that the appellant is one of the victims of the Sri  Lankan
    authorities who has worked with the TGTE both as a volunteer  and  also
    in organising several public events in the UK.  Not only did he  attend
    almost all the meetings, but also took an  active  role  in  organising
    events and public demonstrations.  In particular,  he  took  an  active
    role in the International Conference on Tamil Genocide in Sri Lanka  on
    28 and 29 September 2013.

63. But,  as  became  apparent  from  Mr  Melvin's  cross-examination,  the
    appellant does not have any organisational role.   His  activities  for
    the TGTE, and for other organisations, have extended  no  further  than
    distributing leaflets, and similar low level and low profile activities
    of that nature.

64. Accordingly, I am satisfied to a very high degree of  probability  that
    the appellant's asylum claim is a fabricated one.  It may be the  case,
    as Judge Oliver found,  that  there  are  individual  elements  in  the
    appellant's account that  have  a  grain  of  truth,  but  he  has  not
    discharged the burden of proving, even to the lower standard, that  the
    core of his claim of past persecution is true.   In  particular,  there
    are not substantial grounds for believing that he was detained for  two
    years as a suspected LTTE member or supporter, or  that  he  eventually
    escaped from detention by payment of a bribe, with the consequence that
    he remained of adverse ongoing interest to  the  authorities  with  the
    consequence that he had to be smuggled out  of  the  country  with  the
    assistance of an agent in 2010.  There are also not substantial grounds
    for believing that a court summons and an arrest warrant were genuinely
    issued against him in 2012.

65. On the issue of risk on return, there are not substantial  grounds  for
    believing that the appellant has acquired an adverse profile  with  the
    Sri Lankan authorities as  a  result  of  his  limited  and  low  level
    diaspora activities in the UK, nor that he would be subjected  to  ill-
    treatment on return as a result of admitting under questioning that  he
    had become a member of two proscribed organisations,  namely  the  TGTE
    and BTF.  Annex D to  the  OGN  is  a  report  from  the  British  High
    Commission in Colombo  dated  25  July  2014  reporting  on  the  local
    response to the proscription of sixteen Tamil  diaspora  organisations.
    The High Commission says there had been no reports in the  local  press
    of anyone being arrested because of their membership of, or association
    with, one of the proscribed Tamil diaspora organisations.   Members  of
    civil  society  have  not  raised  this  as  an  issue  with  the  High
    Commission.  A spokesperson from the MEA stated that no returnees  from
    any country had been arrested yet because of their association with one
    of the proscribed groups and a spokesperson from the DIE also confirmed
    that no returnees had been arrested on  arrival  for  this  reason.   A
    spokesperson from the SIS and from an international NGO also  gave  the
    same confirmation, as did the Australian High Commission, the  Canadian
    High Commission, the Swiss Embassy and the Dutch Embassy.

66. In conclusion, the appellant has not discharged the burden  of  proving
    that he qualifies for recognition as a refugee.   By  the  same  token,
    there are not substantial grounds for believing that on return  to  Sri
    Lanka he would face a real risk of serious harm of such severity as  to
    cross the threshold of Article 3 ECHR.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the appellant's appeal against  removal  on  asylum  and  human
rights grounds is dismissed.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

