
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11585/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 September 2015                 |On 11 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                             Mr Hamidi ABDULLAHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Elder Rahimi solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                             DECISION & REASONS

    1.     The Appellant is a national of Iran, born on 17 September  1974.
    He is a Sufi of the Qaderi order. He came to the United Kingdom  on  15
    December 2012 as a student and made an asylum claim on 31 December 2013
    after he was informed that a property he owned in Karaj, Iran, had been
    raided by plainclothes police on 13 November 2013 because it was  being
    used for a Sufi meeting  and  those  attending  the  meeting  had  been
    arrested and the property sealed. He had  also  written  Sufi  articles
    which had been seized. This application was refused on 15 December 2014
    and the appeal came before Judge of the First Tier Tribunal  Freer  for
    hearing on 27 March 2015.

    2.     In a determination  promulgated  on  7  April  2015,  the  Judge
    dismissed the appeal on the basis that the property in question  of  70
    square metres would have been too small for fifteen Dervishes  to  meet
    and "pray and so on" [51]; that the Appellant failed to  show  that  he
    had any connection with the  specific  address  mentioned  in  the  new
    reports in translation [53] and whilst he accepted  the  evidence  that
    the Appellant is a Sufi he did not accept that this would give rise  to
    persecution in Iran [60-63]. He further failed to place weight  on  the
    property ownership document because it is dated from 2007 [48]

    3.     Permission to appeal was sought on a number of grounds,  but  in
    particular challenged the adverse credibility finding and asserted that
    the Judge made material errors  of  fact  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant had written the articles concerning Sufism; in preferring his
    own knowledge of Sufism to that of the Appellant  without  testing  the
    Appellant's knowledge; in failing to place appropriate  weight  on  the
    news reports of the raid on the  mistaken  basis  that  they  were  not
    independent; in engaging in "highly dubious" statistical analysis as to
    the number of Sufi meetings taking place in Karaj the  same  night;  in
    failing to accept that the Appellant still owned his property in  Karaj
    absent further corroborative evidence post 2007; in failing  to  accept
    that the raid took place on the Appellant's home, given the  manner  in
    which raids are reported in the media; in finding that the Appellant is
    a low level Sufi when in fact he is a dervish, which was  confirmed  by
    the documentary evidence and in failing to take account of the  country
    evidence that clearly documents the increasing persecution of Sufis  in
    Iran. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Pooler on 30 April 2015
    on the basis that the grounds were arguable.

    4.     Having heard from Mr Gayle and Ms Pal, who acknowledged that  at
    [42] the Judge was "overstepping the mark"  in  referring  to  his  own
    knowledge of Sufism, I find that First Tier Tribunal Judge Freer  erred
    materially in law. Whilst I accept Ms Pal's submission that Judge Freer
    provided detailed reasons for some of his findings I consider that  the
    Judge fell into error in undertaking unduly  detailed  analysis  eg  at
    [47] as to the number of Sufi members in Iran, the population of  Karaj
    and consequently the likely numbers  of  meetings  in  Karaj  the  same
    evening, concluding that "the odds could be as much as  a  thousand  to
    one against it being the same meeting". This is essentially speculation
    and  cannot  properly  be  invoked  as  a  reason  for  rejecting   the
    Appellant's account,  which  was  supported  by  both  independent  and
    subjective evidence, that his property was raided. At  [48]  the  Judge
    notes that the Appellant produced a property  ownership  document  from
    2007 but disregards this on the basis that it had not  been  shown  "by
    any independent and objective evidence" that this address was still  in
    the ownership of the Appellant. At [51-52] the Judge again  engaged  in
    speculation as to the number of Dervishes could fit into a property  of
    70 square metres given he was not aware of "the physical sizes of those
    attending" and that they would wish to pray and would need room to move
    as "Islamic prayer practices are very physical."  This  is  speculation
    and is neither appropriate nor provides proper reasoning for  rejecting
    the Appellant's account. Essentially the Judge failed to consider  both
    the Appellant's credibility and his case as a whole "in the round".

    5.     Having indicated my finding that the First Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    had erred materially in law it was agreed  by  both  parties  that  the
    appropriate course would be for the  appeal  to  be  remitted  back  to
    Taylor House for a hearing de novo to be heard by a  Judge  other  than
    Judge Freer.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Chapman

10 September 2015
