
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/11005/2015
                                                               AA/11024/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 7th November 2016               |On: 8th November 2016                  |
|                                    |                                       |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    RT+1
                                     SS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Bradshaw, Counsel instructed by Oaks Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents are all nationals of the Islamic Republic of  Iran.  RT
    is a woman aged 41.  Her  dependent  is  her  daughter,  a  minor  upon
    application but now an adult.  SS is her niece, born in 1997.    On the
    31st May 2016 the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Lever)  allowed  their
    linked appeals against decisions to refuse  to  grant  protection.  The
    Secretary of State now has permission to appeal against the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.

 2. The matter in issue before the Tribunal was whether the then appellants
    had a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of  their  religious
    belief. All three professed to having converted  from  Shi'a  Islam  to
    Christianity. Judge Lever heard evidence about their claimed faith from
    the witnesses, and from a Reverend Finton, formerly the Rector of Bury,
    who had conducted their baptisms.  Having  heard  that  evidence  Judge
    Lever was satisfied that the conversions  were  genuine  and  that  the
    women would be at risk in Iran as a result. The appeals were allowed.

 3. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had not  properly  considered  or  applied  the
    country guidance case of SZ and JM (Christians, FS Confirmed)  Iran  CG
    [2008] UKAIT 00082.  Permission  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pedro on the 23rd June 2016.




    My Findings

 4. The grounds cite the following passages from SZ and JM:

         "140.    In conclusion, the  question  of  whether  someone  is  an
             "ordinary convert" in each case will depend on its own  facts.
             There should not be findings based solely on the  denomination
             of the church which a person has joined.  They  must  also  be
             based on the evidence  as  to  his  own  conduct  as  it  will
             manifest itself in Iran.  When deciding whether a  convert  is
             genuine, it is important to take care because, as we  set  out
             earlier in this determination, one individual's view as to how
             another  person  may  perceive,  or  practice,  or  understand
             Christianity may be very different from the reality in another
             denomination,  country  or  community.   Insofar  as   it   is
             necessary to consider  whether  it  would  be  persecutory  to
             expect an individual returning to modify  his  behaviour,  the
             Tribunal has now  promulgated  HJ  (homosexuality:  reasonably
             tolerating living discreetly) Iran [2008]  UKAIT  00044  which
             deals with that issue.  The Tribunal identified  a  two  stage
             approach.  The first is to decide how it is likely a  possible
             returnee will behave.  That question must be decided from  the
             evidence and facts of each case including the way in which the
             person has behaved up until the present.   It  should  not  be
             based on how it is thought an individual should  behave.   The
             Tribunal described a factual and  not  a  normative  approach.
             The second stage is a test to decide whether that would entail
             that person having to live a life that he could not reasonably
             be expected to tolerate because  doing  so  would  entail  the
             suppression of many aspects  of  his  identity  (which  is  an
             objective test).  In HJ it was  the  sexual  aspects  of  that
             appellant's identity, here it would be the religious  aspects.
             HJ was recently cited without comment by the Court  of  Appeal
             in XY (Iran) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2008] EWCA Civ 911.

         ...

         146. We are conscious of  the  fact  that  some  of  the  "ordinary
             converts" who have been caught up with  the  authorities  have
             been severely mistreated.  We have in mind the man in the car.
             As we have said, it is extremely difficult  to  predict  under
             what circumstances this kind of incident might arise, and to a
             very large extent it seems to be chance.  In our judgment  the
             number and frequency of these events is not such  as  to  show
             that there is a real risk of serious mistreatment to those who
             are not seen  as  the  more  active  convert,  Pastor,  church
             leader, proselytiser or evangelist (FS and Others  Para  189).
             We add that  church  leaders  would  certainly  include  those
             leading house churches.  We say that because the incidents are
             still not large in number but also do  not  always  result  in
             serious harm which would amount to persecution  or  Article  3
             mistreatment.

         148. It remains our view that for the ordinary convert (within  the
             meaning which we have slightly modified from  FS  and  Others)
             that there is a risk, but not a real risk, of serious harm  if
             returned to Iran.  We do not demur from  the  concept  of  the
             added risk factor as referred to in FS and Others.

                                                      [emphasis in original]

 5. In light of that  guidance  Secretary  of  State  makes  the  following
    submission about the approach taken by Judge Lever: "the IJ has  failed
    to consider whether or not the Appellant's would proselytse on  return,
    particularly given the second Appellant's  evidence  at  paragraph  18,
    that on return to Iran she would practice Christianity at home".

 6. I am very surprised to see  these  grounds  being  argued,  and  indeed
    permission being granted. The decision in SZ and JM was  heard  in  May
    2008. As set out above, the approach the Tribunal  took  on  that  date
    was, quite understandably, that taken by another  panel  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in HJ (homosexuality: reasonably tolerating living discreetly)
    Iran [2008] UKAIT 00044. The test applied in that case had been whether
    or not a gay man  could  reasonably  be  expected  to  tolerate  living
    discreetly in his country of origin.  The  Tribunal  in  SZ  transposed
    this reasoning to  Christians.  If  a  Christian  could  be  reasonably
    expected to tolerate concealing his faith, his asylum case failed. That
    approach was followed by the Court of Appeal in HJ but not, as I  think
    is now well known, by the Supreme Court, who held  that  the  test  was
    misconceived and contrary to the fundamental principles of the  Refugee
    Convention.  The test to be applied was  in  fact  whether  the  person
    concerned would act discreetly and whether any part of his decision  to
    do so  was  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution.  The  grounds  make
    reference to the second Appellant's evidence that if returned  to  Iran
    she "would practise Christianity privately at home...".  The  Secretary
    of State has omitted to cite the rest of the sentence  at  the  end  of
    paragraph 18: "...as she would be frightened to  practise  it  openly".
    This evidence reflected that of both appellants before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. They had converted to Christianity and in doing so knew  that
    they had committed what is considered to be a capital offence in  Iran,
    namely  abandoning  Islam.  As  apostates  they  would  live  with  the
    knowledge that they faced the death penalty if their conversion came to
    light.   They could not therefore practise their faith openly.    Since
    it is not in issue that their fear would be well  founded,  it  follows
    that Judge Lever was quite correct  to  have  allowed  the  appeals  on
    asylum grounds.




    Decisions

 7. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.

 8. There is an order for anonymity.



                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           7th November 2016
