
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11499/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 March 2016                               |On 19 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     TT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mackenzie, instructed by TRP Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant before me is the Secretary  of  State.   However,  it  is
    convenient to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT").

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on [ ] 1982.   He  became
    subject to deportation proceedings pursuant to the UK Borders Act  2007
    ("the 2007 Act") by reason of his conviction for an  offence  of  arson
    with intent to endanger life on 6 August 2007, resulting in a  sentence
    of ten years' imprisonment.

 3. The respondent's decision was made on 18 November 2014 and within it is
    certification under section 72  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") (presumption of  particularly  serious
    crime and danger to the community). The result of the  certificate,  if
    upheld, is that the appellant is excluded from the  protection  of  the
    Refugee Convention.

 4. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision and his appeal
    came before a panel of the FtT on 23 July 2012 whereby the  appeal  was
    dismissed. However, the FtT's decision was found to have  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law and its decision was set aside for
    the appeal to be heard afresh in the FtT.

 5. The appeal then came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane ("the FtJ")
    on 5 October 2015.  He  found  that  the  appellant  had  rebutted  the
    presumption of particularly serious crime and danger to  the  community
    (the s.72 certificate) and allowed the appeal on asylum grounds, and on
    human rights grounds with reference to Article 3 of the ECHR.

 6. The basis of the appellant's claim is best illustrated  with  reference
    to the decision and reasons of the FtJ

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The FtJ summarised the appellant's case to  the  following  effect.  In
    1994 he became a member of the LTTE, agreeing to undertake training  as
    a Black Tiger. In 1996 and 1997 he took part in raids on the Sri Lankan
    army with a number of soldiers having been killed.  The  appellant  was
    detained in the summer of 1997, and was interrogated and  tortured.  He
    disclosed some information about  the  LTTE,  and  was  released  after
    signing a blank piece  of  paper  and  agreeing  to  report.  The  LTTE
    concluded that he had betrayed them, and started looking for him.

 8. As a result, the appellant went to Colombo  with  his  father.  He  was
    detained by the police in a stop-and-search but released after a  short
    while after payment of a bribe.

 9. He then went to Thailand to avoid the Sri Lankan  authorities,  and  in
    his absence his parents were questioned in 1998 as to his  whereabouts.
    He came to the UK and claimed asylum in 1999.

10. During 2002 he was visited by the LTTE in London and accused of  having
    given information about them to the authorities. In  October  2010  his
    parents were arrested in Sri Lanka following their return  from  India.
    In 2013 the appellant became involved  with  the  British  Tamil  Forum
    ("the BTF"), attending meetings and collecting signatures on petitions.
    He also became involved in the Transitional Government of  Tamil  Eelam
    ("TGTE"), attended and spoke at  meetings,  and  was  involved  in  the
    preparation of petitions. He also worked  for  the  Tamil  Coordinating
    Committee   ("the TCC"), helping at a protest that took place in  2012,
    amongst other things.

11. At the hearing before the FtT the  appellant  did  not  give  evidence,
    although witnesses were called on his behalf.

12. In his conclusions, the FtJ  at  [18]  of  his  decision,  started  his
    consideration of the issues with reference to the determination  of  an
    Adjudicator, Mr C. Buckwell, who heard the appellant's first appeal  on
    13 August 2004. The FtJ noted that the Adjudicator had found  that  the
    appellant's account was "consistent" and that the Adjudicator's finding
    that the appellant "had  not  been  involved  with  the  Black  Tigers"
    derived from the Adjudicator's concern as to the weight to be  attached
    to certain documents.

13. The FtJ found that the expert report of Dr Chris  Smith  supported  the
    appellant's account of  his  involvement  with  the  Black  Tigers.  In
    relation to the respondent's concerns that the appellant had not at  an
    earlier stage mentioned his involvement with the Black Tigers, the  FtJ
    stated that on that issue he gave the  benefit  of  the  doubt  to  the
    appellant who said that his previous representatives had told  him  not
    to mention involvement with the Black Tigers on the basis that he might
    be excluded from Refugee Convention protection.

14. The FtJ decided that he was entitled to come to  different  conclusions
    from those of the Adjudicator, finding that the appellant  had  been  a
    member of the Black Tigers and that the activities that he referred  to
    in his account were true. He found that the appellant had been detained
    and tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities, and that  he  was  "for  an
    indeterminate  period  of  real  and  adverse  interest"  both  to  the
    authorities and to the LTTE who believed that he had betrayed them.

15. Furthermore, at [20] he found that the appellant had given  a  credible
    account  of  his  political  activities  in  the  UK  and  allegiances,
    including in terms of work carried out for the TGTE  and  the  BTF.  He
    found that the  witnesses  called  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  were
    "palpably truthful and honest". He concluded  that  there  was  "not  a
    shred of evidence" to support a conclusion that the appellant's support
    for those organisations was "contrived or the product  of  an  ulterior
    motivation". He found that the appellant  was  deeply  devoted  to  the
    cause of the Tamil Communities of Sri Lanka.

16. It is also worth noting that the FtJ did not find that  there  was  any
    basis for drawing an adverse inference from  the  appellant's  decision
    not to give evidence "if indeed he personally  evinced  a  decision  in
    such regard".

17. Applying the country guidance decision in  GJ  and  Others  (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) he concluded  that
    the appellant fits into one of the risk categories, as someone who  is,
    or would be perceived to be, a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka  as
    a single State because he has or would  be  perceived  to  have  had  a
    significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil  separatism  within
    the diaspora.

18. At [24] he found that the Sri Lankan  authorities  would  know  of  the
    appellant, his political allegiances and affiliations  and  his  ardent
    support for the cause of ordinary Tamils  resident  in  Sri  Lanka.  He
    noted that the BTF and TGTE  are  both  proscribed  organisations,  and
    according to the Operational Guidance Note,  individuals  belonging  to
    those organisations would face arrest under  anti-terrorism  laws  when
    travelling to Sri Lanka.

19. In relation to the s.72 certificate, he decided that the appellant  had
    rebutted the presumption that he constituted a danger to the community.
    He referred to the OASys report of 2012 which said that the risk of the
    appellant reoffending was low. He  also  took  into  account  that  the
    appellant had not reoffended since his release  from  prison  in  March
    2012.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions before the Upper Tribunal

20. The respondent's grounds contend that the FtJ, having  found  that  the
    appellant was a member of the Black Tigers and carried  out  activities
    such as being a potential suicide  bomber,  planned  killings,  attacks
    using grenades, ambushes, planting mines, setting roadside  bombs,  and
    was involved in shootings and killings, he erred in law by not carrying
    out the process "as  stated  at  part  3  of  the  Article  1F  Process
    instruction". The grounds refer in this  respect  to  the  respondent's
    supplementary decision letter dated 7 September 2015.

21. At [15] of the grounds it is asserted that the FtJ's findings that  the
    appellant was a  member  of  the  Black  Tigers  and  carried  out  the
    activities referred to amounts to a  finding  that  there  are  serious
    reasons for  considering  that  the  appellant  is  guilty  of  actions
    contrary to Article 1F.

22. The allied contention is that the FtJ had "fundamentally  misread"  the
    supplementary decision letter of 7 September 2015 in that there was  no
    concession made by the Secretary of  State  in  relation  to  exclusion
    under Article 1F.

23. In relation to the  findings  of  the  Adjudicator  who  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal in 2004, it is argued that the FtJ was wrong to find
    that the Adjudicator had found that the appellant had not been involved
    in the Black Tigers, when in fact the appellant did not  claim  at  the
    time of that appeal to have been involved in  the  Black  Tigers.  That
    claim was only made after that appeal in 2004 had been dismissed.

24. Furthermore, it is contended that as a reason for  departing  from  the
    findings in the previous appeal, it was irrational to conclude that  Dr
    Smith's report about the appellant's possession of detailed information
    about membership of the Black Tigers was a sufficient basis to conclude
    that the appellant's knowledge of the Black Tigers could only have come
    about because he was such a  member.   The  grounds  contend  that  the
    appellant could feasibly have obtained this  information  from  another
    person who had been a member of the Black Tigers.  Thus, it is asserted
    that the FtJ had failed to give "reasonable  scrutiny"  to  Dr  Smith's
    conclusions.  The related assertion is that the FtJ had failed to  give
    any adequate reasons for departing from the findings of the Adjudicator
    bearing in mind the failure of the appellant to mention his involvement
    with the Black Tigers at that earlier hearing.

25. It is asserted that the  FtJ  had  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    decision in BT (Former solicitors'  alleged  misconduct)  Nepal  [2004]
    UKIAT 00311 when accepting that the appellant  had  been  told  by  his
    previous representatives to lie about his involvement  with  the  Black
    Tigers.

26. As regards the appellant's failure to give evidence, it  is  said  that
    the FtJ had failed  adequately  to  consider  whether  the  appellant's
    failure to adopt the contents of his interviews  and  statements  is  a
    matter that limited the weight to be attached to them,  or  whether  an
    adverse inference should be drawn from the fact that he  did  not  give
    evidence.  Furthermore, it is  asserted  that  undue  weight  had  been
    attached to the appellant's written  evidence.  Additionally,  the  FtJ
    appeared to have "entirely overlooked" [24]-[34] of the decision letter
    which is said to be of central relevance to the Devaseelan issue.

27. In terms of the s.72 certificate, it is contended that the FtJ appeared
    to have paid no regard  to  [10]  of  the  decision  letter  where  the
    respondent's reasons for finding that the presumption of danger to  the
    community had not been rebutted  are  set  out.   In  addition,  it  is
    asserted that no consideration had been given  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had only refrained from further offending  while  subject  to
    significant restrictions, and in the knowledge that deportation  action
    was pending.  Reference is made in the grounds to an OASys Report dated
    29 June 2002 (although both the grounds and the FtJ's decision  are  in
    error in respect of the date of the OASys Report which is 2012).

28. Lastly on this issue, it is said that the FtJ had failed to  take  into
    account in terms of 'danger to the community' that he himself had found
    that the appellant was a committed terrorist whilst in Sri Lanka, as  a
    member of the Black Tigers.  It is suggested that the FtJ  should  have
    taken that  fact  into  account  in  terms  of  whether  the  appellant
    represented a danger to the UK community, which includes a  significant
    number of people of Sri Lankan nationality  or  origin.   That  claimed
    history of significant criminality, including  military  and  terrorist
    training, was relevant  to  whether  the  appellant  had  rebutted  the
    statutory presumption under s.72.

29. In a 'rule 24' response, on behalf of the appellant it is  pointed  out
    that the FtJ had accepted that the appellant was a refugee  because  of
    his extensive political activities within the Tamil diaspora in the UK,
    and that that placed him within one of the risk  categories  identified
    in GJ.  There was no challenge on behalf of  the  respondent  to  those
    conclusions.

30. So far as  exclusion  is  concerned,  notwithstanding  the  appellant's
    claimed involvement in the Black Tigers, as part of the LTTE, there was
    no evidence that he had been  involved  in  terrorism  or  war  crimes.
    Although in the decision letter of 18 November 2014 the respondent  had
    said that if the appellant's activities on behalf of the  Black  Tigers
    were accepted he fell to be excluded under Article  1F(a),  no  details
    were provided of what precise  actions  she  considered  gave  rise  to
    exclusion, or why any such actions might fall within the  Rome  Statute
    of the International Criminal Court ("the ICC Statute").  The  decision
    in R (on the application of JS) (Sri Lanka) v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2010]  UKSC  15  is  referred  to.   The  rule  24
    response continues that in consequence of the respondent's  failure  to
    have set out her case on exclusion,  a  designated  judge  of  the  FtT
    directed the respondent to consider issuing a  further  refusal  letter
    dealing with exclusion, along with any evidence to be relied on.   That
    direction was  reiterated  when  the  hearing  was  adjourned,  at  the
    respondent's request, on 22 June 2015.

31. However, instead of filing submissions or evidence  on  the  point  the
    respondent wrote to the appellant on 7 September 2015  withdrawing  the
    paragraphs of the refusal letter that dealt with exclusion, given  that
    she did not accept that he had been in the Black  Tigers.   The  letter
    went on to say that if it was concluded that the appellant had  carried
    out activities that breach Article 1F, consideration would need  to  be
    given at the hearing to whether he should be excluded from the  Refugee
    Convention.  That approach is said on behalf of the appellant  to  have
    been entirely circular and did not set  out  the  evidential  or  legal
    basis of any allegation which might give rise to exclusion.

32. Thus, having failed to take repeated opportunities to make a  case  for
    exclusion, the respondent, it is argued, is not entitled  to  criticise
    the FtJ for not dealing with the point.

33. It is further argued that the point was not in any event an obvious one
    which the FtJ was obliged to consider.  All the actions set out in  the
    respondent's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal were of a military
    nature, as part of a civil war, and such activities do not per se  lead
    to exclusion as is clear from the Court of Appeal's decision in KJ (Sri
    Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2009]  EWCA  Civ
    292, in particular at [34].

34. The contention that the FtJ had erred in not applying the  respondent's
    Article 1F Process instruction is rejected,  on  the  basis  that  that
    process document is an internal document  for  the  respondent  in  the
    context of her decision-making and is  not  capable  of  sustaining  an
    argument that the judge made an error of law.

35. It is asserted further that any error on the part of the FtJ  in  terms
    of what the Adjudicator had earlier found in terms of  the  appellant's
    involvement in the Black Tigers was not material because the FtJ  found
    that the appellant was a refugee because of his  involvement  in  Tamil
    separatist politics in the UK.  The FtJ was impressed by the  witnesses
    called on behalf of the appellant on  that  issue.   It  was  therefore
    irrelevant as to whether the appellant was also  at  risk  from  having
    been a  Black  Tiger.   The  FtJ's  conclusion  on  the  issue  of  his
    membership of the Black Tigers  was  in  any  event  one  that  he  was
    entitled to come to.

36. It is further contended that the FtJ was entitled to conclude that  the
    appellant did not represent a danger  to  the  community,  taking  into
    account the OASys Report of 29 June 2012 and the fact that he  had  not
    re-offended since his release from prison in March 2012.  The  argument
    that because the appellant had been involved in activities on behalf of
    the LTTE in Sri Lanka he was a danger to the community in the  UK,  was
    not an argument advanced before the FtJ.  That argument is in any event
    speculative and lacks any basis in evidence.

37. The submissions on behalf of the parties before  me  largely  reflected
    the grounds and the rule 24 response.  Mr Kotas submitted that the  FtJ
    had failed to take into  account  that  the  Adjudicator  in  2004  had
    completely rejected the appellant's account.  The FtJ had  referred  to
    the fact that the Adjudicator had found the appellant "consistent"  but
    the Adjudicator had qualified that remark.  Although the report from Dr
    Smith had been taken into account in  Devaseelan  terms,  the  FtJ  had
    failed to take into account what is said in the decision  letter  about
    the inconsistency in the appellant's account of  his  involvement  with
    the Black Tigers.

38. The appellant had not given evidence before the FtJ and ordinarily that
    would require an adverse inference,  in  terms  of  the  weight  to  be
    afforded to his account.

39. So far as the risk of re-offending is concerned, there had not been any
    cross-examination on the  appellant's  attitude  to  his  offence,  his
    family, his community ties and so forth, all of which would  have  been
    relevant.

40. In terms of the impact of the appellant's previous  activities  in  Sri
    Lanka on behalf of the LTTE on the issue of 'danger to the  community',
    Mr Kotas was unable to say whether that issue had  been  raised  before
    the FtJ.

41. As regards Article 1F, the respondent's case had always been  that  the
    appellant had not been involved in the Black Tigers.  The supplementary
    decision letter dated 7 September 2015 at [7] indicated that that was a
    matter that would require consideration were the appellant's account to
    be accepted.  Furthermore, in setting aside an earlier decision of  the
    FtT, Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson found an error of law on the part  of
    the FtT in part in terms of its failure to consider Article 1F.

42. Mr Mackenzie relied on the rule 24 response.  He reiterated that  there
    had been no challenge to the FtJ's  positive  credibility  findings  in
    terms of the appellant's activities in the UK on behalf  of  the  Tamil
    diaspora.  There was similarly no challenge to the conclusion that  the
    appellant fell within one of the risk categories in GJ.

43. In terms of the appellant's not having given evidence before  the  FtT,
    there is no authority for the proposition  that  an  adverse  inference
    needed to be drawn in those circumstances.  It  is  also  important  to
    note that at the time of the hearing before the FtT, the appellant  was
    suffering from mental health problems, as demonstrated by the  evidence
    in the appellant's bundle before the FtT.

44. Although it is true to say that the issue of  exclusion  needed  to  be
    considered in appropriate circumstances, there was no evidence that the
    appellant was involved in war  crimes  or  terrorism.   Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Gleeson invited the parties to  make  submissions  on  exclusion.
    The respondent's decision letter at [58] and  [59]  relied  on  Article
    1F(a) but nothing in  the  evidence  reveals  that  the  appellant  had
    committed a war crime or otherwise came within the exclusion clause and
    there is no reference by the respondent to  the  relevant  law  on  the
    topic.  The matter was raised at a Case Management Review on  12  March
    2015.  Further directions were given on 23 June 2015 on that issue  and
    the only response from the  Secretary  of  State  was  to  produce  the
    supplementary decision letter withdrawing [58] and [59] of the original
    decision letter.

45. The  supplementary  letter  is  tautologous  in  stating  that  if  the
    appellant  had  carried  out  activities   that   breach   Article   1F
    consideration would need to be given to whether he should  be  excluded
    from the Refugee Convention on those grounds.  The ICC Statute  is  the
    starting point for such consideration. It has not been  explained  what
    the respondent's arguments are on this issue.  It was opportunistic for
    the respondent to raise these issues now.

46. In relation to the appellant's involvement with the Black  Tigers,  the
    evidence before the FtJ included Dr Smith's report and the  appellant's
    answers in interview.  His interview gave  a  detailed  description  of
    events and his  membership.   The  respondent's  arguments  are  simply
    disagreement with the FtJ's conclusions.  It is clear from [9] that the
    FtJ took into account the Adjudicator's findings.

    My conclusions

47.  I  deal  with  the  Devaseelan  and  credibility  issue  first.    The
    respondent's arguments contain several facets.  At [18]  the  FtJ  said
    that the Adjudicator (in 2004) had found that  the  appellant  had  not
    been involved  with  the  Black  Tigers.   However,  Mr  Buckwell,  the
    Adjudicator, did not make any finding in relation  to  the  appellant's
    involvement with the Black Tigers; the case was not advanced before him
    on that basis.

48.  This  issue  in  itself  however,  contains  further   subtleties   or
    difficulties.   The  FtJ  had  plainly  considered  the   Adjudicator's
    determination, and in which there is no reference to the Black  Tigers.
    It may be that the FtJ simply made  a  mistake  at  that  part  of  his
    decision or wrongly used the term Black Tigers  synonymously  with  the
    LTTE.

49. In addition however, the question of the appellant's  involvement  with
    the Black Tigers and his not having mentioned it expressly  before,  is
    perhaps not as clear-cut as might previously have been supposed.  I say
    this because at [7] of Mr Buckwell's determination it states  that  the
    appellant claimed to be a member of an "umbrella organisation" for  the
    LTTE and that he had been trained in arms and had participated in small-
    scale attacks but had refused to take part in heavy  combat.   At  [10]
    there is reference to the  appellant  having  said  that  he  had  been
    involved in grenade attacks on the army.  Whether  this  was  a  veiled
    reference to what he later claimed to be his membership  of  the  Black
    Tigers was not explored at the hearing before the FtJ, or indeed before
    me.  It is not appropriate to speculate as to what had gone before,  in
    the absence of submissions on the point, and I proceed on  the  footing
    that the FtJ was indeed mistaken when referring  to  the  Adjudicator's
    findings on this issue.

50. It is however evident that the FtJ recognised that the Adjudicator  did
    not find  the  appellant  had  given  a  credible  account  of  events,
    referring at [9] to the agreed position between the parties before  him
    which was that the  appellant  had  not  been  found  credible  by  the
    Adjudicator.  At [18] he referred to the decision in Devaseelan  [2002]
    UKIAT 00702, recognising that the decision of the Adjudicator was to be
    the starting point in his credibility assessment.  He referred  to  the
    general basis upon which the Adjudicator found the appellant not to  be
    credible.

51. The expert report of Dr Smith was a significant feature of the evidence
    before the FtJ which was not before the Adjudicator.  Although the  FtJ
    did not quote from Dr Smith's  report  it  is  worth  referring  to  Dr
    Smith's specific conclusions.  At [54] of his report dated 19 July 2012
    he said as follows:

         "After a total of four hours with the Appellant I am convinced that
         he was recruited as a Black Tiger.  His accounts of his  time  with
         the LTTE have been consistent  with  his  witness  statement.   His
         attention to detail is noteworthy, even extending to  drawing  maps
         to illustrate his points."

52. Dr Smith went on  to  refer  to  the  appellant's  description  of  his
    training as a Black Tiger and the equipment he used, stating  that  the
    appellant's knowledge of the workings of a suicide vest  were  detailed
    and more than he had personally  seen  in  open  source  material.   He
    concluded that it was  "unlikely  that  he  could  have  acquired  this
    information from anything other [than] first hand experience."  He gave
    other  examples  supporting  his   emphatic   conclusions   about   the
    appellant's involvement with the Black Tigers.

53. In addition, as  the  FtJ  stated  at  [19],  the  appellant  gave  the
    respondent a detailed account of his involvement in  the  Black  Tigers
    when interviewed.  The FtJ referred in particular to questions 52-64.

54. Although the FtJ did not refer to the decision in BT, relied on by  the
    respondent in terms of what information needed to be before a  Tribunal
    in relation to allegations against former  representatives,  I  do  not
    consider that his failure to do so is 'fatal'.  The FtJ  was  alive  to
    the point that the respondent questioned  why  the  appellant  had  not
    previously mentioned his involvement with the Black  Tigers,  prior  to
    the latest claim.  I do not read BT as meaning that a failure to adduce
    evidence of contact with previous representatives who are said to  have
    been responsible for some misconduct (here, telling  the  appellant  to
    lie) means that an appellant's explanation along those lines had to  be
    rejected.

55. Likewise, I am not satisfied that there is any  error  of  law  in  the
    FtJ's not having  drawn  an  adverse  inference  from  the  appellant's
    failure to give evidence before him.  Although Mr Mackenzie referred in
    his submissions in passing to the appellant's  mental  health  problems
    evidenced at the hearing before the FtJ, that does not appear  to  have
    been the basis of any explanation or submission before the FtJ in terms
    of why the appellant had not given evidence.  My view in  that  respect
    is reinforced by the fact that the Presenting Officer  before  the  FtT
    questioned witnesses as to why the appellant was not  giving  evidence.
    It seems to me that no explanation was proffered to the FtJ in terms of
    why the appellant had not given evidence.

56. However, I was not referred to any authority to the effect that a judge
    must draw adverse inferences from the failure of an appellant  to  give
    evidence in an asylum and human rights appeal.   Although  in  criminal
    proceedings for example, an adverse inference can be drawn  in  certain
    circumstances, I was not referred to any authority in  support  of  the
    respondent's argument on this point.  The standard of proof  in  asylum
    appeals is also to be borne in mind.  An appellant has  the  burden  of
    proving his or  her  case.   The  FtJ  was  required  to  consider  the
    appellant's credibility on the basis of the  available  evidence.   The
    fact that the appellant's account was not tested  in  cross-examination
    is plainly a factor to be borne in mind but it is evident that the  FtJ
    considered that there was sufficient  evidence  before  him,  from  the
    appellant's witness statements, asylum interview and  expert's  report,
    such as to mean that he had established his claim  to  the  appropriate
    standard.

57. I do consider that the FtJ's decision would have  benefited  from  some
    reference to the weight to be attached to evidence that is  not  tested
    but I am not satisfied that the FtJ erred  in  law  by  reason  of  his
    failure to have done so.  He said at [20] that he was not  prepared  to
    speculate as to why the appellant did not give evidence and that he was
    to decide the relevant issues of fact  by  reference  to  the  evidence
    actually presented to him. He clearly took into account the  fact  that
    the appellant had not given evidence.

58. The reference in the  grounds  to  [24]-[34]  of  the  decision  letter
    appears to refer to the decision dated 18 November 2014.  There  is  an
    earlier undated decision  which  has  no  paragraph  numbers.  However,
    although not highlighted at the hearing before me, it is apparent  that
    the 18 November 2014 decision is missing pages 9 and 10.  There  is  no
    complete copy of that decision letter in the Tribunal file,  either  in
    the respondent's bundles or  in  the  appellant's  bundle.  Indeed,  it
    appears to me that there was no complete copy of that letter before the
    FtJ.  However, the relevant paragraphs on the  Devaseelan  point  would
    appear to be [29] onwards.  The missing pages appear from  the  context
    to be a recitation of the  appellant's  circumstances  and  history  up
    until the proceedings before the Adjudicator.  Nothing  turns  on  this
    omission from the decision letter.

59. I next deal with  the  exclusion  point.  There  is  no  merit  in  the
    contention that  the  FtJ  erred  in  not  following  the  respondent's
    'Process Instruction', for  the  reasons  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, as set out at [34] above.

60. There is some confusion and/or disagreement between the  parties  about
    the respondent's position before the FtJ in relation to exclusion.  The
    FtJ's decision does not make  the  matter  completely  clear.   In  the
    decision letter of 18 November 2014 at [58] the  respondent  said  that
    even if it was accepted that the appellant had been involved as a Black
    Tiger, he had committed a crime against peace, a war crime or  a  crime
    against humanity and would therefore fall for exclusion  under  Article
    1F(a) of the Refugee Convention.  Paragraph [59] sets out the terms  of
    Article 1F(a).

61. Following a hearing on 26 February 2015 before a  Designated  Judge  of
    the FtT, directions were issued which included  a  direction  that  the
    respondent "do forthwith consider the issue of a  supplemental  refusal
    letter dealing with issues of exclusion from the Refugee Convention  in
    the event that the Panel find the appellant to be a member of the Black
    Tigers".  After an adjourned hearing on 22 June 2015 further directions
    were issued which reiterated the previous directions.

62. There then followed the supplementary decision letter dated 7 September
    2015, which itself referred to the earlier directions.  That letter set
    out the terms of Article  1F  and  referred  to  Home  Office  guidance
    contained in asylum instructions, providing a web-link.  At [4] of that
    later decision letter (there are two  paragraphs  numbered  4),  it  is
    stated that the Secretary of State has  not  accepted  the  appellant's
    claim in respect of his involvement with the Black Tigers, going on  to
    state that:

         "Consequently [Mr T] should not have been excluded from the Refugee
         Convention under Article 1F(a) of the Refugee  Convention  and  the
         findings that he is in paragraphs 58 and 59 of the deport  decision
         dated 18 November 2014 are withdrawn."

63. At [5] it states that the  Secretary  of  State  needed  to  give  full
    consideration to the specific reasons for the exclusion "as stated from
    part 3 onwards of the guidance document referred to above".  At [7]  it
    states as follows:

         "In the event at appeal the Immigration Judge determines [Mr T] has
         carried out activities  that  breach  Article  1F  of  the  Refugee
         Convention consideration would need to be given at the  hearing  as
         to whether [Mr T] should be excluded from the Refugee Convention on
         those grounds."

64. The FtJ referred at [10] to the supplementary decision  letter,  saying
    that in that letter the respondent "explicitly withdrew" the contention
    that the appellant was excluded from protection.  At [15]  he  referred
    to the submissions made to him on  behalf  of  the  respondent  to  the
    effect  that  the  Presenting  Officer  referred  to  the  respondent's
    supplementary letter

         "In  which  an  unequivocal  concession  was  made  that,  as   the
         respondent had not accepted the appellant's claims made in  respect
         of his role as a Black Tiger, he should not have been excluded from
         the Refugee Convention under Article 1F(a)".

65. It does seem to me that those references to the supplementary  decision
    letter do not accurately portray its contents, although the  inaccuracy
    is in some senses not significant.   It  appears  that  the  Presenting
    Officer suggested to the FtJ that the issue of exclusion was not relied
    on by the  respondent  (see  [15]).   That  is  not  exactly  what  the
    supplementary decision letter said.  Its import  is  that  it  was  not
    accepted that the appellant was a member of the  Black  Tigers  and  on
    that basis exclusion did not apply.  However, the letter continued that
    if the FtJ thought that he had carried  out  activities  in  breach  of
    Article 1F, then consideration would have to be given to exclusion.

66. That is in a way circular, as Mr Macknzie suggested.   The  real  point
    however, it seems to me, is that it does not appear that any  case  was
    advanced on behalf of the respondent before the FtJ on exclusion,  even
    on an alternative basis (if the appellant's account  was  found  to  be
    true).

67. Furthermore, despite having been given repeated  opportunities  to  set
    out  the  respondent's  case  on  exclusion  in  the  event  that   the
    appellant's account was accepted, the respondent did not take  up  that
    opportunity.  As Mr Mackenzie rightly pointed out, the ICC  Statute  is
    the starting point for considering whether a person  is  excluded  from
    asylum by virtue of Article 1F(a), but the respondent has  done  little
    if anything to articulate her case on this  issue.   In  KJ  the  court
    expressed the view, albeit obiter,  that  acts  of  a  military  nature
    committed by an independence movement such  as  the  LTTE  against  the
    military forces of the government are not themselves acts  contrary  to
    the purposes and principles of the UN (a reference to Article 1F(c)).

68. I should also point out that the appellant's representatives  wrote  to
    the respondent on 18 June 2015 asking for the respondent's position  on
    exclusion to be confirmed, should the appellant's account  of  being  a
    Black Tiger be accepted.

69. The appellant's skeleton argument that was before the  FtT  at  [4]-[6]
    referred to the issue of exclusion, the history of the appeal  on  that
    issue, and suggested that the respondent had withdrawn  the  allegation
    that the appellant was excluded and had not provided  any  reasons  for
    concluding that any of his actions  would  fall  within  the  exclusion
    clauses.  It is stated at [6] of the  skeleton  argument  that  in  the
    circumstances no further submissions in writing were to be made on  the
    point, and that no evidence would be called on the issue  and  that  if
    the respondent now sought to rely on  the  exclusion  clauses  the  FtT
    would be invited  to  prohibit  her  from  doing  so  or  to  grant  an
    adjournment for the matter to be explored more fully.  I refer to those
    aspects of the appellant's skeleton argument because they dovetail with
    what appears to have happened at the hearing before the FtT,  that  is,
    that exclusion was not actively argued on  behalf  of  the  respondent,
    even on an alternative basis.

70. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that there is any error of law  on  the
    part of the FtJ in this respect.

71. The last issue raised in the grounds concerns the FtJ's conclusion that
    the appellant had rebutted the presumption that he constitutes a danger
    to the community of the United Kingdom.  In relation to the  contention
    that the FtJ had failed to take into account  the  appellant's  claimed
    activities with the Black Tigers, it is not apparent that this  was  an
    argument advanced before the First-tier judge. If, as suggested in  the
    respondent's grounds, it was irrational or a misdirection for  the  FtJ
    to fail to consider that claimed history, one would have  thought  that
    what is said to be such a compelling argument would have been  advanced
    at the hearing before the FtJ.  In any event, it is to be borne in mind
    that the appellant's activities on  behalf  of  the  LTTE  occurred  in
    specific circumstances relating to  a  particular  political  objective
    prior to his arrival in the UK, about 17 years ago.

72. The grounds at [10] refer to an OASys assessment dated  29  June  2002.
    As already indicated, that is an error; the OASys assessment  is  dated
    2012.  It was clearly relevant to the FtJ's assessment of the risk that
    the appellant posed.

73. I am satisfied that the FtJ was entitled to conclude that the appellant
    did not constitute a danger to the  community,  having  regard  to  the
    OASys assessment of the risk of re-offending being  low  and  the  fact
    that the appellant had not committed further offences since his release
    from prison in March 2012.  It could also be added that  the  probation
    officer's assessment dated  20  September  2013  at  page  410  of  the
    appellant's bundle before the FtJ, stated that since his  release  from
    prison in March 2012 he had  been  fully  compliant  with  his  licence
    conditions and his compliance in the 17 months that she had  supervised
    him had been exemplary. The  fact  that  the  appellant  did  not  give
    evidence and was thus not cross-examined, for example on  his  attitude
    to his offending, could not be said to involve any error of law on  the
    part of the FtJ in the light of the information that was before him  on
    the issue of the risk of reoffending.

74. In conclusion therefore, having considered the  respondent's  arguments
    in detail with reference to the material that was before the FtJ, I  am
    not satisfied that there is any error of law in the FtJ's  decision  in
    any respect.

    Decision

75. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  Its decision is to stand in all respects.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            15/04/16


