
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11882/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th October 2016                          |On 13th October 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     ASN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Saleem of Malik & Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of  Judge  Abebrese  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 5th August 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a male Afghan citizen born 11th  February  1996.   His
    asylum, humanitarian  protection,  and  human  rights  application  was
    refused by the Respondent on 18th August 2015.

 3. The appeal was heard on 25th May 2016.  After hearing evidence from the
    Appellant and his father, who has settled status in the United Kingdom,
    the FtT found the core of the claim not to be credible.

 4. The FtT did not accept that the Appellant or his  family  were  of  any
    adverse interest to the Taliban.  It was not accepted that  threatening
    letters were received, nor was it accepted that one of the  Appellant's
    brothers was taken away by the Taliban and never seen again.

 5. The FtT did not accept that the Appellant was attacked by  the  Taliban
    and it was not  accepted  that  the  Appellant  fled  from  Afghanistan
    because his father had previously  been  of  adverse  interest  to  the
    Taliban.

 6. The FtT found that the Appellant had not  proved,  even  to  the  lower
    standard, that he would be at risk on the basis  of  imputed  political
    opinion if he was returned to Afghanistan.   The  FtT  found  that  the
    Appellant would have a  sufficiency  of  protection.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed on all grounds.

 7. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon three grounds which are summarised below.

Ground 1

 8. It was contended that the FtT  had  failed  to  properly  evaluate  the
    evidence given by the Appellant and his father.  It was contended  that
    the FtT was wrong to find an inconsistency in the evidence.  The FtT at
    paragraph 32 found that the Appellant's father had  indicated  that  he
    left Afghanistan, prior to the departure of the Appellant,  because  he
    was running a video shop which made  him  a  target  for  the  Taliban.
    There was no mention in his witness statement that he was  targeted  by
    the Taliban due to him having caused the  death  of  several  of  their
    members which was the case put on behalf of the Appellant.

 9. It was contended that the FtT had not properly considered  the  witness
    statement made by the Appellant's father, nor the witness statement and
    oral evidence given by the Appellant.

Ground 2

10. With reference to paragraph 24 of the FtT decision, the evidence  given
    by the Appellant  had  been  inaccurately  recorded.   The  Appellant's
    evidence was that he and  his  mother  travelled  from  Afghanistan  to
    Pakistan in order to meet his father, not that his father travelled  to
    Afghanistan.  It was contended that the FtT  had  wrongly  recorded  at
    paragraph 24 that the Appellant's father  had  made  eleven  visits  in
    total to Afghanistan and Pakistan.  It was submitted that  the  failure
    to consider the inability  of  the  Appellant's  father  to  travel  to
    Afghanistan due to the risk that he would face as a  person  wanted  by
    the Taliban, had impacted upon the findings  made  by  the  FtT  as  to
    whether the Appellant would be at risk as a family member.

Ground 3

11. With reference to paragraph 41 of the FtT decision,  it  was  submitted
    that the FtT had erred by finding that it  would  be  proportionate  to
    remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom.  It  was  submitted  that
    this  conclusion  failed  to   take   into   account   the   particular
    circumstances of the Appellant and the background evidence highlighting
    a decline in the security situation in Afghanistan.  It  was  submitted
    that the FtT finding that the Appellant had  family  to  return  to  in
    Afghanistan was inaccurate, and had caused an inaccurate assessment  of
    proportionality.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge Macdonald  in  the
    following terms;

         "The grounds of application contend (Grounds  1  and  2)  that  the
         judge misread the evidence.

         The  judge  rejected  the  evidence  of  the   Appellant's   father
         principally because there was no mention in the  witness  statement
         which he has prepared that he was chased by the Taliban due to  him
         having caused the death of several of their members (paragraph 32).



         However, as stated in  the  grounds,  the  Appellant's  father  had
         stated  that  the  Taliban  were   interested   in   finding   him.
         Accordingly it is arguable that the basis of the judge's  reasoning
         is unsound.  Permission to appeal is therefore granted  to  include
         Ground 3 albeit there  may  be  little  merit  in  that  particular
         ground."

13. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  The author of the response did not have access to  the  file  or
    hearing bundles, and therefore could not respond to Grounds  1  and  2.
    It was submitted that Ground 3 was without merit in that  the  FtT  was
    considering a situation where it had been found that there would be  no
    risk to the Appellant on return, and therefore it was not an  error  in
    law to find that removal would be proportionate.

14. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law such  that
    the decision should be set aside

The Appellant's Submissions

15. Mr Saleem relied upon the grounds contained within the application  for
    permission to appeal.  I was referred to the Appellant's  supplementary
    bundle and the Appellant's witness statement dated 23rd May  2006,  and
    in particular paragraph 9.  This statement had been before the FtT.  In
    summary the Appellant in paragraph 9 confirmed that his father had been
    arrested and detained because of his video business, but  the  interest
    in him by the Taliban in later years was because of his background with
    Hezb-e-Islami and the Taliban wanted to  trace  him.   The  Appellant's
    father was blamed for many Taliban losses.

16. In paragraph 10 the Appellant explained that in 2010  the  Taliban  had
    sent a threatening letter to the family home.  The  Appellant's  father
    left Afghanistan in 1999 but the Taliban were not  aware  of  this  and
    were still searching for him.

17. I was then referred to the Appellant's father's witness statement dated
    23rd May 2016, which again had been before the FtT.  At paragraph 4 the
    Appellant's father had given further information than had  been  quoted
    by the FtT at paragraph 31.  The FtT had set out part  of  paragraph  4
    which related to the Appellant's father being arrested and detained  by
    the Taliban in 1999 because of his video shop.  The Appellant's  father
    had gone on to say in paragraph 4 of his witness statement  that  since
    he came to the UK in 2000, the Taliban were the main enemy.   When  the
    Appellant was in Afghanistan the Taliban  were  seeking  to  trace  the
    Appellant's father due to his previous Hezb-e-Islami involvement.   The
    Taliban blamed the Appellant's father for deaths of their members  when
    he was with Hezb-e-Islami.

18. Mr Saleem submitted that the FtT had not taken  into  account,  or  had
    misread or misunderstood the evidence given by the  Appellant  and  his
    father, and they had not omitted from their evidence the fact that  the
    Taliban had been searching for the Appellant's father.   Therefore  the
    FtT had been wrong to find an inconsistency.

19. Mr Saleem went on to submit that paragraph 33 of the FtT  decision  was
    linked to paragraph 32, and  contained  inadequate  reasoning  for  the
    findings  made.   The  main  reason  given  for  finding  the   account
    incredible was the alleged inconsistency in the evidence as to  whether
    the Appellant's father had been subject to the adverse attention of the
    Taliban because of his video shop, or because he was accused  of  being
    involved in the deaths of Taliban members when he was a member of Hezb-
    e-Islami.

20. Mr Saleem had no oral submissions to make in relation to Grounds 1  and
    2.

The Respondent's Submissions

21. Mr Whitwell's position was that the FtT had erred in law in  making  an
    incorrect reference to the evidence given  by  the  Appellant  and  his
    father, and in particular had not taken into account  the  totality  of
    the Appellant's father's witness statement.

22. However Mr Whitwell submitted that the error was not  material  because
    the FtT had given two other reasons for finding the account incredible.



23. The first of these reasons was  the  determination  of  an  Immigration
    Adjudicator dated 10th October 2004 which related  to  the  Appellant's
    father's claim to asylum.  His asylum  appeal  had  been  dismissed  on
    asylum and human rights  grounds.   The  FtT  made  reference  to  this
    determination in paragraph 32, noting that it had been found that  "the
    Appellant and his extended family had  never  experienced  problems  in
    their home area on the basis of the Appellant's father's membership  of
    Hezb-e-Islami".

24. The second reason for finding the account incredible was the length  of
    time that had passed before a threatening letter from the  Taliban  was
    received.  The Appellant's father left Afghanistan in 1999, and it  was
    not until 2010 when the first threatening letter was received.

25. With reference to Ground 2, Mr Whitwell stated he could  be  of  little
    assistance, because the notes  taken  by  his  colleague  who  appeared
    before the FtT did not indicate whether the  Appellant  had  stated  in
    cross-examination that his father had visited Afghanistan.

26. With reference to Ground 3,  Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  this  would
    either stand or fall together with Ground 1.  If a  material  error  of
    law was found in relation to Ground 1, then the  whole  decision  would
    need to be re-made.  If  there  was  no  such  error,  Ground  3  alone
    disclosed no error of law.

The Appellant's Response

27. With reference to the previous determination it was noted that although
    at paragraph  11(3)  the  Adjudicator  had  found  that  the  Appellant
    (referring to the Appellant's father) or his extended  family  had  not
    experienced problems in  their  home  area  regarding  the  Appellant's
    father's membership of Hezb-e-Islami, at paragraph 9(7) the Adjudicator
    had found that the Appellant (the Appellant's father) was arrested  and
    detained by the Taliban, that he escaped and left  Afghanistan  because
    of his fear of the Taliban, and that he had been a  member  of  Hezb-e-
    Islami.  Mr Saleem submitted that that finding  should  therefore  have
    formed the starting point for the findings in the current appeal.

28. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

29. I find that Ground 1 discloses an error of law, as conceded  on  behalf
    of the Respondent.  In my view the error is material which  means  that
    the decision of the FtT is unsafe and must be set  aside.   My  reasons
    for reaching this conclusion are as follows.

30. The FtT described at paragraph 31 the core of the Appellant's claim for
    asylum was that he and members of  his  family  were  targeted  by  the
    Taliban as a result of his  father's  connections  with  Hezb-e-Islami.
    The Appellant's father had fled from Afghanistan  because  the  Taliban
    had blamed him for the death of several members of their  organisation,
    which put the Appellant and other family members at risk.

31. However the FtT then set out the following  extract  from  the  witness
    statement of the Appellant's father;

         "I wish to clarify any confusion that has arisen in respect of  A's
         asylum claim.  When I came to the United Kingdom in  2000  my  fear
         was from the Taliban, I had  been  arrested  and  detained  by  the
         Taliban in 1999 for fifteen days due to my video  shop  which  they
         had destroyed in 1998.  They wanted to punish  me  and  torture  me
         with wire cables.  I managed to escape  and  stayed  five  days  in
         hiding and then left Afghanistan."

32. The FtT at paragraph 32 found that  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    father indicated that he left Afghanistan because he had been running a
    video shop which meant that he was targeted by the  Taliban.   The  FtT
    found there was no mention in the witness statement that he  was  being
    chased by the Taliban due to him having caused the death of several  of
    their members.

33. The FtT is mistaken, as the Appellant's father did state in paragraph 4
    that the Taliban were seeking to trace him due to his previous  Hezb-e-
    Islami involvement, and the Taliban blamed him for the death of some of
    their members when he was a member of Hezb-e-Islami.

34. It is the case, as submitted by Mr Saleem, that the  Appellant  in  his
    witness statement dated 23rd May 2016 made reference in  paragraphs  12
    and 13 to the Taliban being interested in tracing former  Hezb-e-Islami
    members and the Taliban later discovered the Appellant's father's Hezb-
    e-Islami background after he had been detained running  a  video  shop,
    and the Taliban wanted to trace him.

35. Therefore the primary reason for the FtT making an adverse  credibility
    finding is because of an inconsistency in evidence, that  does  not  in
    fact exist.

36. I find that the claimed  inconsistency  is  the  main  reason  why  the
    credibility of the  account  was  rejected  as  the  FtT  concluded  at
    paragraph 32 in the following terms;

         "The Tribunal does not find it credible that the Appellant's father
         was of any interest to the Taliban  because  of  the  inconsistency
         which he has provided in relation to why  the  Taliban  would  have
         been interested in him.  The Tribunal does not find that he was  of
         interest to the Taliban on the basis of his  father  having  caused
         the death of several members of the  Taliban  as  this  contradicts
         with his evidence provided at his own hearing and cited above  that
         he was targeted by the Taliban due to  his  ownership  of  a  video
         shop."

37. It is common ground that there must be anxious scrutiny  of  an  asylum
    claim.  The FtT rejects the various aspects of the Appellant's  account
    at paragraph 33 without giving adequate reasons, as in my view the  FtT
    was very heavily influenced by the conclusion that there  had  been  an
    inconsistency in the evidence.

38. I do not find that the reference to the previous determination, or  the
    passage of time, was sufficient to undo the mistake made by finding  an
    inconsistency that did not exist, and placing very  significant  weight
    on that.

39. The other findings in the FtT decision are, in my view, infected by the
    mistake in relation to the inconsistency,  and  therefore  I  conclude,
    because of the need for anxious scrutiny, that the decision  is  unsafe
    and must be set aside with no findings preserved.

40. Both  representatives  agreed  at  the  hearing,  when  I  reserved  my
    decision, that if a material error of law was found,  as  contended  in
    Ground 1, then it would be appropriate to remit the appeal back to  the
    FtT to be heard again.

41. I have considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements, and find that it is appropriate to remit the appeal back to
    the FtT because of the nature and extent of judicial fact-finding  that
    is necessary in order for this decision to be re-made.  The appeal will
    be heard at the Taylor House hearing centre and  the  parties  will  be
    advised of the time and date in due course.  The appeal is to be  heard
    by an FtT Judge other than Judge Abebrese.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity

The  FtT  made  no  anonymity  direction,  but  as  this  is  a  claim   for
international protection I find it appropriate to make  an  anonymity  order
pursuant to rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 10th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of any fee award will need to be considered by the  FtT  when  the
decision is re-made.


Signed                              Date 10th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
