



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11513/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |         Decision & Reasons      |
|                                          |Promulgated                      |
|On 19th November 2015                     |        On 22nd December 2015    |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                            Mr Yasine Badreddine
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Cole, Solicitor for Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION ON WITHDRAWAL
  Pursuant to Rule 17 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

 1. This appeal came before me, following a grant of permission against the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge AK Simpson,  who  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 9th July 2015, allowed the  Appellant's  appeal  against
    the Respondent's refusal to issue him with an EEA  Residence  Card,  to
    the limited extent of remitting the matter back to the Respondent.  The
    appeal was also allowed on Article 8 grounds; and  it  is  that  matter
    which  prompted  the  Respondent  to  seek  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Algeria and he sought to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom because he is in a durable relationship  with  a  Polish
    national who is in the UK exercising Treaty rights.

 3. Following discussion between the parties, Mrs Pettersen  on  behalf  of
    the Respondent sought to withdraw the appeal on this basis.

      . The FtT Judge's decision to remit the matter to  the  Secretary  of
        State for consideration of the Appellant's  right  to  a  Residence
        Card stands. This is on the basis that a finding has been  made  by
        the FtT Judge that the Appellant and his  Polish  national  partner
        are in a durable relationship. That finding stands.

      . The Appellant and his representatives do not pursue  implementation
        of the Article 8 ECHR findings made by the Judge.

 4. Rule 17 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  provide
    that an appeal before the Upper Tribunal may be withdrawn only with the
    consent of that Tribunal. I hereby consent to  the  withdrawal  of  the
    appeal on the terms outlined above,  which  have  been  agreed  by  the
    representatives.

 5. The effect is that the Secretary  of  State  will  now  reconsider  the
    Appellant's case in the light of the  FtT's  findings  on  the  durable
    relationship existing between the Appellant and his Polish partner.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated

Judge C Roberts
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

