
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11056/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:   Columbus House, Newport  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 14 July 2016                     |On 28 July 2016                   |
|                                     |                                  |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                     ABC
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Nawaparast, NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    1. This is an appeal against the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Woolley in which he dismissed the appeal of the  Appellant,  a
       citizen of Gambia, against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
       refuse asylum and set removal directions.


    2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 6 September 2011  and
       having been given  leave  to  remain  as  a  visitor  for  6  months
       overstayed that leave eventually claiming asylum on 24  March  2015.
       Her application was refused by the Respondent on 28 July  2015.  The
       Appellant exercised her right of appeal against  this  decision  and
       this is the appeal that was heard before Judge Woolley on 5 February
       2016 and dismissed. The Appellant's application  for  permission  to
       appeal against the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision was  refused
       by the First-tier Tribunal but on renewal to the Upper Tribunal  was
       granted on 7 April  2016  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Allen  in  the
       following terms

          "I  note  the  explanation  provided  for  the  lateness  of   the
          submission of the grounds to the First-tier Tribunal. On balance I
          have concluded that it is in the interests of justice to admit the
          application. There is an arguable issue as to the judge's findings
          in respect of the expert evidence and that has  relevance  to  the
          challenge to the credibility findings. As a consequence all points
          raised in the grounds may be argued."


    3. By a rule 24 response dated 4 May 2016 the  Respondent  opposed  the
       appeal.


    4. At the hearing before me Mr Richards appeared for the  Secretary  of
       State and Ms  Nawaparast  represented  the  Applicant.  No  skeleton
       arguments were submitted.




    Background


    5. The Appellant is a 22-year-old Gambian citizen of the Mandinka tribe
       who arrived in the United Kingdom at the age of 17  travelling  with
       her mother.  The Appellant claims that she was subjected to FGM when
       she was 8 years old. She claims that prior to leaving Gambia she was
       told by her family that a marriage had been arranged and that before
       the marriage she would need further FGM. Not wishing to  go  through
       with the marriage the Appellant ran away from her mother  whilst  in
       the United Kingdom and her claim for asylum is based upon  her  fear
       of forced marriage and  further  FGM  if  she  had  to  return.  The
       Respondent refused her asylum claim not  accepting  her  account  of
       risk of forced marriage and not accepting that she would  be  forced
       to undergo further FGM on a return.


    6. In dismissing her appeal, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  found  the
       account of forced marriage not to be credible and that  it  was  not
       established that she would be subjected to further  FGM.  In  making
       the latter finding the Judge noted that the expert  evidence  showed
       that FGM of category 3 or 4 would be likely to  require  further  or
       repeated FGM but concluded that it had not been established at  what
       level her FGM has been performed.




    Submissions

    7. Ms Nawaparast referred  to  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal and to paragraph 23 to 25 of the refusal letter. The  level
       of FGM was not thought to be in dispute so not raised at the  First-
       tier  Tribunal  hearing.  As  such  the  Appellant  was  denied  the
       opportunity of dealing with it. In making findings as to  the  level
       of FGM the Judge failed to consider the  NHS  documentation  in  the
       Respondent's bundle. The level of FGM was relevant to  the  risk  of
       further FGM as highlighted in the expert's report. The  Judge  found
       (at paragraph 33) that the expert's opinion was  predicated  on  the
       Appellant having undergone a particularly severe form of FGM  whilst
       he was not satisfied that this was the case. The Judge's finding  as
       to the level of FGM therefore undermined the expert's report.


    8. For the Respondent Mr Richards said that paragraph 24 of the refusal
       letter showed that  the  level  of  FGM  was  not  accepted  by  the
       Respondent. Professor Knorr's report gave the clear opinion that the
       risk of further FGM was present where the initial FGM  was  category
       3, effectively  a  sealing  of  the  vaginal  opening.  Mr  Richards
       accepted that the medical evidence whilst not specifying category  3
       did appear to support the Appellant's account of a  severe  form  of
       FGM. On this basis he did not seek to address me further.


    9. I said that it  was  my  judgment  that  the  decision  contained  a
       material error of law and could not stand and I reserved my  written
       decision.


    Error of law

   10. The Appellant is a citizen of Gambia for  the  Mandinka  tribe.  The
       fact that she has undergone FGM is not disputed  and  the  objective
       evidence shows that the rate of FGM amongst the Mandinka  is  up  to
       100%. The severity of FGM (by reference to category) is important to
       the  issue  of  credibility  and  fear  on  return  because  FGM  at
       categories 1 and 2 does not necessarily result in or require further
       FGM whilst that at category 3 does. This, according to the  document
       NHS Choices (in the Respondent's  bundle),  is  because  category  3
       involves the narrowing or sealing of the vaginal opening which needs
       to  be  opened  for  sexual  intercourse  and  childbirth.  This  is
       highlighted in the expert report of Professor  Knorr  submitted  for
       the First-tier Tribunal hearing.


   11. The Appellant complains that the level  of  FGM  was  not  a  matter
       thought to be in  dispute  or  raised  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       hearing but that nevertheless the Judge had gone onto  consider  the
       level of FGM and reached the conclusion that she had not established
       that she had been subject to category 3 FGM. The decision  shows  at
       paragraph 30 that the Judge carefully considered the  level  of  FGM
       before coming  to  the  conclusion  that  the  level  had  not  been
       established.


   12. In my judgment the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  fell  into  error  in
       making this finding. In the first place the refusal  letter  records
       (at paragraph 2C) that the letter submitted by  the  Appellant  from
       Kings Cross hospital shows that the Appellant has undergone FGM type
       three to four. The reference at paragraph 24 to the lack of  medical
       evidence that further surgery is required  does  not  refer  to  the
       level of FGM and does not appear to take into account the  objective
       evidence from NHS Choices referred  to  above.  It  is  not,  in  my
       judgement, clear from the refusal letter that the level of  FGM  was
       in dispute.


   13. Secondly in examining the evidence of  the  mutilation  carried  out
       upon the Appellant at paragraph 30 the Judge notes that 'the vaginal
       orifice was too small'  for  an  examination  to  be  performed  but
       nevertheless reaches the conclusion that  more  supporting  evidence
       was required. This appears to fly in the face of  the  NHS  document
       showing as it does that neither category one  or  category  two  FGM
       involve the narrowing or closing of the vagina. This  is  restricted
       to category three. A vaginal  orifice  too  small  for  an  internal
       examination to be performed may well be indicative of category three
       FGM.


   14. Thirdly and in any event the  Judge,  whilst  reaching  the  careful
       finding that the level had 'not been established' has in my judgment
       examined the medical evidence and in effect drawn a conclusion based
       upon that evidence that he was not qualified to reach. It is not  in
       dispute that the evidence shows that this  Appellant  has  undergone
       FGM. That conclusion having been reached, and whereas  the  pointers
       seem to indicate that the  level  could  well  be  category  3,  the
       assessment of the level is a matter for a medical expert and not for
       the Judge either at First-tier or Upper Tribunal  level.  The  Judge
       fell into error by failing to give adequate reasons for his findings
       on the material matter of the degree of the Appellant's FGM.


   15. The effect of this error must be to render the credibility  findings
       as a whole unsafe because the Appellant's claimed fear of further or
       repeated FGM is interlinked with her account of forced marriage.


   16. Due to the nature of the error of law and  in  accordance  with  the
       President's direction it  is  appropriate  for  this  matter  to  be
       remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  hearing  de  novo  with  no
       findings  preserved.  The  First-tier  tribunal  will  no  doubt  be
       assisted by  conclusive  medical  evidence  of  the  degree  of  the
       Appellant's FGM.



   Conclusion

   17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error of law for the reasons set out above.


   18. I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in
       accordance with the President's direction this  matter  is  suitable
       for and should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed:                                      Date: 28 July 2016

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
