
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/11397/2012
     AA/11400/2012
     AA/11403/2012
     AA/11405/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Sent           |
|On 4th September 2013                         |On 30th September 2013       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                mR ZAFOR khan
                      also known as TIN SHWE MAUNG KHAN
                                 MRS SUNERA
                       ALSO KNOWN AS KHIN CHO CHO BEGUN
                                 MISS SAFIYA
                     ALSO KNOWN AS ASYL CHO CHO KHAN and
                                 MISS SAMIYA
                        ALSO KNOWN AS AATIFA CHO CHO
                          (No order for anonymity)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr R Selway of Halliday Reeves
For the Respondent:    Mr J Kingham, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The first named appellant was born on 20th October  1961.   The  second
    named appellant, who is also known as Khin Cho Cho, was  born  on  23rd
    May 1973.  The third named appellant, who is also  known  as  Asyl  Cho
    Cho, was born on 11th October 2004, and the fourth named appellant  who
    is also known Aatifa Cho Cho, was born on 2nd January 2009.  The  first
    and second appellants are husband and wife and are the parents  of  the
    third and fourth appellants.

2.   The appellants arrived in the United Kingdom on 24th  April  2010,  and
    claimed asylum.  On 3rd December 2012, the respondent  gave  directions
    for the appellants' removal to either Burma or  Japan,  after  refusing
    leave to enter.

3.   The appellants appealed that decision and their  appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Sacks at North Shields  on  8th  March  2013.
    Judge Sacks made numerous findings in his determination  and  dismissed
    the appellants' appeals on asylum grounds, on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds and on human rights grounds.

4.   The appellants challenged the  determination  and  on  17th  June  2013
    Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb granted permission and said this:-

         "Although the judge convincingly found that the appellant  was  not
         who he claimed to be and rejected his account  of  events  that  he
         said occurred to him in Burma, the judge  nevertheless  found  that
         the principal appellant was a  Burmese  national,  despite  finding
         that he had resided in Japan for eighteen years,  where  he  had  a
         right of residence.  Nevertheless,  having  properly  rejected  the
         principal appellant's claim (and that of the  other  appellants  as
         his dependants) on the basis of past events, the judge went  on  to
         consider whether the principal appellant's sur place activities put
         him at risk.  In finding  that  the  principal  appellant  had  not
         demonstrated that risk, the judge applied the approach in  TL  (sur
         place activities - risk) Burma CG [2009] UKAIT 0017.  At  least  in
         part, the AIT reasoning in TL was found to be flawed by  the  Court
         of Appeal  in  KS  (Burma)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2013] EWCA Civ 67, in particular  in  relation  to  the
         Burmese ability to  distinguish  between  a  genuine  opponent  and
         hanger-on.  To that extent alone, the First-tier Tribunal  arguably
         erred in law in finding that the principal appellant would  not  be
         at risk on return as a perceived political opponent."

5.   I pointed out to Mr Selway that although  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb
    had referred to KS, the Court of Appeal in KS had  suggested  that  the
    matter be looked at again  by  the  Tribunal.   Their  decision  in  TS
    (political opponents - risk) Burma CG [2013] UKUT 00281  had  now  been
    published.  I handed him a  copy  and  agreed  to  allow  him  time  to
    consider it.

6.   The second, third, and fourth appellants' claimed as dependants of  the
    first named appellant. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  extensive
    findings.  He was not satisfied that  the  first  named  appellant  was
    actually who he claimed to be and found that he was,  Tin  Shwe  Maung.
    He was satisfied that the first appellant had  permanent  residency  in
    Japan and was satisfied also that there was no evidence before  him  to
    suggest that the appellant was Zafor Khan as he had claimed.

7.   The judge did not accept that the first named  appellant  had  been  in
    Japan only for six months and found that he had been resident in  Japan
    for eighteen years with a right of residence to remain there until  4th
    August 2012.  There was no evidence before the judge to suggest that he
    would be unable to return to Japan.

8.   He  was  satisfied  that  the  first  named  appellant  was  a  Burmese
    national, but not satisfied that his home had been raided  as  claimed,
    nor that he had ever come to the attention of the authorities in Burma.
     He found that the first named appellant had no involvement in politics
    in Burma and was not satisfied that the appellant  had  taken  part  in
    demonstrations on 6th November 2010.

9.   The judge examined photographs taken between 15th  and  17th  September
    2011 and was satisfied that the first appellant had attended  at  least
    one demonstration in London.  He found that the  appellant  was  not  a
    high level activist or demonstrator and had not  demonstrated  how  the
    Burmese authorities would be able to identify him given that he claimed
    to be Zafor Khan, despite the fact that the judge found that  his  true
    identity was Tin Shwe Maung.

10.  The judge found there to be no evidence that  the  appellant  was  from
    the Rohingya race.  It followed that he did not accept that  there  was
    any warrant for the arrest of the first named appellant  in  Burma  and
    was not satisfied that any of  the  appellant's  sur  place  activities
    brought him to the adverse attention of the Burmese  authorities  while
    he had been in the United Kingdom.

11.  When the hearing resumed Mr Selway told me that he had  very  carefully
    considered the judge's determination and the Tribunal's decision in  TS
    and was satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  determination
    did not contain any material error of law, given the current assessment
    of risk set out in TS.  He had nothing further to say.

12.  Mr Kingham did not seek to persuade me otherwise.

13.  I am satisfied, having  myself  carefully  read  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Sacks and the decision of the Upper  Tribunal
    in TS, that these appellant will not, on  the  findings  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Sacks, be of any interest  to  the  Burmese  authorities
    were they to return to Burma.  I  uphold  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Sacks.  The appellants' appeals are dismissed.





Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
