
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA110772014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 March 2017                              |On 22 May 2017                |
|Prepared 31 March 2017                        |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                              mr Yong Kang Hong
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Professor W Rees, Counsel, instructed by Simman
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant a national of the People's Republic  of  China,  date  of
    birth 22 October 1957, appealed against the Respondent's decision dated
    25 November 2014 to make removal directions, a form IS151A having  been
    served on 13 December 2002 on the  basis  that  the  Appellant  was  an
    illegal entrant.

2.   Through various processes this matter has been considered by the First-
    tier and the Upper Tribunal but as a  result  of  the  decision  of  17
    August 2015 made by Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman the  matter  was  sent
    back to be further determined in the First-tier with the  intention  it
    should go before the judge who previously dealt with the appeal,  Judge
    S Lenier.  As it transpired she was unwell and so the matter came to be
    listed before and was dealt with by First-tier Tribunal Judge N M  Paul
    (the Judge) who in a decision  [D]  promulgated  on  28  November  2016
    dismissed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

3.   Whatever may have been the basis of his decision permission  to  appeal
    that decision was given by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on 19 January
    2017.

4.   It is worth noting that originally before  Judge  Lenier,  counsel  who
    had appeared for the Appellant was a Mr S Karim, instructed  by  Simman
    Solicitors.  When the matter came before  the  Upper  Tribunal  it  was
    counsel, Miss V Easty, instructed by Simman Solicitors who appeared and
    when the matter returned and was dealt with by Judge Paul, counsel  who
    appeared was Miss Malhotra, again instructed by Simman Solicitors.

5.   Permission to appeal having been  given  on  all  grounds,  the  issues
    concentrated on really three points.  First, whether or not  the  judge
    had failed to deal with  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules HC 395, as amended.  Secondly, whether or not a  concession  made
    by Miss Malhotra in which she conceded Article 3 ECHR issues  were  not
    for consideration.   Thirdly,  an  attack  upon  the  exercise  of  the
    consideration of Article 3 insofar as  it  has  been  affected  by  the
    decision of the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights  in
    the case of Paposhvili and Belgium, application number 41738/10.

6.   The Respondent produced by letter dated 23  February  2017  a  Rule  24
    response essentially arguing that there was no material error of law.

7.   Professor Rees argued the judge having identified  [D15]  that  he  was
    going to deal with the issue of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and [D16]  said
    he was paying regard to the same paragraph, nevertheless then  went  on
    to  make  no  findings  and  did  not  address  the  paragraph   276ADE
    specifically.  More  particularly  reliant  upon  paragraph  8  of  the
    grounds (i) to (x) that the judge had failed to have regard to material
    considerations which were pertinent to the assessment of whether or not
    there were very significant obstacles to the Appellant integrating on a
    return to the PRC.

8.   His second argument was that Miss Malhotra  should  not  have  conceded
    the Article 3 basis of claim and should have pursued the  matter.   The
    issue of  Paposhvili  and  the  significance  of  the  Grand  Chamber's
    decision either as a "game changer" or otherwise is contingent upon re-
    examining the question of Article 3 and the  considerations  that  come
    into play.

9.   The issue of whether or not this concession should have been  made  was
    originally raised in the grounds, dated 1 December 2016, settled by  Mr
    Karim.

10.  Notwithstanding the passage of time  no  evidence  was  ever  filed  to
    support the grounds of appeal and undermine the basis on which Counsel,
    instructed by solicitors appeared and made the concession.  It does not
    appear that Miss Malhotra has been asked to explain the concession  she
    made, nor to justify it  on  the  basis  that  she  had  no  authority,
    otherwise than Counsel's discretion, to make such concession.  There is
    nothing from Simman Solicitors undermining Miss Malhotra's authority to
    make that concession.  In the time  available  it  seems  to  me,  even
    before the renewed grounds of 24 December 2016 settled  by  Mr  Karim,
    evidence should have been obtained if it was seriously to be argued  as
    it was again that the concession should not have been made by  counsel.


11.  Professor Rees has been faced with a set of late instructions  and  has
    done what he could with the material but he inevitably is  driven  into
    speculating as to what might have  been  her  reasons  for  making  the
    concession, putting aside the question of whether she had authority  to
    do so.

12.  The further difficulty faced is that at the hearing  before  the  Judge
    the Appellant felt unwell and it is said Miss Malhotra directed him  to
    depart the hearing centre and  go  and  see  a  GP  or  obtain  medical
    assistance.  Such events may have occurred.  Again there is  no  direct
    evidence on it but there is nothing to suggest that the  Appellant  was
    unaware about the concession  Ms  Malhotra  was  making  and  there  is
    nothing from him since that time indicating that he did not know of the
    concession being made.

13.  By side wind Professor Rees also argues that this  was  a  matter  that
    clearly should have been adjourned and that the judge got it  wrong  in
    failing to do so.
.    It seems to me that the underlying problem with that argument  is  that
    an adjournment application was not a matter pursued  by  Miss  Malhotra
    and she in the end indicated that she was  content  to  deal  with  the
    matter by way of submissions, which it  is  perhaps  hardly  surprising
    given the relatively limited  challenges  there  were  to  the  factual
    matters relating to the Appellant's health.

14   So far as the issue of the concession  is  concerned:  I  am  satisfied
    that the concession, on the evidence such as  there  is,  was  properly
    made and there is nothing to suggest it was done without authority. For
    that reason I therefore do not address directly the issue of Article  3
    ECHR and Paposhvili and the issues as to whether or not it's binding on
    the UK courts and/or to what extent  I  am  obliged  to  follow  it  as
    opposed to the settled House of Lords cases of D and N.

15   I therefore turn to the paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). It seems  to  me  that
    as a matter of impression, in the case which is not a deportation case,
    Article 8 as a fact invites  a  wider  consideration  of  all  material
    factors that particularly bear on the question of proportionality.

16   It is clear, as Mr Wilding properly accepts, that there  may  be  cases
    where an Appellant's health, mental or physical, may be an indicator of
    very significant obstacles to integration but in this case  looking  at
    the matters relied upon particularly in the grounds of appeal Paragraph
    8 (i) to (ix) those factors are not sufficient to raise the question or
    show an inability to integrate: They are simply  the  disadvantages  of
    being there, arising from his health.

17.  In these circumstances it seems to me that the judge made an  error  of
    law in failing to deal with paragraph 276ADE of the Rules but it is not
    material: The Judge went on to consider, on the basis of  the  evidence
    that was being advanced, the impact on the Appellant's private life and
    the relationship between that and his health  issues  on  a  return  to
    China.

18.  So far as paragraph 8 of the grounds is concerned Mr Wilding with  whom
    I agree on this point says that grounds (i) to (iii) are simply factual
    statements and do  not  particularly  bear  on  the  issue.   The  most
    relevant  ground  in  (iv)  concerning  the  impact  of  the  available
    treatment and its cost and to this extent the  position  of  the  other
    health factor which could in due course of its nature  irrespective  of
    where the Appellant was be life threatening.  As to the lack of  social
    network or support network or the Appellant's wife those were  matters,
    which the judge made reference to, as the Judge  was  aware  about  the
    ability of the Appellant to work.

19.  In the circumstances it seems to me  that  the  judge  looking  at  the
    matter through the prism of the Rules nevertheless he was looking at  a
    wider case and therefore the error of law which he made is not material
    to the outcome in the light of the findings  he  made  in  relation  to
    Article 8 ECHR.

20.  For these reasons I am satisfied that there was no  material  error  of
    law made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul.   The  Original  Tribunal's
    decision stands.  The appeal is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The  appeal  is  dismissed  on  Humanitarian  Protection  and  human  rights
grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date 11 April 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 11 April2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

