
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11007/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 7 December 2015                            | On 22 December 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     AK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the appellant who claims asylum.   This  order
    prohibits the disclosure  directly  or  indirectly  (including  by  the
    parties) of the identity of the appellant.  Any disclosure  and  breach
    of this order may amount to a contempt  of  court.   This  order  shall
    remain in force unless revoked or varied by a Tribunal or court.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon who was born on  19  July  1982.
    He arrived in the UK on 1 February 2012  and  claimed  asylum.   On  19
    November 2014, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claim for
    asylum and international protection and on  20  November  2014  made  a
    decision to remove him to Cameroon.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision dated
    21 January 2015, Judge Suffield-Thompson allowed the appellant's appeal
    on humanitarian protection grounds.  She accepted  that  the  appellant
    was at risk on return to Cameroon as a result of his role in  an  anti-
    music piracy organisation in Cameroon.  However, because she could  not
    be satisfied that the risk emanated from  the  government  rather  than
    those involved in the piracy trade, she concluded he was  not  entitled
    to refugee status.  Consequently, she allowed  the  appeal  under  para
    339C on humanitarian protection grounds only.

 4. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal  on  the  basis  that  the
    judge should have allowed the appeal under the Refugee  Convention  as,
    in the context, the risk to the appellant was because of his actual  or
    imputed political opinion given the context of anti-piracy activity  in
    Cameroon.

 5. On 15 October 2015, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge McDade) granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on that ground.

 6. In a Rule 24 response dated 28 October 2015,  the  Secretary  of  State
    indicated that she did not oppose the appellant's appeal.

 7. The appellant did not appear at the  hearing  before  me  and  was  not
    represented.  However, his representatives, Asylum Justice in a  letter
    dated 5 December 2015 indicated they would not attend but invited me to
    allow the appeal on asylum grounds.  I considered that it  was  in  the
    interest of justice to hear the appeal in the absence of the  appellant
    applying rule 38 of Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI
    2008/2698 as amended).

 8. Mr Richards, who represented the Secretary of State, conceded that  the
    judge should have allowed the appeal under the Refugee Convention.   He
    invited me to set aside the judge's decision  allowing  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds and  re-make  it  allowing  the  appeal
    under the Refugee Convention.

Decision

 9.  In  the  light  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  concession  that  the
    appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal should succeed, and with which
    I agree, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to  allow  the  appellant's
    appeal on humanitarian protection grounds involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law.  I set that decision aside.

10. On the basis of the material before the judge, I re-make  the  decision
    allowing the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.
                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
