
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11315/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons issued            |
|on 2 February 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     A O
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Loughran, of Loughran & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Blair, promulgated on 17 July 2015, dismissing her asylum appeal.



 2. The appellant based her case on a number of strands.  The first related
    to her husband, a member of the Nigerian police force, being shot  dead
    on 24 November 2008.  Some evidence suggested  that  this  was  in  the
    course of an armed robbery, but  the  appellant  alleged  that  he  was
    murdered at the instance of State Governor  Fayose,  against  whom  her
    husband was on his way to give evidence on corruption charges.  On this
    branch of the claim, the judge said that it was not necessary to  reach
    a concluded view on credibility because there was evidence of  Governor
    Fayose being put on trial  and  of  a  further  arrest  warrant  issued
    against him, so there was sufficiency of protection.   (The  judge  did
    not opine on whether risk might credibly extend to the  appellant.)   A
    claim based on fear of the Ogboni cult similarly failed even  taken  at
    highest,  and  was  defeated  in  any  event  by  internal  relocation.
    Finally, the appellant based her claim on  a  history  of  trafficking,
    which was found to lack all credibility.

 3. The determination is plainly a careful one, and it might  be  difficult
    to find a legal flaw within its four corners.  However, the appellant's
    grounds firstly complain  that  the  finding  on  state  protection  in
    relation to Governor Fayose is  out  of  keeping  with  the  background
    evidence which was before the Tribunal.  The US State department Report
    2009 noted "little progress in prosecutions of federal, state and local
    officials accused of corruption."  It gave  a  series  of  examples  of
    instances  to  support  this,  including  that  of   Governor   Fayose.
    Subsequent reports noted that his trial had still not been  heard,  but
    had been "moved from Federal Court to the State Court.  He is currently
    Governor of Ekiti  State  ...  with  the  Nigerian  President  actively
    campaigning for his re-election in 2015".

 4. The report was also to the effect that Governor Fayose was immune  from
    prosecution during his tenure.  An excerpt in  the  appellant's  fourth
    inventory, item B (page 13 of 21 of the report) includes this:

         'Government Corruption and Transparency

         Corruption was massive, widespread, and pervasive, at all levels of
         government and society.  The constitution  provides  immunity  from
         civil and criminal prosecution to the  President,  Vice  President,
         governors and deputy governors while in office.'

 5. Ms Loughran further sought to refer  to  evidence  from  the  US  State
    Department report, updated to 25  June  2015,  to  show  that  Governor
    Fayose won re-election, but that of course  is  not  relevant  to  show
    error of law.  It might become relevant in remaking the decision.

 6. The appellant's second principal point in her grounds of appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal is based on the lack of a finding on her claim that  she
    was assaulted and raped in 2010.   That  was  mentioned  by  the  judge
    granting permission.  However, Ms Loughran accepted in  the  course  of
    submissions that it is secondary to the main ground.  If the judge  had
    been  justified  in  finding  the  claim  defeated  by  sufficiency  of
    protection, then credibility would, as stated at paragraph  40  of  the
    determination, not have been crucial.

 7. Ms Loughran pointed out that in view of the terms  of  paragraph  43  -
    "the fundamental difficulty for the appellant" - the  judge's  view  of
    the active proceedings against Governor Fayose was plainly the  nub  of
    the decision.

 8. Mrs O'Brien conceded that the findings regarding  Governor  Fayose  and
    sufficiency of protection ran contrary to the background evidence,  and
    that took away the logic of the rest of the determination.

 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  None of its
    findings are to stand.  Under section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007  Act  and
    Practice Statement 7.2, the nature and extent of judicial fact  finding
    necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is  appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  The members of the First-
    tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case are not  to  include  Judge
    Blair.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           5 February 2016


