

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11814/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 23 February 2016                      |On 9 March 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                    S H P
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr T D H Hodson, of Elder Rahimi, Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr J Kingham, Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction.

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran, aged 36 at the date of the  hearing
    in the Upper Tribunal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity
    order.  The matter was not addressed in the Upper Tribunal.  The  order
    remains in place.

 2. The respondent  rejected  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  for  reasons
    explained in a decision dated 17 December 2014.  It was  accepted  that
    the appellant had given  a  clear  and  consistent  account  about  the
    process of obtaining a divorce (paragraph 12).   It  was  not  accepted
    that her father had threatened her (paragraph  13),  that  her  husband
    caught her with a former boyfriend, or that she was  forcibly  detained
    and escaped (paragraph 14).  On the basis of such  allegations  as  had
    been accepted, she had no good claim (paragraph 16).

 3. The letter went on to consider the claim "at highest" and found that it
    would be defeated by legal sufficiency of protection (paragraphs 18-23)
    and alternatively by internal relocation (paragraphs 24-29).

 4.  The  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal
    essentially challenge the credibility  findings.   They  foreshadow  no
    reasoned attack on the alternative conclusions based on sufficiency  of
    protection and on internal relocation.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Buchanan heard the appellant's appeal  on  17
    April 2015 and dismissed it for reasons given in his decision issued on
    9 June 2015.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 7. Ground 1, expressed over paragraphs 5-13 of the application, criticises
    the reasons given for the credibility findings.

 8. Ground 2 relates to a court summons and two warning notices  which  the
    appellant produced at the hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    judge is said to have gone wrong in his approach to what  he  considers
    the appellant ought to have done, and in concluding that the  documents
    were not genuine, going "wholly contrary  to  the  clear  guidance"  in
    Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKAIT 00439.

 9. A Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  refused  permission,  on
    the view that the grounds  going  to  credibility  were  no  more  than
    disagreement, that it was open to the judge to find the documents  were
    not genuine, and that Tanveer Ahmed was no authority to the contrary.

10.  The  appellant  resumed  her  application  to  the   Upper   Tribunal,
    maintaining and amplifying the previous grounds.

11. On 14 October 2015 a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge granted permission  on
    both grounds.

12. In a Rule 24 response dated 4 November 2015 the respondent argues  that
    the First-tier Tribunal decision thoroughly engages with the facts  and
    arguments put forward in the First-tier Tribunal; that the  grounds  of
    the challenge "... merely represent a detailed re-arguing of  the  case
    rather than an identification of any material errors in law"; and  that
    nothing in Tanveer Ahmed discloses error.

Submissions for appellant.

13. The judge erred  by  relying  on  his  subjective  views  of  what  was
    plausible.  At paragraph 7.15 the judge found that alleged events in an
    orchard were unlikely because the orchard was open to  anyone  to  gain
    access, with walls which anyone could easily  get  over,  and  an  open
    door.  This failed to take account of the  appellant's  description  in
    her asylum interview at Q/A 21 and 22-26 which showed that the  orchard
    was an out-of-the-way place, not in the public eye.

14. The judge thought it unlikely that the appellant would put her life and
    the life of her former boyfriend at risk by enlisting  the  help  of  a
    friend to arrange a meeting in a public place, but this failed to  take
    account of the appellant having consistently made it clear that it  was
    only surmise on her part that she  might  have  been  betrayed  by  her
    friend.  This  later  supposition  did  not  show  that  the  train  of
    occurrences was any less likely.

15. The judge accepted more of the appellant's account than the  respondent
    did, but where he doubted the evidence he made assumptions  which  were
    not based on the evidence from the appellant.  He speculated  regarding
    her state of mind and the likelihood  of  her  running  certain  risks,
    which put matters in the wrong psychological context.

16. The judge made "equally questionable projective  judgments"  about  the
    likelihood or plausibility of threats made by the  appellant's  husband
    against her boyfriend, "assuming a form of rational decision-making  by
    the husband" which in such a context "can very commonly be found to  be
    conspicuously absent".

17. The second ground of appeal opens along  the  lines  that  the  judge's
    adverse comments about the appellant not producing  the  court  summons
    and two warning notices  at  an  earlier  date  are  "open  to  serious
    reservations" because this imposes the judge's assumptions of what  the
    appellant ought to have done, which should not  have  been  "approached
    from such a wholly non-particularised and general normative stance".

18. The conclusion that the documents were not genuine failed to apply  the
    requirement for an assessment in the round, along with other sources of
    evidence, rather than in isolation.  The judge had no evidence that the
    documents were forged.

19. Summing up, Mr Hodson said that for all the  reasons  advanced  in  the
    grounds and submissions the judge's conclusions were flawed, so  as  to
    require a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

Submissions for respondent.

20. The first ground relied on what  the  appellant  said  in  her  witness
    statement, but overlooked her oral evidence at  the  hearing,  recorded
    also at paragraph 7.15.  The appellant said that  anyone  could  easily
    get over the walls and there was an  open  door.   In  response  to  my
    question, Mr Kingham (who was also the  appellant's  representative  in
    the First-tier Tribunal; the appellant had another representative  from
    the same firm) acknowledged it had not been  explored  at  the  hearing
    whether the door was said to be open in the sense of lying ajar, or  in
    the sense of  being  unlocked.   However,  he  submitted  that  on  the
    evidence the judge was plainly entitled to find this was  a  relatively
    public place and not  one  the  appellant  would  choose  for  a  risky
    meeting.

21. The judge reasoned his finding that the  appellant's  actions  had  not
    proceeded as she claimed.  His determination should be considered as  a
    whole and not discarded on the basis of generalised forensic criticisms
    such as the alleged  subjectivity  of  the  judge.   According  to  the
    appellant's  evidence  her  husband  threatened  to  rape  her   former
    boyfriend and to film and publicise the  event,  a  course  of  conduct
    which would entail a significant risk of his  own  execution.   It  was
    open to the judge not to accept such an account.

22. It should also be noted that in paragraph 7.15 the judge held that  the
    appellant had embellished her account as she went on, adding additional
    information which would have been likely  to  have  been  recounted  at
    first instance (a reference to her and her former boyfriend having  had
    sexual relations).  The grounds of appeal did not criticise  that  part
    of the reasoning.

23. The provenance of documents was highly relevant to  the  weight  to  be
    attached.  The appellant produced the envelope in which documents  were
    said to have been sent to her but the address was cut  out.   This  was
    part of the documentary trail.  She was unable to explain sensibly  why
    she did not bring the documents to the attention of the Home Office  as
    soon as they reached her possession, or why she had not mentioned  them
    earlier, when she knew about them two months  prior  to  receiving  the
    respondent's decision.  The judge at paragraph 7.13 went  into  why  he
    did  not  find  her  account  regarding  the  documents  reliable.   At
    paragraph 7.11 he had noted that the documents in  themselves  did  not
    appear consistent with background evidence about  procedures  in  Iran,
    and that summonses were both easily  obtained  illegally  and  easy  to
    forge.  The judge had paid close attention to  the  documents  at  both
    paragraphs 7.11 and 7.13, and  had  given  ample  reasons  for  placing
    little weight on them.  He had not erred by  looking  at  them  out  of
    context.

Reply for appellant.

24. The background evidence did not disclose every single feature of  court
    and official processes  in  Iran.   The  fact  that  documents  of  the
    particular type produced were not mentioned was not a good  reason  for
    finding them not to be genuine.  The judge's reasoning  therefore  came
    down to no more than the cutting out of the address from the  envelope,
    a feature which she could not explain but to which she was  not  party.
    It was she who produced the envelope.  There was nothing in this  which
    logically yielded an adverse inference.   The  judge  might  have  been
    entitled to attach some significance to delay in disclosure, but  there
    was still insufficient in the evidence as a whole to find against her.

Conclusions.

25. The judge had to decide whether the incident in the orchard took  place
    as described, or at all.  Orchards lying just outside  city  boundaries
    in Iran are often described  as  relatively  private  places,  but  the
    information that this orchard was open to anyone to gain  access,  that
    anyone could easily get over the walls, and  that  there  was  an  open
    door, all came from the appellant at the hearing.

26. It is easy to describe conclusions which go  against  an  appellant  as
    subjective and based on a false perspective of  plausibility,  but  the
    judge's findings on this central matter appear to be  firmly  based  on
    the evidence heard, and well within the range  of  inferences  which  a
    judge might sensibly draw.

27. The same applies to the  finding  that  even  an  enraged  husband  was
    unlikely to threaten to  carry  out,  film  and  publicise  an  act  of
    homosexual rape, against the legal and cultural background of Iran.

28. Tanveer Ahmed says that  it  is  for  an  appellant  to  establish  the
    reliability of documents on which she founds.   The  matter  is  to  be
    resolved after looking  at  all  the  evidence  in  the  round.   These
    principles are to be applied even if there is nothing to  show  on  the
    balance of probability that documents are forged.  There is seldom  the
    need to make such an allegation, or evidence strong enough  to  support
    it.

29. The appellant did not show that those principles disclose any error  by
    the judge in this case.  The appellant's account appears to be that the
    documents were sent by her brother at her request, and  came  into  her
    hands through a paternal cousin who lives in the UK  (and  who,  I  was
    told, accompanied her to the hearing in the UT).  The judge founded  at
    the end of paragraph  7.13  on  (a)  failure  to  bring  the  documents
    promptly to the respondent's attention, (b) notable absence  of  detail
    about the alleged recipient in the  UK,  (c)  a  weak  explanation  for
    asking that documents be sent to a relative in the UK, and (d)  absence
    of  consistency  with  the  background  evidence  about  summonses  and
    procedures  (which  refers  back  to  paragraph  7.11).   That   is   a
    respectable set of reasons, properly placed in context,  for  declining
    to accept the documents as genuine.

30. While the above is sufficient to dispose of both grounds of  appeal,  I
    note in passing that the judge appears to have permitted the  appellant
    to focus the case solely on credibility.   He  omitted  the  issues  of
    sufficiency of protection and internal relocation, either  or  both  of
    which might have resolved the case, irrespective of  credibility.   The
    appellant does not seem to have put  forward  significant  argument  on
    those matters.  The judge  should  have  resolved  them,  even  in  the
    alternative, which might have avoided or at  least  simplified  further
    proceedings.

31. I do not find that the judge made any material error in his credibility
    findings or regarding the documents.  The determination, as a whole, is
    a properly reasoned explanation to the  appellant  of  why  her  appeal
    failed.  The grounds do not resolve  into  more  than  reassertion  and
    disagreement.

32. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

            [pic]


            29 February 2019
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman

