
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11536/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 3 August 2016                           |On 9 August 2016               |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                    O A A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert of Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer
Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from a decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hall
    promulgated on 23 May 2016, and I  will  continue  with  the  anonymity
    direction.

2.   The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Iraq,  born  in  1979,  who  arrived
    illegally in the  United  Kingdom  in  June  2014  and  claimed  asylum
    immediately upon his arrival.  He is a Sunni Muslim born in  Salahaldin
    in Iraq where he lived with his parents and six siblings.  His claim by
    way of asylum was based upon likely risk of persecution were he  to  be
    returned to Iraq. The Judge dealt with the factual disputes and applied
    the law applying the appropriate burden and standard of proof.

3.   There were two  aspects  of  the  appellant's  claim  which  the  Judge
    expressly rejected: one was that the appellant's brother had mistakenly
    been killed in his place and the second was that the  family  home  was
    attacked by IS militia apparently looking for the appellant.

4.   The Judge identified the relevant country guidance to be  found  in  AA
    (Article 15(c) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 and  the  Judge  proceeded  to
    apply that country guidance  in  relation  to  the  particular  factual
    circumstances of this appellant.  In particular, the  Judge  considered
    whether the appellant would be at risk were he to relocate in  Baghdad.
    The grounds of appeal were somewhat discursive and I am grateful to  Mr
    Gilbert, who has represented the appellant before  me  this  afternoon,
    both for  the  provision  of  a  detailed  skeleton  argument  and  for
    helpfully  refining  and  reformulating  the  grounds   in   his   oral
    submissions into three distinct areas of concern.

5.   First, he contends that the Judge failed properly to take into  account
    the fact that the appellant's civil service identity  document  (CSID),
    would be sufficient of itself to identify his religious affiliation  as
    a Sunni Muslim and the region  of  Iraq  from  which  he  came.  It  is
    suggested that those two pieces of information would put the  appellant
    specifically at risk, and the judge did  not  take  this  feature  into
    account.

6.   The second concern was that the Judge did not  have  sufficient  regard
    to all the available material regarding the  potential  risk  to  Sunni
    Muslims. Mr Gilbert took me to a document headed Annex  B  Letter  from
    the British Embassy Baghdad "Violence in  Baghdad  by  Area"  dated  29
    March 2006.  It would appear from  the  grounds  of  appeal  that  this
    document was before the Judge on the basis  that  it  is  said  it  was
    submitted with  the  skeleton  argument  and  certainly  Mr  Avery  who
    represents the Home Secretary does not suggest otherwise.  The material
    contained in that letter  deals  with  various  issues  concerning  the
    situation in Baghdad specifically on a zone by zone basis.  Mr  Gilbert
    took me to a number of specific points and invited me to conclude  that
    the  situation  in  Baghdad  had  deteriorated  and  is   deteriorating
    significantly and that the country guidance in AA must be read  in  the
    context of that progressively worsening situation.

7.   The third point matter is that the  Judge  failed  to  have  sufficient
    regard to the risk posed to the appellant by Shia militia  in  Baghdad.
    For reasons mirroring those in the first point of concern,  Mr  Gilbert
    contended that the appellant would be particularly at risk in that were
    he to be stopped at any checkpoint  in  Baghdad  it  would  immediately
    become apparent that he was both a Sunni Muslim and that he came from a
    particular area of Iraq.

8.   Whilst not  abandoning  the  other  grounds  set  out  in  the  written
    application, Mr Gilbert did not address me separately on the  remainder
    of them,  as  there  was  a  considerable  degree  of  overlap  and  he
    considered he had covered the  territory  sufficiently  in  making  the
    submissions which he did. Point (c)(7)  was  not  pursued,  Mr  Gilbert
    recognising that the weight to be afforded to various  aspects  of  the
    evidence was properly a matter for the Judge.

9.   It  is  perhaps  unfortunate  that  the  Judge  did  not  make  express
    reference to the Annex B letter in the course of his determination  but
    reading the decision holistically and having regard to the careful  and
    detailed analysis which the judge brought to  bear,  he  was  evidently
    fully aware of its content  and  he  approached  the  case  with  those
    matters as part of the factual background in relation to which he  made
    his findings.  The Judge dealt with paragraph 339K of  the  Immigration
    Rules  [at  para  62]  which  assess  whether  previous  incidents   of
    persecution or serious harm are indicative of the likelihood of  future
    such  incidents.  He  rejected  the  causative  conclusion   on   these
    particular facts because it had no bearing risk since his return  would
    be in the nature of internal location to Baghdad, and he was no  longer
    in the employ of IOM.

10.  The substantive conclusion of the Judge is to be found in paragraph  75
    of the determination.  He says this:

         "I do not find that the background evidence or the country guidance
         indicates that the appellant would be at risk in Baghdad because he
         previously worked for IOM or because he is a  Sunni  Muslim.   With
         reference to paragraph 339K  I  find  there  are  good  reasons  to
         consider that that the threats previously  made  to  the  appellant
         would not be repeated.  This is because he no longer works for IOM,
         and he would be resident  in  Baghdad  city  and  not  in  an  area
         controlled by ISIS."

11.  Looking at the  totality  of  the  determination  and  particularly  at
    paragraph  66  where  the  judge  set  out  the  relevant  points   for
    consideration under AA in assessing whether it would be unreasonable or
    unduly harsh for an  individual  to  relocate  to  Baghdad,  the  Judge
    applied his mind with care to their relevance and application  in  this
    specific case and came to the factual  conclusion  that  the  appellant
    would not be at risk upon internal relocation to Baghdad.

12.  It is, of course, possible that other  judges  might  have  come  to  a
    different conclusion, but that is not the test which has to be  applied
    here in the Upper Tribunal. It is for an appellant to demonstrate  that
    there was a material error of law on the Judge's part in the First-tier
    Tribunal. Notwithstanding the forceful yet economical submissions of Mr
    Gilbert, I am compelled to conclude that there is no error of law.  The
    complaints which he makes behalf of the  appellant  are  no  more  than
    challenges to the factual findings which the Judge came to in what  is,
    in my assessment, an unimpeachable application of the country  guidance
    in AA.  It must therefore follow that this appeal is dismissed.
Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
maintained.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Mark Hill QC                   Date     8 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
