
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11511/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 January 2016                   |On 26 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                    A J A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Faryl counsel instructed by Irving & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. An anonymity direction  was  previously  made  and
    shall continue.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
    in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in
    the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mulvenna promulgated on
    17 March 2015  which  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of  the  Respondent  to  remove  the  Appellant  from  the  UK
    following the decision to refuse the Appellant's claim for  asylum  but
    allowed the appeal against a refusal of humanitarian protection.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 4 October 1993 and is a national of  Somalia.
    The Appellants claimed to be a member of a minority clan,  the  Banjuni
    who lived and worked as a fisherman on the Island of Chula. He  claimed
    to be at risk from the majority clans.

 4. On 7 February 2014 the Appellant applied for asylum.

 5. On 1 December 2014 the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) It was accepted that the Appellant was  a  member  of  the  Banjuni
         minority clan and that he lived and worked as a  fisherman  on  the
         Island of Chula.

      b) It was not accepted that the Appellants brother  was  kidnapped  as
         claimed as his account was inconsistent and therefore not credible.

      c) The Appellants credibility was undermined by his failure  to  claim
         asylum promptly on arrival.

      d) The Appellant could live in Mogadishu if he chose not to return  to
         his home area.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Mulvenna  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision in respect of the Appellants claim for asylum but
    allowed the appeal in respect of  humanitarian  protection.  The  Judge
    found :

      a) The Appellants claims in relations to why he left Somalia were  not
         credible.

      b) He referred to the operative country guidance  as  AMM  and  others
         (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia  CG  [2011]
         UKUT 00445 (IAC).

      c) At paragraph 52 he set out the background evidence in  relation  to
         the security situation in Somalia generally.

      d) At paragraph 54  he  concluded  on  the  basis  of  the  background
         material that the Appellant would not be able to travel to his home
         area without incurring a significant degree of risk.

      e) He considered the question of relocation  to  Mogadishu  and  found
         that his personal circumstances would put him at risk if he  sought
         to relocate there.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that  the  Judge  had  failed  to
    apply the more recent country guidance case of MOJ  &  Ors  (Return  to
    Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC).

 8. On 1 April 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Andrew  gave  permission  to
    appeal.

 9. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Harrison on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent. I indicated to him that I was satisfied that the Judge  had
    indeed relied on the case of AMM rather  than  MOJ  but  asked  him  to
    identify for me what difference that application of the appropriate  CG
    case would have had to the outcome of the case given the factual matrix
    of the Judge's findings. I reminded him that AMM remains applicable  to
    the extent that it has not been changed by MOJ & Ors.   In  respect  of
    Mogadishu the changes in MOJ & Ors  are  substantial,  but  outside  of
    Mogadishu AMM is still applicable in many  respects.  Mr  Harrison  was
    unable to identify what difference the guidance in MOJ would have made.

10. On behalf of the Appellant Ms Faryl submitted that application  of  the
    up to date guidance would have made no material  outcome  to  the  case
    because AMM had to be read in  conjunction  with  MOJ.  The  Judge  was
    required to look at the situation the Appellant would  face  on  return
    and he found that the Appellant would end up in a refugee camp.

Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no errors of law that were material to the outcome of the
    case.

12. It is clear that the Judge erred in failing to have regard to the  most
    up to date country guidance case that applied  in  respect  of  Somalia
    particularly given that it was referred to in the refusal letter.

13. The Respondent does not challenge the finding that on the basis of  the
    available background material that even though the Appellant was not at
    risk in his home area the prevailing country conditions as set  out  in
    the background material he relied on were such that it would be  unsafe
    for him to return to his home area. The issue in the case therefore was
    whether he could relocate to Mogadishu.

14. I note that neither the grounds nor the permission  to  appeal  clearly
    identify how the application of MOJ would  have  produced  a  different
    outcome in this case and certainly Mr Harrison was unable to articulate
    this to me. The guidance given in  MOJ  &  Ors  (Return  to  Mogadishu)
    Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) was that   relocation  in  Mogadishu
    for a person of a minority clan with no former links to  the  city,  no
    access to funds and no other form of clan, family or social support  is
    unlikely to be realistic as, in the absence of  means  to  establish  a
    home and some form of ongoing financial support there will  be  a  real
    risk of having no alternative but to live  in  makeshift  accommodation
    within an IDP camp where there is a real possibility of having to  live
    in conditions that will fall below acceptable humanitarian standards.

15. I am satisfied that the Judge made brief but sustainable findings  that
    the Appellant could not relocate to Mogadishu at paragraph 54.  It  was
    not disputed that he was from a minority clan and the only work that he
    had done was as a fisherman on the Island of  Chula  and  it  would  be
    arguable that this would  not  translate  to  a  means  of  support  in
    Mogadishu. It was not challenged that he  had  no  links  to  the  city
    either familial or otherwise. His family was in Chula and while aspects
    of his case were rejected the Judge made no adverse finding  about  his
    claim that the family had used what  assets  they  had  to  secure  his
    flight with an agent and therefore the Judge would have  been  entitled
    to find he would have no prospect of financial support  there  or  from
    any other source. In accordance with MOJ he would have been entitled to
    find that if the Appellant found himself in a refugee camp  this  would
    be unacceptable. Thus the failure to  refer  to  MOJ  was  not  in  the
    circumstances material.

16. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set
    aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1): "Although
    there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on
    the central issue on which an appeal is determined, those reasons  need
    not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard
    to the material accepted by the judge."

17. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

18. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

19. The appeal is dismissed.

20. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008 9as
    amended) the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. An
    order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.


Signed      Date 24.1.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

