


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11191/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Manchester                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 4 May 2016                               |On : 12 May 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                  ali abedi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr E Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Iran born on 3  August  1994.  He  claims  to
have entered the United Kingdom clandestinely in early May 2007. He  claimed
asylum on 18 June 2007. His claim was refused on 18 March 2008. He  appealed
against that decision and his appeal was heard on 1 May 2008  and  dismissed
in a determination promulgated on 13 May 2008.

On 25 March 2011 the appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK on  the
grounds that he had  a  brother  in  the  UK  who  had  since  been  granted
indefinite leave to remain under the legacy programme (on 3 March 2011).  On
5 August 2011 he was granted limited leave to remain until 3  February  2012
outside the immigration rules, as an  unaccompanied  child.  On  17  January
2012 he applied for a variation of his leave  on  asylum  and  human  rights
grounds. His application was refused on 2 December 2014,  at  which  time  a
decision was made to remove him from the UK.

The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was  heard  in  the
First-tier Tribunal on 29 January 2015  and  was  dismissed  in  a  decision
promulgated on 25 February 2015. Permission was granted on 13 April 2015  to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant claims to be at risk on return to Iran  as  a  result  of  his
brother  Behrooz's  disappearance  during  military  service.  The   Iranian
authorities came to the family home looking for Behrooz and caused  problems
for his other  brother,  Mehdi.  His  father  was  frequently  arrested  and
released and Mehdi was beaten up by the authorities. Mehdi  then  left  Iran
and in October 2006 came to the  UK  where  he  claimed,  and  was  refused,
asylum. The appellant claimed that in February 2007 he and  his  father  and
brother Mohamed were taken from home by armed  men  and  he  was  questioned
about Mehdi and Behrooz and later released. He subsequently  left  Iran.  In
the UK he was put in the care of his brother Mehdi. He feared  returning  to
Iran.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim on 18  March  2008,  noted
that his brother Mehdi's claim, based on the same facts,  had  been  refused
and his appeal dismissed in March 2007, in a  decision  concluding  that  he
was not of any interest to  the  Iranian  authorities  because  of  problems
caused by Behrooz. The respondent therefore refused  the  appellant's  claim
on the same basis, considering that he would be at  no  risk  on  return  to
Iran.


The appellant's application on 17 January 2012 for further  leave  was  made
on the basis that he still feared return to Iran,  that  there  had  been  a
deterioration in relations between the UK and Iran, that he had  no  contact
with his family in Iran and that he had developed a relationship in  the  UK
with a British citizen and had established ties in the UK.


The respondent refused the appellant's application on 20 November  2014  for
the same reasons as previously as well as on the basis that,  as  an  adult,
he did not  meet  the  criteria  under  Appendix  FM  with  respect  to  his
relationship with his brother  or  otherwise,  that  he  did  not  meet  the
criteria in paragraph 276ADE(1) and that his removal would  not  breach  his
Article 8 rights. The respondent considered the factors  in  paragraph  353B
but concluded that there were no grounds upon which to justify  a  grant  of
leave.

The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard by  Judge  Morris  in
the First-tier Tribunal on 28  January  2015.  Judge  Morris  considered  an
adjournment request made by the  appellant's  representative  on  the  basis
that it was intended that an expert be instructed to  provide  a  report  on
the risk to those who had left Iran  illegally,  a  matter  that  had  again
become a live issue since the  country  guidance  in  SB  (risk  on  return-
illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053, that there was a general  lack  of
evidence in the appellant's case and that a  decision  was  awaited  on  the
question  of  funding  from  the  legal  aid  agency,  without   which   the
representatives would be unable to represent the appellant. The judge  noted
that two previous adjournment requests had been refused by the Tribunal  and
she declined to adjourn the proceedings. The appellant's representative  did
not withdraw, however, but he made submissions on behalf of  the  appellant,
although not calling the appellant to give oral  evidence.  The  submissions
were essentially based upon the risk to the appellant as a result of  having
exited  Iran  illegally,  the  respondent's   delay   in   considering   the
appellant's application and the length of time the appellant  had  spent  in
the UK, the fact that the appellant had not been  granted  indefinite  leave
to remain together with his brother and the  breach  of  Article  8  arising
from the appellant's removal.

Judge Morris relied upon the decision of the  Tribunal  in  the  appellant's
previous appeal, following the principles in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT  00702,
in relation to his claim based upon his  brother  Behrooz.  With  regard  to
risk on return on the basis of having left Iran illegally, she followed  the
country guidance in SB and concluded that the  appellant  would  not  be  at
risk on that basis. The judge found that the appellant could  not  meet  the
requirements of the immigration rules on the basis  of  family  and  private
life  and  she  considered  that  neither  the  delay  in  the  respondent's
consideration  of  the  application  nor  any   other   matter   constituted
exceptional circumstances justifying a grant of leave outside the  rules  on
wider Article 8  grounds.  She  accordingly  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
grounds.


Permission to appeal the  judge's  decision  was  sought  on  the  following
grounds: that the judge  had  erred  in  law  by  refusing  to  adjourn  the
proceedings; that the judge had failed to give proper reasons for  rejecting
the arguments based  on  the  change  in  circumstances  since  the  country
guidance in SB and the risk on return on the  basis  of  illegal  exit;  and
that she had failed to give proper consideration to the  question  of  delay
in the consideration of the appellant's  application  and  the  respondent's
policy in that  respect  as  set  out  in  Chapter  53  of  the  Enforcement
Instruction Guidance. The grounds asserted that  the  judge  had  failed  to
record how the respondent had agreed to an adjournment  before  the  hearing
but had then opposed it at the hearing.


Permission was granted on all grounds.


At the hearing before me there was no appearance by  or  on  behalf  of  the
appellant and no explanation for his absence. I noted  from  the  file  that
his former representatives, Greater Manchester  Immigration  Aid  Unit,  had
withdrawn from the case in September 2015 and  were  no  longer  instructed.
They had provided an up-dated address  for  the  appellant,  which  was  the
address to which the Notice of Hearing had been sent. It appeared  therefore
that the appellant had been properly served with notice of the  hearing  and
I could see no reason why the appeal should not, and could not,  proceed  in
his absence.


By way of submissions, Mr Harrison simply relied on  the  respondent's  Rule
24 response.


I advised him that I was upholding the judge's decision.

Consideration and findings.

There was clearly no merit in the substance of the appellant's  claim  based
on his brother Behrooz's  problems  and  that  matter  had  been  considered
previously by a different Tribunal.  The  appeal  before  Judge  Morris  was
being pursued on a different basis, namely the question of  risk  on  return
as a result of illegal exit from Iran, as well as the  issue  of  delay  and
Article 8.

The request for an adjournment of the proceedings was primarily  based  upon
the need for further evidence in relation to the question of  illegal  exit.
Reliance was placed by the appellant's representative on various  grants  of
permission and decisions in cases involving that issue and  it  was  claimed
that the situation in Iran had changed since the country guidance in SB.

It is indeed the case that the Upper Tribunal are  shortly  to  hear  a  new
country guidance case on the issue of illegal exit from Iran  on  the  basis
of country information and expert  evidence  post-dating  the  date  of  the
previous country guidance in SB and BA (Demonstrators in Britain -  risk  on
return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36. However it does not seem to me that that  in
itself is a reason to conclude that the judge erred  in  law  by  proceeding
with the appellant's appeal and refusing the  request  for  an  adjournment.
The judge gave full and careful consideration to  the  adjournment  request.
She noted  that  two  previous  requests  had  been  refused.  She  properly
considered the basis upon which  she  could  depart  from  existing  country
guidance and took careful account  of  the  evidence  relied  upon  in  that
regard, which  included  decisions  made  by  other  judges  and  background
country information. Having assessed all the evidence she  was  entitled  to
conclude that it was appropriate for her to proceed with the  appeal  before
her and to rely upon the existing country guidance. I do not agree with  the
assertion in the grounds that the judge failed to give adequate reasons  for
rejecting the appellant's claim on that basis.


Neither do I find merit in the assertion  that  the  judge  failed  to  have
regard to the delay in deciding the  appellant's  claim  and  to  the  other
considerations relevant to an assessment of Article 8  and  to  the  factors
included in the Home Office policy guidance  in  Chapter  53.  At  [44]  she
specifically dealt with the Enforcement Guidance and  took  account  of  the
delay in the consideration of  the  appellant's  application  and  the  time
spent in the UK, as well as the appellant's relationship with  his  brother.
She concluded  that  these  did  not  amount  to  exceptional  circumstances
justifying a grant of leave and that the appellant's  removal  from  the  UK
would not breach  Article  8.  That  was  a  conclusion  she  was  perfectly
entitled to reach on the limited evidence that she had before her.


For all of these reasons I find no errors of law in the judge's decision.

DECISION

 The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.













                               Signed                                  Date


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
