
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11570/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 March 2016                      |On 21 March 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    [NC]
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kotas a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ahluwazia of Counsel instructed by Birnberg
Peirce Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. For the purpose of continuity with the determination in the  First-
         tier Tribunal I will hereinafter refer to the Secretary of State as
         the Respondent and [NC] as the Appellant.

      2. The Appellant was born on 10 January 1996. He is a Tamil  from  Sri
         Lanka. He arrived here on 21 December 2009 when he  was  almost  14
         years  old.  It  was  found  at  a  hearing   on   15   July   2010
         (AA/08570/2010) that he had been  forcibly  recruited  as  a  child
         soldier 2 or 3 months before the fall of the LTTE  and  experienced
         some awful events. His asylum appeal was dismissed  but  his  human
         rights appeal allowed due to a lack  of  evidence  of  there  being
         adequate reception and accommodation arrangements for  him  in  Sri
         Lanka. He was granted leave to remain on a discretionary basis.

      3. He  applied  to  extend  that  and  renew  his  asylum  claim.  The
         Respondent notified him of her decision to refuse to  grant  asylum
         or ancillary protection on 8 December 2014. His appeal against that
         decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson ("the
         Judge") following a hearing on 29 September 2015 (and not  2014  as
         stated on the decision). The Judge found that the Appellant met the
         requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the  Statement  of  Changes  in
         Immigration Rules HC 395 ("the rules") and allowed  the  appeal  on
         that basis.

      4. First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade granted permission to  appeal  (19
         November 2015) on the grounds that

          1.  "by referring to "significant obstacles"  rather  than  "very
             significant obstacles"..."it is arguable that  the  judge  has
             not applied the correct test in relation  to  the  Appellant's
             position on return" and

          2. it is arguable "proper consideration has" not "been  given  to
             s117" of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
             ("the Act").

The Judge's decision

      5.  In  dealing  with  the  rules  the  Judge  stated  that  [30]  (my
         underlining);

             "...the  only  provision  under  which  the  Appellant   could
             possibly  succeed  was  276ADE  (1)(vi),  which  requires   an
             applicant to  show  that  "there  would  be  very  significant
             obstacles to the applicant's integration into the  country  to
             which he would have to go if required to leave the UK."

      6. The Judge found [32];

             "In  concluding  that  the  Appellant   suffers   from   Major
             Depression secondary to  Post  Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  Dr
             Lawrence states that his symptoms would be  made  worse  by  a
             return to Sri Lanka and that he requires social/family support
             in addition to appropriate medication. He noted

             'This man was so flat that he appeared to be mentally retarded
             but this is the consequence of the deep  trauma  that  he  has
             suffered, and from which he has not recovered.'

             'The psycho-social treatment  of  this  young  man's  symptoms
             needs a coherent social/family support and he has this here in
             the UK.' "

      7. The Judge said [34] that;

             "I find that although the Appellant is now an  adult  and  has
             had the benefit of an education, there  would  be  significant
             obstacles to his integration into life in Sri Lanka. Whilst he
             would be able to maintain some contact with his uncle  in  the
             UK through modern means of communication and could continue to
             be supported financially, he would not be able to  access  the
             necessary direct family support. Dr Lawrence concludes

             'His symptoms would undoubtedly be made worse by return to Sri
             Lanka (because of re-stimulation); he has no concept  of  life
             in Sri Lanka and he has lost  all  contact  with  the  country
             (partly as a defence against his PTSD)...' "

      8. The Judge said [35] that;

             "In reaching my conclusions I do not make a finding as to  the
             adequacy of the medical services in Sri Lanka, rather  I  find
             that in this case the Appellant requires  a  level  of  family
             support which would not be available were he to return to  Sri
             Lanka. I consider that this  would  significantly  hamper  his
             ability to find accommodation, employment and to reintegrate."

      9. The Judge's decision notes [16 iii and 17 i] that  it  was  claimed
         that his uncle and grandmother are his only living family  members,
         she is in an old person's home in Sri Lanka, and  is  fragile,  and
         other family members have been killed or are missing.

The hearing before me on 28 January 2016

     10. The Respondent asserted in the  application  that  the  Appellant's
         uncle ([NL]) could assist financially and had been with his  family
         twice to Sri Lanka. It was also asserted that the Appellant's  lack
         of English and financial independence were  factors  that  had  not
         been properly considered.

     11. I determined that there was a material error of law in the  Judge's
         decision and set it aside. That was because if the  Judge  intended
         to apply the more stringent test he  would  have  referred  to  the
         correct terminology in [34] where he purported to apply  it.  There
         is a material difference between "significant obstacles" and  "very
         significant obstacles" as, if there was not, the word "very"  would
         not be included. The Judge did  not  find  that  there  were  "very
         significant obstacles" and therefore materially erred  in  allowing
         the  appeal.  Neither  did  he  find  that  there  were  not  "very
         significant obstacles". Accordingly he did not answer the  question
         he was asked to determine.

     12. The preserved  findings  were  those  referred  to  in  the  Judges
         decision [32], [34], and [35] which I  have  reproduced  above.  Mr
         Ahluwazia  indicated  that  he  wished  to  file  further  evidence
         regarding the Appellant's ability to integrate back  into  life  in
         Sri Lanka and that evidence may be required to be  heard  regarding
         the availability  of  social  care.  Mr  Tarlow  (the  Respondent's
         representative at that hearing) had no objection to that. I  issued
         appropriate directions.

The evidence at the hearing of 7 March 2016

     13. The Appellant's statement (23 September 2015) records that  he  was
         born  in  Vanni.  Due  to  the  turmoil   the   family   moved   to
         Mulluyavaikal. He was captured by the LTTE.  He  escaped  during  a
         bombing raid. He went to stay with an aunt. They went to a camp  at
         Omanthai.  His  grandmother  found  him.  He  escaped   the   camp.
         Arrangements were made for him to come here.

     14.  [NL]'s statement (23 September 2015) records that he travelled  to
         Sri Lanka in 2011 and 2012 and was informed at the  Village  Office
         that the Appellant's parents and siblings were  either  missing  or
         had been killed during the war. They have no  family  home  in  Sri
         Lanka. His mother is very old and fragile (I note here that in  the
         2010 appeal it was said she was 70) and living in a  home  for  the
         elderly.

     15. In evidence in chief he added that he came here in 1995 and claimed
         asylum. This was granted in 2002. He became a  naturalized  British
         citizen in 2011. His 3 children who are 13, 12, and 5 are  British.
         He has had a corner shop for 15 years. He went to Sri Lanka in 2011
         and 2012 to find his brother and family and contacted the Red Cross
         here and in Sri Lanka. The Appellant is incapable of looking  after
         himself. He needs 24 hour care. He cannot wash or cook. He  can  go
         to the toilet but sometimes cannot flush or wipe. They make sure he
         takes his medication as he may take all of it and harm his life. He
         comes to the kitchen and watches the knives. The  knives  and  rope
         (later clarified as washing line) are hidden so he cannot see them.
         He (i.e. [NL]) stopped the Appellant taking a  knife  and  stabbing
         himself. The frequency of the  counselling  has  increased  as  his
         symptoms have got worse. He broke the television and  set  fire  to
         plastic bottles.

     16. In cross-examination he  added  that  the  Appellant's  grandmother
         lived with her sister in 2009 in Vavuniyia. That  sister  moved  to
         Killinochchi at the end of 2009 when the army  occupied  the  area.
         She still lives there, has her own home, is 65, and lives with  her
         husband. The Appellant cannot stay with her as  she  cannot  manage
         herself. When he went to Sri Lanka to find his family he stayed  in
         a hotel. The Appellant stayed with his wife's uncle who lives  very
         close. There were many GP referrals between 2009 and 2013.  If  the
         Appellant was in Sri Lanka he could send money  but  his  condition
         will get worse.

     17. In re-examination he said the Appellant would  not  be  capable  of
         collecting the money.

     18. In response to my questions he said that he is worried he will harm
         himself with the kitchen knives  and  would  take  an  overdose  of
         medication deliberately.

     19. In response to questions arising out of mine he said it would  take
         5  hours  to  reach  Colombo  from  Killinochchi,  there   are   no
         psychiatric services in Killinochchi, and  he  is  not  capable  of
         travelling to Colombo by himself.

     20. There is a letter (perhaps 10 September 2015 - the date is said  by
         the translator to be unclear)  from  [NA].  She  said  she  is  the
         Appellant's grandmother, she cared for him, is in an old age  home,
         and his parents are missing.

     21. Sivagnanam Shritharan, MP for the Jaffna Electoral District,  wrote
         (23  September  2015)  that  [NA]  is  in  an  old  age   home   in
         Killinochchi, is very old, and needs help and  support.  He  cannot
         confirm if the  Appellant's  parents  and  siblings  are  alive  or
         displaced. If the Appellant returns  to  Sri  Lanka  he  will  face
         trouble and will be destitute as he has nowhere to live or work.

     22. Dr Robin Lawrence, Consultant  Psychiatrist,  wrote  (15  September
         2015) that he interviewed the Appellant on 14 September  2015.  The
         Appellant appeared to be very anxious, and low and had an excessive
         startle response. There were some signs of  self  neglect.  He  was
         coherent, appropriate, and co-operative. He was  functioning  at  a
         low  intellectual  level  which  was  likely  to  be  due  to   his
         psychological  difficulties.  He  has  symptoms  which  are  highly
         consistent with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). He has  some
         symptoms highly consistent with depression but not sufficient for a
         clinical diagnosis. He wants to die but does not make any plans and
         has no motivation. He had a paucity  of  thought  and  speech.  His
         concentration is poor. He is forgetful. He requires medication  and
         therapy. Dr Lawrence believes that treatment is  not  available  in
         Sri Lanka as it was not available to Tamils when he  was  there  in
         2006 and the situation had not changed.  The  Appellant  is  not  a
         great risk of successful suicide due to his pervasive apathy. If he
         was returned to the source  of  threat,  Sri  Lanka,  the  risk  of
         suicide will increase, and his symptoms would  be  made  worse.  He
         needs coherent social/family support.

     23. Dr Saleh Dhumad, Consultant Psychiatrist and Cognitive  Behavioural
         Therapist wrote (2 March 2016) that he interviewed the Appellant on
         28 February 2016. The Appellant said that most of the time he feels
         paranoid  and  thinks  people  are  working  for  the  Sri   Lankan
         authorities. He was  frightened  when  he  witnessed  killings  and
         injuries during the war. He was worried about his family. He  feels
         safe with [NL] and has developed very strong emotional  bonds  with
         his family but remains frightened and anxious. He  reported  strong
         suicidal feelings and wanted to cut himself with a  knife  but  his
         uncle stopped him. His condition deteriorated after his  leave  was
         refused in 2013. He  attempted  to  commit  suicide  once  but  was
         stopped by [NL]. He has been having auditory flashbacks. He  has  a
         moderate depressive episode  and  PTSD.  The  risk  of  suicide  is
         moderate. Hopelessness, depression, and PTSD symptoms increase  the
         risk of suicide. Refusal will trigger a  significant  deterioration
         in his mental suffering and will subsequently increase the risk  of
         suicide. His condition is very unlikely  to  progress  due  to  the
         ongoing fear of deportation. There is a high risk of suicide if  he
         is deported. He is not fit to fly.  He  is  unable  to  look  after
         himself unsupported. He needs 24 hour  support  for  daily  living,
         personal  care,  and  medical  supervision.  Due  to  a   fear   of
         ostracisation and lack of support, he is very unlikely to  approach
         medical professionals in Sri Lanka to obtain medical treatment  for
         his mental health conditions. He would suffer marked self  neglect.
         He would require hospital inpatient treatment. He would  experience
         more  suicidal  ideation.  The  personal  care  of  his  family  is
         necessary to prevent self  neglect  and  further  deterioration  in
         mental state. The emotional support could not be replicated  by  an
         employed carer in Sri Lanka.

     24. Dr Reshma Inamdar, Consultant Psychiatrist, wrote  (30  July  2015)
         that the Appellant is receiving counselling for his  PTSD.  He  has
         been commenced on Sertreline.

     25. Edwin Hobbs, Cognitive Behavioural Therapist,  notes  (25  February
         2016) the Appellant's self harm ideation.

     26. Faheem Parkar, Cognitive Behavioural  Therapist,  wrote  (13  March
         2015) that the Appellant described  having  suicidal  ideation  and
         thoughts about hurting himself with a knife. His  intention  is  to
         hurt himself, not to kill himself.

     27. The Appellant's bundle of educational information while here  notes
         difficulties and  poor  performance  in  2011  and  extremely  poor
         academic results. His GP records identify nothing of relevance that
         is not recorded elsewhere.

Discussion

     28. It is clear that the Appellant has PTSD, has had suicidal ideation,
         and there are concerns that he may seek to harm himself should  the
         decision be averse to his wishes and he be returned  to  Sri  Lanka
         although Dr Lawrence and Dr Dhumad differ as to the level of  risk.
         It is equally clear that his family care  for  him,  and  that  the
         supervision and understanding of his condition is such that he  has
         not required psychiatric detentions here for his protection.  I  am
         satisfied that  given  that  package  of  support  around  him  and
         knowledge of him, appropriate support can be provided for him  upon
         receipt of this decision and throughout any subsequent  enforcement
         action by the Respondent. Indeed neither psychiatrist suggests that
         this cannot be provided. The initial issue for Dr Dhumad  (but  not
         Dr Lawrence) is the Appellant's fitness to fly. That  is  based  on
         the Appellant's medical condition which itself is based on his fear
         of harm and the perceived lack of family and  professional  support
         available. I do not accept that assessment is made out as he  fails
         to engage with the question of what support can be provided to  him
         to fly to Sri Lanka and  why  that  cannot  be  provided.  For  the
         avoidance of doubt where the risk of  suicide  differs  between  Dr
         Lawrence and Dr Dhumad I prefer the evidence of Dr Lawrence  as  he
         explains that there is no great suicide risk due to  his  pervasive
         apathy (which has not been properly considered by Dr  Dhumad),  and
         because if there was a real  risk  there  would  be  likely  to  be
         evidence of professional intervention  through  hospitalization  or
         some form of assertive community psychiatric outreach.

     29. The asylum claim and Article 3 claim were dismissed.  There  is  no
         appeal before me in relation to either.  It  has  been  found  that
         there is no real risk to him on return. The Appellant's  subjective
         fear is not objectively based. I agree with Mr Kotas that once  the
         Appellant realises that there is no real risk to him on return, his
         symptoms of anxiety and hopelessness are likely  to  reduce  as  he
         will have nothing to be anxious about and no reason to be hopeless.
         In my judgment, this aspect has been given inadequate consideration
         by Dr Dhumad and Dr Lawrence.

     30.  The  Appellant  has  been  legally  represented  throughout  these
         proceedings. Despite this, and the obvious importance in this case,
         no background information has been supplied to show that there  are
         no psychiatric services in Killinochchi or nearby, no  availability
         of psychiatric medication, no outreach service, and no professional
         care or support to assist the Appellant. It is for the Appellant to
         make his case (and his representative's duty to assist him) and  he
         and they have failed to do so. It  is  not  for  me  to  "fish  for
         evidence" and I am not doing so. I do not accept that  Dr  Lawrence
         has  established  he  has  the  expertise  to   comment   on   what
         professional psychiatric support is available in Sri  Lanka  as  he
         has not been for 9 years and has not mentioned considering  any  up
         to date report on the availability of such support for example from
         the Sri Lankan Ministry of Health, or  international  organizations
         such as the World Health Organization or Medecins Sans  Frontieres.
         Dr Dhumad does not hold himself out  as  being  an  expert  on  the
         situation in Sri Lanka - indeed he has entirely ignored what may be
         available to the Appellant when considering the risk and  how  that
         risk can be ameliorated. This evidence is important for the reasons
         given in a multitude of cases such as N v UK (Application 26565/05)
         ECtHR Grand Chamber, Akhalu (health claim: ECHR Article  8)  [2013]
         UKUT 00400 (IAC) and AJ (Liberia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  1736  and
         cannot simply be brushed aside.

     31. It is now clear that [NL] and the Appellant did not previously tell
         the truth regarding the presence of family in Sri Lanka.  They  had
         repeatedly referred to  only  the  Appellant's  grandmother  living
         there. It only emerged in cross examination that in fact  he  still
         has a great aunt and uncle who have their own home.  This  evidence
         post dated and undermines the preserved finding regarding the  lack
         of family support in Sri Lanka. It fatally undermines the  first  4
         submissions made in Mr Ahluwalia's skeleton argument  as  they  are
         all based on a false premise and the Doctors were provided  by  the
         family with false information. Had  it  been  disclosed  earlier  I
         would not have preserved that finding.  I  cannot  now  ignore  the
         evidence. The great aunt is only 65. She has her own  house.  There
         is no evidence from her to suggest  she  cannot  receive  money  to
         assist  with  any   professional   support   required.   In   those
         circumstances it has not been established she could  not  replicate
         the family support he has here. I do not expect [NL] to  return  to
         Sri Lanka with or without his children. He  can  provide  financial
         and moral support from here and visit. The  coherent  social/family
         support the Appellant needs can be provided in Sri Lanka albeit  by
         different family members.

     32. Despite the hearing having  previously  been  adjourned  to  enable
         evidence to  be  produced  regarding  the  Appellant's  ability  to
         integrate back into life in  Sri  Lanka  and  the  availability  of
         social care, there is still no evidence  setting  out  what  social
         services care may be available.

     33. The  Appellant  plainly  has  current  issues  in  socialising  and
         establishing relationships with others. He is living in  a  foreign
         country where he does not speak the  first  language  and  has  had
         little access to its culture. In Sri Lanka he would be returning to
         his home country where he lived for almost 14 years and speaks  the
         language used by a very significant part of the community. He would
         not therefore be socially isolated through linguistic and  cultural
         barriers and has family support available. There is no evidence  he
         has developed a private life here beyond [NL]'s  immediate  family.
         It is not  clear  on  what  basis  Dr  Lawrence  asserts  that  the
         Appellant has no more than remote and abstract ties with Sri Lanka.
         There is no indication as to how, when he realises there is no real
         risk  to  him  in  Sri  Lank,  and  there  is  family  support  and
         professional treatment available, this may  impact  on  his  mental
         condition and reduce Dr Lawrence's concern regarding his ties  with
         Sri Lanka.

     34. Given the obvious gaping holes in  the  Appellant's  case,  he  has
         failed to establish that there are "very significant obstacles"  to
         his integration into Sri Lanka, a country where he lived for almost
         14 years, where he speaks  the  language,  he  has  family  support
         namely at least his grandmother and a great  aunt  and  uncle,  and
         where his family here can visit freely whenever they wish  and  can
         send his financial support. His family in Sri Lanka can meet him at
         the airport and escort him wherever they wish, and take him to such
         support as is available. It has not  been  established  that  there
         would be a  linguistic  barrier  to  professional  support  in  the
         absence of background evidence to that effect.

     35. I therefore dismiss the appeal under the immigration rules.

     36. In relation to Article 8 (that  being  the  only  relevant  Article
         given the ambit of the appeal before me and it not being challenged
         by the Respondent that it is engaged in this case), the sole  issue
         for  determination  is  whether  the  Respondent's  decision  is  a
         proportionate interference with the respect to which the  Appellant
         and [NL] and his family are entitled with regards to their  private
         and family life.

     37. I accept that the relationship with [NL] (but no other adult in the
         absence of cogent  supporting  evidence)  goes  beyond  the  normal
         emotional ties existing between  adults  given  the  emotional  and
         practical support he provides. His family life does not  extend  in
         any significant manner beyond [NL]'s immediate family as  there  is
         no cogent evidence that it does. Neither [NL's wife] nor any  other
         family member gave statements or wrote letters of support.

     38. The Appellant is no longer a minor and hence not subject to  a  s55
         "best interest" assessment in relation to himself.

     39. It has not been established that  he  has  a  relationship  of  any
         significance with the 3 minor first  cousins  with  whom  he  lives
         given the lack of an assessment from, for example,  an  independent
         social worker commenting on that  especially  given  his  withdrawn
         presentation. None of his children gave statements or wrote letters
         of support. It is  unclear  how,  if  the  Appellant's  psychiatric
         condition is as serious as claimed, it can be in the best  interest
         of 3 children to be in the same house as him particularly given the
         lack of an assessment from,  for  example,  an  independent  social
         worker commenting on that.

     40. It clear from the findings I have made that  I  am  satisfied  that
         appropriate medical treatment and support is available here and  en
         route to Sri Lanka to ameliorate any potential suicide  risk,  that
         is has not been established that appropriate medical treatment  and
         support is not available or accessible in Sri Lanka,  and  that  in
         Sri Lanka the Appellant would have local family support  to  assist
         him to access it and financial and emotional support from  here  to
         aid in that process which  in  my  judgement  will  enable  him  to
         recover, resettle, and re-integrate. He will  be  able  to  develop
         relationships with local professionals.

     41. The high threshold  for  establishing  that  removal  would  breach
         Article 8 on health cases is established in (for example) Bensaid v
         the United Kingdom (Application no.  44599/98)  and  GS  (India)  &
         others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  40  and  comes  nowhere  near  being
         reached in this case given the facts  I  have  found  and  for  the
         reasons I have already given.

     42. The concern identified in the written submissions/skeleton argument
         regarding tracing carries little force as the Respondent cannot  be
         faulted for not tracing a great aunt/uncle  the  Appellant's  uncle
         has just given details of, and as the Appellant is not a minor.

     43. His private life does not extend beyond his medical  treatment  and
         is of limited value given the precarious nature of his status here.
         His English is  very  limited  and  he  has  been  and  will  be  a
         significant burden on taxpayers  given  the  cost  of  his  medical
         treatment.

     44. In summary I am not satisfied that the  removal  of  the  Appellant
         from the United Kingdom will be disproportionate  to  the  need  to
         retain the  integrity  of  immigration  control  and  maintain  the
         economic well being of the country  for  all  the  reasons  I  have
         given.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of a material error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.


Signed
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
16 March 2016
