
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11730/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 July 2015                      |On 23 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                     Master Tharshan SARAVANABAVANANTHAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Anne Heller, counsel instructed by Barnes, Harrid
                    & Dyer solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                             DECISION & REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, of Tamil ethnicity, born  on
4 August 1997. He arrived in the United Kingdom  on  15  December  2010  and
claimed asylum the following day. The basis of his claim  is  that  when  he
was 10 years of age he became separated from his family when their  village,
near Kilinochchi, was attacked by the army. He was taken to a military  camp
where he remained for 2 years,  undertaking  chores.  He  resisted  forcible
recruitment and was beaten. A man "Uncle" who knew his father paid  a  bribe
so that they were both able to leave the camp  and  they  travelled  to  the
United Kingdom, arriving by car. "Uncle" took him to the Home Office and  he
has not seen him since. He has had no news from or contact with his family.

2.    The Respondent refused the asylum claim on 18 March 2011  but  granted
the Appellant discretionary leave to remain until 14  March  2014.  On  that
date the Appellant submitted an in-time application  for  further  leave  to
remain on the basis that he had a continuing  fear  of  persecution  in  Sri
Lanka. This application was refused on 11 December 2014  but  the  Appellant
was granted a further period of discretionary  leave  thus  his  appeal  was
brought under section 83(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration  &  Asylum  Act
2002.

3.    The appeal came before Judge of  the  First  Tier-Tribunal  Oscar  del
Fabbro for hearing on 9 April 2015. In a decision promulgated on 6 May  2015
he dismissed the appeal on the basis that he did not find the Appellant  had
demonstrated he is likely to be at risk of harm on return to  Sri  Lanka  as
at the date of the hearing [22]. He was  quite  satisfied  on  the  evidence
that the Appellant was not detained in a military camp  but  that  it  would
have been a camp for displaced persons and there was no  evidence  that  the
Appellant was considered at that stage to be an LTTE  combatant  or  in  any
way associated with them [24]. He did  not  find  the  Appellant's  evidence
that he left the camp without leave on payment of a bribe to be credible  or
that the bribe and subsequent arrangements to facilitate his unlawful  entry
to the United Kingdom was paid for by the "uncle"  [25].  He  also  did  not
find credible the Appellant's concerns that he would be of adverse  interest
to the Sri Lankan authorities for a Convention reason  based  on  the  claim
that he left without documentation and spent several  years  in  the  United
Kingdom, as there is no connection either directly or  indirectly  with  the
LTTE or any sur place activity in the United Kingdom and he  would  be  able
to return to Sri Lanka without fear of falling into one of those  categories
of post-civil war returnees identified in GJ [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC)[27].
He did not find on the evidence that the situation  in  Sri  Lanka  is  such
that penury, abuse and exploitation would be a likely outcome  for  a  young
person returning there as a 17 year old [28].

4.    The Appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
the basis that the First Tier Tribunal Judge erred: (i) in failing  to  give
any or adequate consideration to the possibility of the Appellant  being  at
risk as a witness  to  war  crimes  and  (ii)  in  failing  to  specify  the
objective evidence upon which his finding was based that "penury, abuse  and
exploitation would be a likely outcome for a young person returning here  as
a 17 year old."  Permission to appeal was  granted  by  First-Tier  Tribunal
Judge Astle in a decision dated 4 June 2015 notwithstanding the  grounds  of
appeal but on the basis that it was arguable that  there  was  no  right  of
appeal.

Hearing

5.    The appeal came before me for hearing on 22  July  2015.  The  parties
both agreed that there was a valid right  of  appeal  because  although  the
most recent grant of leave was from 11 December 2014  to  4  February  2015,
leave had previously been granted from 18 March 2011 to 14  March  2014  and
thus the Appellant had aggregated sufficient periods  of  leave  to  qualify
for the right of appeal pursuant to section  83(2)(b)  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration & Asylum Act 2002.

6.    In respect of the grounds of appeal, Ms Heller  acknowledged  that  it
was not clear on what basis Judge Astle had  granted  permission  to  appeal
but sought to rely on the grounds of appeal. She submitted that even if  the
camp was for internally displaced persons it was run  by  the  military  and
the Appellant's evidence of seeing Tamils shot  by  the  army  is  credible.
Consequently, there would be a risk to the Appellant as  a  witness  of  war
crimes. She noted that the Respondent's rule 24 reply  by  implication  says
that the camp was civil rather than military but emphasized  that  those  in
charge would have been military rather than civil. In respect of the  second
ground of appeal, she pointed  out  that  the  Appellant  was  a  minor  and
continues to be a minor. The  Judge's  conclusion  that  penury,  abuse  and
exploitation would not be a likely outcome is unsustainable given  that  the
Appellant has stated that he has had no contact with his family and he  lost
that contact in pretty dire circumstances.. The return of a young  man  with
no family back-up whatsoever returned to Colombo would mean  that  he  would
be at risk of being a street child subject to all the dangers that  go  with
that.

7.    In response, Mr Avery  submitted  that  it  was  not  clear  that  the
argument that the Appellant was a witness of a war  crime  was  advanced  at
the hearing. It was pointed  out  in  that  it  was  in  counsel's  skeleton
argument before the First Tier Tribunal. He went on to submit that this  was
not the sort of point that is covered in GJ [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  which
refers merely to persons identified as witnesses to that enquiry  and  there
was nothing from that to show or indicate that there  would  be  follow  up.
Consequently, he submitted that this was not a material matter  as  it  does
not fall within the Country Guidance risk categories.  He  referred  to  the
Respondent's rule 24 response  which  indicated  that  the  Judge  had  some
concerns about the Appellant's credibility on this issue. He did not  accept
the military would have allowed Tamil youths to handle  guns.  He  submitted
that the primary issue is whether it is a material factor  and  it  was  not
because  there  was  nothing  beyond  the  fact  the  Appellant  might  have
witnessed something. In respect of the second  ground  of  appeal,  and  the
risk to the Appellant as a child, he  submitted  that  as  the  case  is  an
asylum claim the Appellant still has to make out his case.  With  regard  to
the  background  evidence  he  submitted  that  there   was   nothing   that
specifically addressed the issue of children.  Consequently,  there  was  no
objective evidence to support the contention that he would become  a  street
child. He pointed out that the Appellant is 17 and although he  might  be  a
minor he could not properly be termed a child. Even if  the  Judge  had  the
United States State Department report before him it  was  difficult  to  say
that it would have made a difference. On the basis of the evidence  and  the
Appellant's account the Judge's findings at [28] were perfectly  justifiable
and there was no error of law.

8.    In reply, Ms Heller relied upon E9 of the  Respondent's  bundle  which
raises the issue of particular social  group  as  a  minor;  also  E14,  the
Operational Guidance Note which refers  to  minors  claiming  in  their  own
right; E17 which quotes the  United  States  State  Department  report  with
regard to child abuse and sexual exploitation of children;  E20  in  respect
of the absence of family support; E22 as to the  risk  of  orphans  becoming
destitute upon return. She submitted that there was evidence  to  show  that
there were risks to a destitute child and that the Judge at [28]  failed  to
distinguish the United States State Department report in any way. Ms  Heller
accepted the Appellant does not fall squarely into  risk  categories  in  GJ
[2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

Error of law

9.    It would appear that permission to appeal was granted  by  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Astle simply on the issue of  whether  or  not  there  was  a
valid appeal, rather than in respect of either or both  of  the  grounds  of
appeal. In respect of  Ground  1,  this  was  in  issue  before  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge del Fabbro as it was expressly raised at [5] of the  skeleton
argument which provides: "The Appellant as eye witness  to  a  human  rights
crime committed by a member of  the  Sri  Lankan  military  against  a  camp
inmate." This would appear to be based on the Appellant's  response  in  his
asylum interview at Q.134 when asked if there was anything  else  he  feared
when he responded: "They will shoot me because I know a person  they  killed
because they refused to join the army." However, it  does  not  appear  that
his case  was  put  on  this  basis  in  terms  of  the  oral  evidence  and
submissions before the First Tier Tribunal, which focused  on  the  risk  to
him because he left the camp without leave on payment of a  bribe  and  then
left the country without documentation. Therefore, whilst  it  is  the  case
that the First Tier Tribunal Judge did not engage with the issue of risk  as
an eye witness to a human rights crime I do not consider that this an  error
of law given that this aspect of the case does not appear to  have  featured
at all at the hearing  and  no  evidence  was  called  nor  further  details
provided as to when this incident took place; whether there were  any  other
witnesses and whether there were repercussions at the time.  Moreover,  even
if I am wrong about this and it does amount to an error of law it is  not  a
material error as it would not have placed the Appellant in a risk  category
covered by the most recent country guidance in GJ [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC)
given that [356](7)(c) relates  specifically  to  those  who  gave  evidence
before the  Lessons  Learned  and  Reconciliation  Commission  (LLRC)  whose
report was submitted to the GOSL at the end of 2011. I  have  also  in  this
respect taken into account the judgment of  Lord  Justice  Maurice  Kaye  at
[38] on appeal to the Court of Appeal [MP (Sri Lanka) & Anor v Secretary  of
State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 829].

10.   However, I do find that the First Tier Tribunal Judge made a  material
error of law for the reasons set out in Ground 2 of the grounds  of  appeal.
The Judge at [28] held: "I do not find that on the objective  evidence  that
the situation in Sri Lanka is  such  that  penury,  abuse  and  exploitation
would be a likely outcome for a young person returning there as  a  17  year
old." Ms Heller drew my attention to  the  background  evidence  before  the
Judge that supported her contention that the Appellant would be at  risk  on
return of destitution and  possible  abuse  and  sexual  exploitation  as  a
minor. This is not reflected in the Judge's finding at [28] and  no  reasons
were provided as to why the Judge  reached  that  conclusion.  Consequently,
the Judge failed to  give  proper  consideration  to  the  Appellant's  best
interests as part of the assessment of his asylum claim cf.  AA  (unattended
children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC) at [32] and  [33].  I  gave
my decision in this respect at the hearing.

Submissions

11.   I then proceeded to re-make the decision. The parties were content  to
proceed on the  basis  of  submissions  only.  Ms  Heller  relied  upon  the
submissions she had already  made  in  respect  of  the  error  of  law  and
evidence relied on, particularly the United States State  Department  report
of 2013 and surmised that the 2014 report will have the  same  content.  She
submitted that the Appellant would be returned to Sri Lanka,  a  country  he
knows but he would be returned to Colombo, an area he does not know,  as  he
is originally from Vanni, which is part of the LTTE heartland. His  evidence
is that he lost touch with his family and although he  agreed  to  the  Home
Office undertaking tracing enquiries, nothing has come of this.  He  has  no
experience of the employment situation in Sri Lanka and he will be  returned
with nowhere to live and crucially no family support. She submitted that  in
Sri Lankan families the males live with the family even after the age of  18
and it could not possibly be said to be in his best interests for him to  be
returned in the circumstances she outlined.

12.   On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Avery submitted that the evidence  the
Appellant would be at risk is extremely limited to a  generic  paragraph  in
the United States State Department report. He submitted that that had to  be
balanced against the Appellant's actual age and that in less  than  a  month
he would be 18 and the closer the Appellant  gets  to  18,  the  less  there
would be of a risk of the type of treatment set out  in  the  United  States
State Department report which was, in any event, very general. He  submitted
that the Appellant has been in the United Kingdom  and  has  learned  skills
that would avail him in the job market in Sri Lanka. If he wanted  he  could
seek assistance to return from the voluntary return  scheme.  The  Appellant
would not be destitute and would get assistance, although he was  unable  to
assist as to how much money or what assistance the Appellant  would  receive
from VARP or RA. He submitted that the burden  was  upon  the  Appellant  to
show he would be at risk on return. The Judge did not make a finding  as  to
alleged loss of contact with his family but proceeded on the basis that  the
Appellant does not have a family. He submitted that the  Appellant  had  not
made out his case. Ms Heller did not exercise her right to reply.

Decision

13.   The Appellant's case before me was  confined  to  whether  or  not  he
would be at risk of persecution on return to Sri Lanka  as  a  member  of  a
particular social group viz a (Tamil) minor,  without  family  support.  The
Appellant's case is that he is effectively  an  orphan,  his  father  having
been drowned and at the same time, aged 10, the Appellant  became  separated
from his mother and sister. The First Tier Tribunal Judge at [28]  proceeded
on the basis that the Appellant was without family  support  thus  accepting
his evidence on this point. Therefore, the  issue  that  I  am  required  to
resolve is the likely treatment the Appellant would experience on return  to
Sri Lanka and whether this would amount to persecution.

14.   The evidence before me consisted of bundle  from  the  Respondent  and
the  Appellant.  Ms  Heller  drew  my  attention  to   extracts   from   the
Respondent's bundle.  E14-E15  contain  an  extract  from  the  Respondent's
Operational Guidance Note,  14  July  2013  at  [4]  in  respect  of  minors
claiming asylum in their own right  and  provides  at  4.2.  that  there  is
"insufficient  information  to  be  satisfied  that   there   are   adequate
alternative reception, support and care arrangements  in  place  for  minors
with no family in  Sri  Lanka.  Those  who  cannot  be  returned  should  be
considered for leave as unaccompanied asylum seeking children." I find  that
the Respondent has complied with her duty in this  respect  as  she  granted
the Appellant discretionary leave to remain until  he  was  17  and  a  half
years of age, in accordance with her  policy.  E17-E18  contain  an  extract
from the United States State  Department  country  report  on  human  rights
practices for 2013 which make reference to child abuse, sexual  exploitation
of children and displaced children. The report  provides  inter  alia  that:
"NGOs continued to  attribute  exploitation  of  children  to  the  lack  of
enforcement of child abuse laws rather than  inadequate  legislation.  There
are no specific examples provided in respect of the sexual  exploitation  of
displaced  children.  That  sub-section   provides:   "Displaced   Children:
Children in IDP welfare centers and relocation sites  were  exposed  to  the
same difficult conditions as adult IDPs and returnees in these  areas.  Many
school facilities were in poor condition and lacked basic supplies.  Medical
care in these areas was limited, but improvements continued  throughout  the
year." The United States State Department country  report  on  human  rights
practices for 2014  is  in  identical  terms.  Unfortunately,  none  of  the
reports in either bundle  address  the  likely  situation  for  a  displaced
minor.

15.   I have also considered the available  jurisprudence,  particularly  GJ
[2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) but similarly there is a paucity of evidence  as  to
the situation for a displaced Tamil minor on return to  Sri  Lanka  as  that
was not the focus of  the  linked  cases.  The  most  recent  reported  case
involving a minor is that of ST (Child  asylum  seekers)  Sri  Lanka  [2013]
UKUT 00292(IAC) where the Upper Tribunal found that the  Appellant  in  that
case would not be at risk of persecution [76]  in  part  because  he  had  a
grandmother in the North of the country but also because:  "The  authorities
in Sri Lanka do not appear to be indifferent or  unwilling  to  take  action
against  those  who  abuse  children  whether   as   foreign   tourists   or
disreputable care home guardians. The problem may be a significant  one  but
raids, arrests and prosecutions may follow. There seem to  be  a  number  of
institutions to receive unprotected children in the  event  that  family  or
foster care was not feasible, some may be of a poor  standard  but  not  all
are, and the homes and  centres  run  by  international  organisations  seem
alert  to  the  challenges  facing  children  and  committed  to  make  some
difference" [73[b].

16.   In  the  absence  of  evidence  to  support  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution simply on the basis that he is a minor without  family  support,
I find that the Appellant has failed to demonstrate that  there  is  a  real
risk or reasonable degree of likelihood that he would face  persecution  for
this reason on return to Sri Lanka. It was not  argued  that  the  Appellant
was entitled to humanitarian protection  and  I  find  that  he  is  not  so
entitled on the basis of the evidence before me.

17.   I have in reaching my decision taken account of the fact  that  it  is
necessary to consider the Appellant's best interests and in so doing I  note
that this is a primary consideration cf. ZH (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4  per
Baroness Hale.

    However, the appeal before me was brought under section  83(2)  of  the
Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act 2002. In  ST  (Child  asylum  seekers)
Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 00292(IAC), Mr Justice Blake at [23]  -  [25]  drew  a
distinction between the welfare of a child in a section 82(1)  appeal  where
the decision is to remove a child out of the jurisdiction and a  section  83
appeal, which is confined to consideration of refugee or  equivalent  status
and there is no duty to  consider  whether  any  reception  arrangements  on
return are sufficiently well  established  to  be  in  accordance  with  the
child's best interests. Whilst the statutory appeals regime has  changed  in
light of the Immigration Act 2014 since the decision in ST, I consider  that
this issue will need to be re-visited by the Respondent  at  such  time  she
seeks to make a decision to remove  the  Appellant,  bearing  in  mind  Lord
Toulson's judgment in TN, MA & AA (Afghanistan) v  Secretary  of  State  for
the Home Department) [2015] UKSC 40 at 73 that: "There  would  be  force  in
the argument that it should not make a difference whether the appellant  has
by then turned 18, since that would  not  remove  an  obligation  which  had
arisen under the Reception Directive and the effects of which were  intended
to last beyond their minority (as the OCC has submitted)."

18.   For the reasons set out at [14]-[16] above the appeal is dismissed.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

20 October 2015
