
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11061/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                   |Determination Sent.        |
|On 18 June 2014                                 |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                           mr lavalojan ramalingam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Rai, Counsel instructed by TTS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the respondent  now  becomes  the  appellant.
    However, for the sake of consistency and the avoidance of confusion,  I
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. On 22nd April  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Kamara  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal  against  the  determination  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal JS Law who allowed the appeal  of  the
    appellant, a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka,  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent taken on 28 November 2013 to refuse asylum, humanitarian and
    human rights protection to the appellant.  In granting permission Judge
    Kamara noted that the grounds of application argued that the Judge  had
    failed to make clear findings on a matter in dispute namely whether  or
    not the  Appellant  was  involved  in  students  union  activities  and
    demonstrations.  Further the Judge had failed to  provide  any  reasons
    for finding the Appellant's account to be credible and  consistent  and
    that his documentation was authentic.

 3. Although Judge Kamara found the determination to be  well  reasoned  it
    was considered arguable that the Judge had erred in law in  failing  to
    make adequate findings on the adverse credibility  issues  relating  to
    the Appellant's student activities which had been raised in  paragraphs
    18 and 19 of the  refusal  letter.   All  grounds  were  stated  to  be
    arguable.

 4. At the hearing before me I heard submissions relating  to  the  alleged
    error on a point of law and then reserved my decision which I now give.

 5. Mr Harrison relied upon  the  grounds  emphasising  that  reliance  was
    placed upon MK (Duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC)
    requiring that, if a Tribunal were to find oral  evidence  implausible,
    incredible or unreliable or a document to be worth  no  weight  it  was
    necessary to say so in the determination and for such  findings  to  be
    supported by reasons.  Mere statement would be unlikely to satisfy  the
    requirement to give reasons.

 6. He drew attention to paragraph 29 of the  determination  in  which  the
    Judge makes his  main  findings  on  credibility  contending  that  the
    findings were  bare  statements  that  the  appellant's  accounts  were
    credible and consistent  and  the  documentation  legitimate.  However,
    inadequate or no reasons were given for those conclusions.

 7. Mr Rai submitted that the determination is  adequately  reasoned.   The
    Judge  evidently  inspected  original  documents  and  the  appellant's
    evidence as a whole was referred to in detail in paragraphs  10  to  18
    inclusive of the determination before conclusions were reached.  Mr Rai
    also argued that paragraph 7 of the refusal letter made clear that  the
    main issue was the appellant's non-compliance with bail conditions  and
    so a  failure  to  reach  conclusions  about  the  appellant's  student
    activities was not material.

 8. During further submissions Mr Rai drew my attention to the  appellant's
    responses in interview about his student activities.  In  particular  I
    was referred to the appellant's response to question 248 on page 40  of
    the record of asylum interview in which the appellant had said that the
    authorities would want to kill him because he had jumped bail  and  had
    not followed their rules. Whilst searching for  this  reference  during
    submissions I discovered that the copies of the record of interview  on
    the Tribunal file were incomplete.  Not only was page 40 missing but  I
    also discovered that page 14 of the record was also  missing  and  that
    this page contained the record of relevant questions and answers  about
    the   appellant's   student   activities   and   his   attendance    at
    demonstrations. I was then provided with copies of  the  missing  pages
    and noted that, the appellant was asked (question 95)  if  he  had  any
    problems from the authorities following  the  demonstrations  and  said
    that he did not.  No complete copy of the record of interview  appeared
    to have been available to the judge who had  evidently  overlooked  the
    omissions of important information when  hearing  and  determining  the
    appeal.

 9. Mr Rai maintained that the main issue relating to risk  on  return  was
    the appellant's failure to follow the bail conditions imposed upon him.
     In this respect paragraph 36 of the refusal  letter  showed  that  the
    respondent agreed that the appellant's claims were  broadly  consistent
    with objective information even if it was concluded  that  he  was  not
    credible.  Whilst the respondent had not given the benefit of the doubt
    to the appellant the Judge was entitled to do so.

10. In conclusion Mr Harrison also drew attention to an error in paragraphs
    1 and 10 of the determination in which the Judge gave conflicting dates
    for the appellant's departure from Sri Lanka.   Mr  Rai  concluded  his
    submissions by indicating that if an error on a point of law were to be
    found then it would be appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal for fresh findings  on  all  issues.   Mr  Harrison
    agreed with that suggestion.   Mr  Rai,  nevertheless,  maintained  his
    argument that the determination should stand. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

11. The determination by this experienced Judge is  well  written  but  the
    main issue is whether the Judge  erred  by  failing  to  give  adequate
    reasons for his conclusion that the appellant's claims are credible. It
    is also specifically argued that.  in  reaching  his  conclusions,  the
    Judge did not show that he had given consideration to  the  credibility
    of the appellant's claim to have been involved in LTTE activity  whilst
    a student and to have taken part in  student  demonstrations  when  the
    respondent had specifically rejected that claim.  For the reasons which
    follow I am satisfied that the determination does show material  errors
    in those two areas such that it should be re-made.

12. It was revealed during submissions before me that  the  Judge  did  not
    have before him a complete record of  interview  of  the  appellant  as
    pages 14 and 40 of that  record  are  missing  from  the  copy  on  the
    Tribunal file.  Whilst such a matter  might  not  be  material  if  the
    records of interview at each point contained questions and responses of
    no significance, that is not the position here.  Unfortunately, page 14
    contains material information about the claimed demonstrations and  the
    reasons for them and on page 40 the  appellant's  reasons  for  fearing
    harm on return. The determination is unsafe on this account.

13. As to the specific matters raised in the grounds I conclude that  these
    have been made out, in any event.  It is not possible to say  that  the
    main credibility findings in paragraph  29  of  the  determination  are
    adequately reasoned.  Whilst the Judge confirms that he  was  aware  of
    the submissions of the respondent with regard to the overall effect  of
    the evidence lodged by the appellant, he  makes  no  reference  to  the
    significant areas of contention commented upon in  the  refusal  letter
    such as inconsistencies in the appellant's  evidence  by  reference  to
    background material and evidential defects in the  documents  produced.
    There is no reference at all to the credibility  or  otherwise  of  the
    appellant's claims to have been involved  in  LTTE  activity  whilst  a
    student which featured specifically in the refusal letter at  paragraph
    17 to 19 inclusive.

14. Whilst the focus of risk on  return  was  the  appellant's  failure  to
    comply with the claimed bail conditions imposed upon him,  his  earlier
    involvement in LTTE activities  would  certainly  be  relevant  to  the
    authorities' view of him if questioned on return.  As the Judge briefly
    concludes in paragraph 32 of the determination, the appellant's profile
    on the basis set out in the country guidance in GJ  and  others  (Post-
    civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  would  be
    relevant.  But in making favourable conclusions the Judge does not make
    it clear what his basis for doing so was.  In particular the Judge does
    not explain how he was satisfied that the  appellant  would  have  been
    identified as a Tamil activist in the Diaspora and  therefore  at  real
    risk of ill-treatment by the authorities even if he had been  detained,
    ill-treated but then released on bail.

15. The inadequacy of  reasoning  for  the  Judge's  conclusions  therefore
    amounts to an error on a point of law of such  that  the  determination
    should be remade.

16. As credibility is at the heart of this appeal it will be necessary  for
    the matter to be heard afresh.  As  both  representatives  agreed,  the
    appropriate course is therefore for the appeal to be sent back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for hearing.

DIRECTIONS

17. This appeal will be heard afresh  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent.

18. The appeal should not be heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  JS
    Law.

19. The time estimate will be 3 hours.

20.  A  Tamil  (Sri   Lankan)   interpreter   will   be   required   unless
    representatives indicate to the contrary at least  5  days  before  the
    hearing.

21. It is assumed  that  representatives  will  rely  upon  the  bundle  of
    documents already submitted for the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

22.  In  the  event  that  further  evidence  is  to  be  produced  then  a
    consolidated bundle of all documents to be referred to should be  filed
    and served at least five days before the hearing date.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt




