
[pic]
IAC-AH-sar-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/11440/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24th November 2015                |On 18th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                               GUL BAHAR BEGUM
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Timson of Counsel instructed by SEB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Heynes of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 12th May 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Bangladesh born 12th February 1962
    who arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor on 8th  September  2012,
    and claimed asylum on 19th October 2012.  The Appellant had arrived  in
    the UK with two of her children, her daughter born 10th April 1997, and
    her son born 7th September 2003, and the children were accepted  to  be
    the Appellant's dependants when her claim was considered.

 3. The application was refused on 8th December 2014.  The  Respondent  did
    not accept  that  the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  if  returned  to
    Bangladesh, and therefore did not accept that she  was  entitled  to  a
    grant of asylum or humanitarian protection, and  it  was  not  accepted
    that there would be a breach of any of her human rights if she returned
    to Bangladesh.

 4. The appeal was heard by the FtT on 28th April 2015.  The FtT found that
    the Appellant had fabricated her account.  The FtT heard evidence  from
    the Appellant, her daughter, who by the time of the FtT hearing was  18
    years of age, and  the  Appellant's  sister.   The  FtT  described  the
    Appellant and both witnesses as unreliable  and  untruthful.   The  FtT
    found that the Appellant and her  daughter  came  to  the  UK,  not  as
    genuine visitors, "but in the knowledge that they intended to  seek  to
    remain on the basis of a fabricated asylum claim".  The FtT found  that
    the Appellant was not at risk prior to coming to  the  United  Kingdom,
    and that she would not be at risk on return.  The FtT  found  that  the
    Appellant's husband still lived in the family  home.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed on all grounds.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    I set out below the grant of permission by Judge Grant-Hutchison, which
    summarises the application;
         "2.  It is submitted that the judge erred in law (a) by failing  to
             find facts (i) the judge failed to find that Mr Shakur (who is
             accused of murdering the Appellant's sister and two  children)
             was arrested after the Appellant's arrival in the UK; (ii) the
             threat to the Appellant was not only from Mr Shakur  but  from
             his family members who  are  powerful  members  of  the  Awami
             League  and  (b)  by  failing  to  consider  the   Appellant's
             children's best interests.
         3.   In terms of part (a) it is immaterial where Mr Shakur was when
             the Appellant came to the UK as he is presently  detained  and
             awaiting extradition to the UK.  The judge has given  adequate
             reasons why he does not accept that Mr Shakur's relatives have
             any influence.  However in terms of part (b)  it  is  arguable
             that the judge has misdirected himself by not considering  the
             best interests of the Appellant's two children who came to the
             United Kingdom with her.  On this basis only I would  grant  a
             limited permission to appeal".

 6. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  contending,  in  summary,  that  the  FtT  had  directed   itself
    appropriately.  It was noted that the Appellant's two children were  18
    and 11 at the date of hearing and both had spent the great majority  of
    their lives in Bangladesh, and would be returned with their mother, and
    therefore there would be no breach of family life.   It  was  therefore
    contended that any error  was  immaterial,  and  no  Tribunal  properly
    directing itself would have  found  that  the  best  interests  of  the
    children were not served by returning to  Bangladesh  as  part  of  the
    family unit.  Even if the best interests of the children were to remain
    in the UK, which the Respondent did not  accept,  given  the  facts  as
    found the needs of immigration control would inevitably  outweigh  this
    consideration.

 7. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FtT  decision
    should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

 8. Mr Timson relied upon the grounds contained within the application  for
    permission to appeal, insofar as they related to the best interests  of
    a child.  Mr Timson accepted that only the Appellant's son was a  child
    when the FtT heard the appeal.

 9. Mr Timson submitted that the FtT had not considered the best  interests
    of the Appellant's son, and therefore the decision should be set  aside
    and remitted to the FtT for this issue to  be  considered.   Mr  Timson
    submitted  that  in  addition,  there  had  been  no  consideration  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) as the FtT had failed to  consider  whether  there
    would be very significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration into
    Bangladesh if she had to return with a child.

The Respondent's Submissions

10. Miss Johnstone relied upon the rule 24  response,  and  submitted  that
    paragraph 276ADE had not been relied  upon  in  the  skeleton  argument
    presented to the FtT.  I  was  asked  to  note  the  lack  of  evidence
    presented to the FtT, in relation to the child's best  interests.   The
    evidence appeared to be that the child attended school, but  there  was
    nothing to prevent him from attending school in Bangladesh.

The Appellant's Response

11. Mr Timson argued that paragraph 276ADE was before the  FtT  and  should
    have been considered.  Mr Timson accepted that the only evidence before
    the FtT in relation to the child, was that he attended school.

My Conclusions and Reasons

12. The Grounds of Appeal to the FtT  are  unnecessarily  long,  comprising
    nineteen pages,  and  supplemented  by  eighteen  pages  of  additional
    grounds.  However it is clear that the issue of the best  interests  of
    the child was raised in those grounds, and therefore should  have  been
    considered by the FtT.  The Respondent in giving  reasons  for  refusal
    did consider the best interests of the Appellant's son at  page  15  of
    the decision, contending that it would be  in  his  best  interests  to
    return with the Appellant to Bangladesh where family life as a complete
    family unit could be enjoyed.  The failure of the FtT to  consider  the
    best interests of the child is an error of law.  The issue that I  have
    to decide is whether it is material.  Mr Timson has argued that it  is,
    and Miss Johnstone that it is not.

13. It was accepted by Mr Timson that it was only the Appellant's  son  who
    was a child when the FtT heard the appeal, as by then  the  Appellant's
    daughter was an adult.  The evidence before the FtT was that the  child
    arrived in the UK with his mother and elder  sister  on  8th  September
    2012.  He had been in the UK for  approximately  two  years  and  seven
    months by the date of the FtT hearing.  He had therefore lived  by  far
    the majority of his life in Bangladesh.

14. I have carefully considered what evidence was raised before the FtT  in
    relation to  the  Appellant's  son  and  his  best  interests.   It  is
    contended in the Grounds of Appeal and skeleton argument that his  best
    interests would be served by remaining in the UK with his mother.

15. The reasons given for that contention were that the Appellant would  be
    at risk if returned to Bangladesh, and that he now attended  school  in
    the UK.

16. It was not suggested that there were any  relevant  medical  issues  in
    relation to the child.  It was not suggested that the child would  have
    any language or cultural difficulties if returned  to  Bangladesh,  the
    country of which he was a citizen.

17. The FtT dealt with the issue of risk, finding  unequivocally  that  the
    asylum claim had been fabricated, the Appellant and her  two  witnesses
    had been untruthful, and that there would be no risk if the family were
    returned to Bangladesh.

18. It was said that the Appellant's son attended school,  but  it  appears
    that no relevant  evidence  was  submitted  from  the  school,  and  no
    independent evidence, to indicate that leaving school and returning  to
    Bangladesh would have any adverse effect upon the Appellant's son.   It
    was suggested in paragraph 22 of  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to
    appeal, that the Respondent should have prepared a report as to whether
    or not removing the Appellant from the UK would  affect  her  children.
    It is not for the Respondent to prepare such a report.  The  Respondent
    has a duty to consider the best interests of a child, and did  so.   If
    such a report was to be prepared, then it should have been prepared  on
    behalf of the Appellant.

19. I conclude that this is one of a minority of cases, where the error  in
    not considering the best interests of a child is not material.  That is
    because, taking into account the evidence that  was  presented  to  the
    FtT, the FtT could only have come to one conclusion in relation to  the
    best interests of the Appellant's son.  That conclusion would  have  to
    have been that it was in his best interests  to  return  to  Bangladesh
    with his mother.

20. As I find no material error of law, the decision of the FtT must stand.
     Permission to appeal was not applied for or  granted  in  relation  to
    paragraph 276 ADE (vi).

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.
The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity


No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity to the Upper Tribunal, and I see no  need  to  make
an anonymity order.


Signed   Date 1st December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date 1st December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

