
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11884/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 September 2016                 |On 15 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                               marie umurungi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, instructed by Richmond Chambers LLP
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Marie Umurungi, was born on 20 December 1983  and  is  a
    citizen of Rwanda.  The appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student in 2010.  She claimed asylum in  March  2015.   By  a  decision
    dated  20  August  2015,  the  respondent   refused   the   appellant's
    application for asylum.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Turlock) which, in a decision  promulgated  on  17  May
    2016,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal concerns  the  appellant's  sur  place
    activities on behalf of the Rwanda  National  Congress  (RNC)  and  the
    possible risk to which this may expose the  appellant  upon  return  to
    Rwanda.

 3. Judge Turlock found that the  appellant  had  not  been  mistreated  in
    Rwanda as she had claimed.   At  [80],  the  judge  did  not  find  the
    appellant "to be a credible witness" and he did not accept any part  of
    her evidence.  The judge found that she was "not involved with the  RNC
    in Rwanda as claimed nor that she was arrested as  a  result.   I  find
    that she is not at risk on return as a result of any activity which  is
    undertaken in Rwanda."  The judge went on to note  that  the  appellant
    produced a membership card and photographs of demonstrations  which  he
    claimed to have taken place in the United Kingdom.  He  heard  evidence
    from Bonifaace Twahira.  He found Mr Twahira to be "a credible  witness
    on whose evidence  I  could  rely."  [84].   In  Mr  Twahira's  written
    evidence (which the judge quotes at [83]) the appellant  was  described
    as

         a very vocal member who tried to highlight the plight  of  Rwandans
         both at home and abroad. ... Currently [the appellant] is  the  RNC
         youth coordinator for the north and as a hardworking person I  have
         no doubt in my position to offer any support now and at any time to
         come.

    At [88] the judge accepted that the appellant had been involved  "at  a
    low level"  with  the  RNC  in  the  UK.   Although  she  had  attended
    demonstrations "she does not appear in any of  the  photographs."   The
    judge cited Danian [2002] IMM AR 96 and also YB (Eritrea)  [2008]  EWCA
    Civ 360.  At [92] the judge went on to state that  he  found  that  the
    appellant "has taken part in a few demonstrations in the UK in relation
    to Rwanda."  He did record, however,  in  the  same  paragraph  and  by
    reference to the photograph evidence that "[the appellant] ...  is  not
    acting as a leader, mobiliser or organiser but simply a member  of  the
    crowd."  The appellant  asserts  that,  having  accepted  Mr  Twahira's
    evidence, the judge  had  not  explained  why  he  did  not  accept  Mr
    Twahira's description of the appellant both as a youth coordinator  and
    at the demonstrations as "very active".  That evidence, it is asserted,
    is in contrast to the judge's findings at [92] that the  appellant  was
    not shown as "acting as a leader, mobiliser or organiser but simply  as
    a member of the crowd."  Indeed, the fact that she was a "member of the
    crowd" would indicate that the judge had reversed his  earlier  finding
    that she could not be seen on any of the photographs.

 4. I do not find that the ground has merit.  Inconsistencies may appear to
    exist in the judge's decision when one descends to a minute examination
    of the text but what is important is to read the decision as  a  whole.
    When one does so, it is apparent that the judge did not  consider  that
    the photographs provided any evidence that the appellant  was  actively
    involved as a leader, mobiliser or organiser at any demonstration.  She
    might have been in the crowd but the judge could not  identify  her  at
    all in the photographs and, most importantly, he was satisfied that she
    had not taken any active role.

 5. The appellant also asserts that the judge has failed properly to make a
    finding as to the role which he plays in the RNC as coordinator for the
    north.  I agree that the focus of the judge's decision  at  [91-92]  is
    very much upon demonstrations (he  quotes  from  BA  (Demonstrators  in
    Britain - risk on return) (Iran) CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) at length) and
    it is true that [92] deals primarily with  demonstrations  rather  than
    any  wider,  bureaucratic  role  played  by  the   appellant   in   the
    organisation.  However, the judge's decision must be placed in context.
     The judge properly observes that "there is no evidence to suggest that
    the regime in Rwanda aims to identify demonstrators although  there  is
    some evidence that it does target high-profile individuals outside  the
    country."  It absolutely clear from the judge's findings  that  he  did
    not find the appellant to be a "high-profile individual".  Further, the
    judge was entitled to find, on the basis of the  evidence  before  him,
    that there was "no evidence to  suggest  that  the  regime...  aims  to
    identify demonstrators."   Given  that  the  judge  himself  could  not
    identify the appellant on the  photographs  because  her  role  was  so
    insignificant, it cannot be reasonably likely that she would be exposed
    to risk should the Rwandan regime examine  the  same  photographs.   As
    regards the appellant's  wider  role  as  a  youth  coordinator,  there
    appears to have been no evidence before the judge which might  indicate
    that such a role within the RNC in the United  Kingdom  was  likely  to
    expose an individual to risk on return.  The judge's finding, following
    a careful assessment of all the evidence, at [93] that  "the  appellant
    would not be at risk on return with respect to the activities  she  has
    undertaken in the UK" is plainly sufficiently  comprehensive  to  cover
    both her involvement at demonstrations and her ongoing role as a  youth
    coordinator.

 6. In conclusion, this is a well-structured and  argued  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The  judge  has  reached  an  outcome  which  was
    clearly available to him on the evidence and he has done so  by  making
    clear and rational findings based upon that evidence.  I  do  not  find
    that the judge has erred in law for the reasons given in the grounds of
    appeal or at all.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 10 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 10 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

