
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11412/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 September 2015                  |On 7 March 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                     mj
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                    Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, Counsel instructed by Nag & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born  on  19  August  1992.  He
    appealed against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  28
    November 2014 to remove him from the UK as an illegal entrant following
    a refusal to grant him asylum, humanitarian protection  and  protection
    under the European Convention.

 2. The Appellant left Sri Lanka on 26 July 2010 and entered the UK on  the
    same day with entry clearance conferring leave to enter as  a  student.
    The Appellant's history in Sri Lanka was that whilst he was  a  student
    he became friendly with two Tamil-speaking Hindu boys from Jaffna named
    Rathees and Thayparan, who were lodging in a room above a grocery shop.
    When they returned  to  Jaffna  in  December  2008  they  stored  their
    belongings at the Appellant's  house.  In  January  2009,  Rathees  and
    Thayparan  returned  to  resit  an  examination  and  stayed  with  the
    Appellant before returning to Jaffna. In June 2009,  they  returned  to
    start their A-levels and moved back to their former lodgings above  the
    grocery shop. They left a few of their possessions with  the  Appellant
    and took the rest.

3.    On 18 November 2009,  the  Appellant  was  present  with  Rathees  and
    Thayparan when  the  police  raided  their  lodgings.  All  three  were
    arrested.  Police  searched  the  Appellant's  house  and  found   bags
    belonging to Rathees and Thayparan and material relating to  the  LTTE.
    The police suspected that the Appellant was a member of the  LTTE.  The
    Appellant was not aware what  these  documents  were  and  he  was  not
    questioned about them. The police did inform him that  they  had  found
    photographs of the Pologolla Dam in which the Appellant  was  featured.
    The Appellant was interrogated, tortured and sexually abused by  police
    officers. He was held in detention for around 80-85 days  initially  at
    Kandy Police Station and then  on  remand  in  Bogampara  prison.   The
    Appellant's father instructed a lawyer and he was released on  bail  30
    April 2010 on the condition that he reported  weekly  to  Kandy  police
    station. His father was also required to pay a security of Rs  500,000.
    The Appellant continued to report to the police station until  18  July
    2010. He left Sri Lanka on 26 July 2010 on  a  student  visa  with  the
    assistance of an agent and travelled to the UK. On 3  August  2010  the
    Appellant's father was arrested by order of the court as the  Appellant
    had breached his reporting  conditions  and  had  failed  to  answer  a
    summons. The Appellant's father was released on 11 November 2010.

4.    Since  being  in  the  UK  the  Appellant  found  that  he  could  not
    concentrate on his studies which he ceased in 2012. In the  same  year,
    he formed a relationship with an  EEA  national  and  they  married  in
    January 2013 but that marriage was not  sustainable.  Fearing  that  he
    would be returned to Sri  Lanka  and  being  aware  of  the  unexecuted
    warrant, the Appellant applied for asylum on 6 November 2013.

5.    On 29 April 2013  the  authorities  ordered  the  progression  of  the
    Appellant's case and a further summons was  served.  As  the  Appellant
    failed to appear, the court ordered the re-arrest of  his  father.  The
    father was arrested on 3 May 2013 and released due to ill health on  10
    December 2013.

6.    The Appellant's appeal was  heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Amin on 24 March 2015 and he dismissed that appeal on 8 April  2015  on
    all grounds. The judge  noted  inconsistencies  in  the  account  which
    undermined the Appellant's credibility [69]. The judge did not find  it
    credible that the Appellant would be detained and tortured and yet  not
    be questioned about the documents found by the police  [78  &  79].  He
    thus  concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  of  no  interest   to   the
    authorities. The judge was not satisfied  the  Appellant  was  tortured
    because his description of his injuries did not reflect the severity of
    the beatings described and his assertion  that  he  had  been  sexually
    abused was vague [80]. He  found  the  Appellant  had  exaggerated  the
    length of his detention and  his  evidence  was  at  variance  and  not
    supported by the documentary evidence [82 & 83].

7.    Nevertheless, the judge accepted the Appellant had been  detained  but
    not for the  period  claimed  [83].  The  judge  further  accepted  the
    documents produced by the Appellant had not been  forged  and  accepted
    the  existence  of  an  arrest  warrant.  The  judge  found  that   the
    authorities  followed  due  process  in  detaining  the  Appellant  and
    subsequently releasing him on bail with a surety [85 & 86].  The  judge
    referred to the head note in GJ (Sri Lanka) [2013] UKUT 00319 and found
    that the  Appellant's  account  of  past  and  future  persecution  was
    inconsistent with that country guidance. However, the judge found  that
    that guidance did not apply to an Appellant who had  been  released  on
    bail after being subjected to the due process of law, which was further
    applied to his father [88, 89, 90 & 91]. The judge concluded  that  the
    authorities had a very low interest in the Appellant as he  obtained  a
    new passport in 2010 and was able to leave, and concluded that he would
    not be perceived to be a threat to the integrity  of  Sri  Lanka  as  a
    single state because he was not perceived to have a significant role in
    relation to post conflict Tamil separatism. The judge noted no evidence
    had been produced to show that the Appellant's name was on a stop list.
    The judge acknowledged that there was  an  arrest  warrant  outstanding
    against the Appellant as a consequence of his failure to abide by  bail
    conditions, and that, the Appellant was likely to face  a  continuation
    of the prosecution that had been initiated against  him.  Nevertheless,
    he concluded that the Appellant  would  be  prosecuted  under  the  due
    process of the law and not persecuted [98 & 99]. Accordingly, the judge
    dismissed the appeal.

8.    An application for permission to appeal was made on the  grounds  that
    the judge  erred  in  requiring  corroboration  and  failed  to  follow
    applicable country guidance, namely,  GJ  (supra).  On  30  April  2015
    permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler on
    all grounds.

Conclusions

9.    At the hearing, on behalf of the Appellant, Mr Spurling relied on  his
    grounds  of  appeal  and  elaborated  upon  them.  On  behalf  of   the
    Respondent, whilst  she  opposed  the  appeal  in  a  written  Rule  24
    response, at the hearing Mr Tufan, whilst not  formally  conceding  the
    appeal, adopted a more pragmatic  approach.  He  acknowledged  that  no
    challenge had been laid by the Respondent against the judge's  findings
    that accepted the Appellant had been detained, bailed and  was  subject
    to an outstanding arrest warrant as  was  supported  by  documents  not
    found to be forged.  These  accepted  facts  he  acknowledged  put  the
    Respondent in some  difficulties  particularly  in  light  of  her  own
    current published country guidance. Mr Tufan helpfully produced a  copy
    of that guidance - (Country Information and Guidance Sri Lanka :  Tamil
    Separatism : 28 August 2014) - which states, among other  things,  that
    :"A person who is known to the authorities, such as having  their  name
    on a 'stop' list or having a  court  order  or  an  outstanding  arrest
    warrant against him them would be considered at risk  and  a  grant  of
    asylum will normally be appropriate."

10.   Having considered the submissions of the representatives, I  announced
    at the hearing that I was satisfied that there was an error of  law  in
    the decision of Judge Amin on the basis that, whilst he was aware  that
    corroboration was not a requirement in asylum law, he failed  to  apply
    that principle to his consideration of  whether  the  Appellant's  name
    would appear on a "stop list". So much is clear I find  at  [99]  where
    the judge noted : "The Appellant claimed that his name is on  the  stop
    list. However, no evidence has been produced to show this is the case."
    The judge does not state what evidence would be  readily  available  to
    the Appellant in order to prove this claim  and as the  Upper  Tribunal
    pointed out in GJ (at 114, 125 & 130) the list is part of a Sri  Lankan
    State Intelligence database, to which  access  is  controlled.  In  the
    circumstances, the Appellant is likely  to  have  faced  some  inherent
    difficulties in proving that fact. I am satisfied the  error  requiring
    corroboration was material as the issue of whether the Appellant's name
    appears on such a list is a significant factor in assessing if he is at
    risk at the point of return.

11.    I  am  further  satisfied  that  having  found  that  there  was   an
    outstanding arrest warrant against the Appellant, the judge  failed  to
    properly apply the guidance in GJ in which  the  Upper  Tribunal  found
    that there was a real risk of persecution facing a  person  whose  name
    appeared on a computerised stop list because there was an extant arrest
    warrant. In GJ at paragraphs 356 (4), (6) and 7(d) the Tribunal  stated
    thus:

    "356. Having considered and reviewed all the  evidence,  including  the
    latest  UNHCR  guidance,  we  consider   that   the   change   in   the
    GOSL'sapproach is so significant that it 81 is  preferable  to  reframe
    the risk analysis for the present political situation in Sri Lanka.  We
    give the following country guidance:

    ..................

      (4) If a person is detained by the Sri Lankan security services  there
    remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring  international
    protection.

    ............

    (6) There are no detention facilities at the airport. Only those  whose
    names appear on a "stop" list will be detained from  the  airport.  Any
    risk for those in  whom  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  are  or  become
    interested exists not at the airport, but after arrival in  their  home
    area, where their arrival will be verified by the CID or police  within
    a few days.

    (7) The current categories of persons at real risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in detention or otherwise,
    are:

    (d)  A  person  whose  name  appears  on  a  computerised  "stop"  list
    accessible at the airport, comprising a  list  of  those  against  whom
    there is an extant court order or  arrest  warrant.  Individuals  whose
    name appears on a "stop" list will be stopped at the airport and handed
    over to the appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in  pursuance  of  such
    order or warrant."

12.   Whilst the judge referred to the head note in GJ  his analysis of the
    guidance  therein  to  the  applicable  facts  was  in   adequate.   In
    particular, there was a failure to properly engage with the findings at
    paragraph (4) and 7(d) of GJ  in light of the accepted  fact  that  the
    Appellant was detained and the existence of an extant arrest warrant.

13.   Having found that the judge materially erred in law the  parties  were
    invited to address the Tribunal as  to  their  respective  position  on
    disposal. Mr Spurling submitted that as the judge accepted  that  there
    was an extant arrest warrant against  the  Appellant  and,  given  that
    there was no dispute these findings could be preserved, he invited  the
    Tribunal to remake the decision. Mr Tufan invited the Tribunal to remit
    the matter to the First-Tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.  In  light
    of the  unchallenged  accepted  findings,  I  considered  that  it  was
    unnecessary to send the matter  back  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal.  I
    considered it appropriate to set aside the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal save for the preserved findings of  fact  and  to  remake  the
    decision in the appeal.

Re-making the Decision

14.   I have borne in mind that the burden is on the Appellant to show  that
    there is a real risk of persecution and/or serious harm in the event of
    a return. I also bear in mind the preserved findings in relation to the
    Appellant's asylum claim and case law of MP and NT v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 829 and GJ.

15.   GJ has established that the risk for those  in  whom  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities were interested in existed not necessarily at  the  airport
    but after the arrival in their home area where their arrival  would  be
    verified by the CID or police within days. That said, the head note  of
    GJ confirms that individuals who are perceived to be a  threat  to  the
    integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are perceived  to
    have a significant role in relation to post-conflict  Tamil  separatism
    within the diaspora were those who would be at  risk.  The  Sri  Lankan
    authorities' approach is based on the sophisticated intelligence  basis
    to activities within Sri Lanka and in the diaspora and they  are  aware
    that many Sri Lankans travel abroad as economic migrants.

16.   I have noted above what has been accepted regarding the Appellant.  He
    is a Muslim from  the  central  province  of  Kandy.  The  authorities'
    perception of him is that he is affiliated to the LTTE. On the strength
    of that he was detained of which there is a record.  Mr  Spurling  took
    the Tribunal to the evidence that shows there is a court order  against
    the Appellant and two unexecuted warrants. That evidence was before the
    First-tier Tribunal and accepted.

17.   The past history of the Appellant must be of  relevance  in  assessing
    the risk on return and it is against this  background  I  consider  his
    circumstances. It has been found that the Appellant  was  detained  and
    that there is an extant arrest warrant(s) against him. He was  arrested
    on the basis that he was suspected of being  an  LTTE  member.  He  was
    placed in detention but he was able to secure his release on  bail.  He
    reported to the police station until he left Sri Lanka. He  facilitated
    his exit from Sri Lanka via an agent and thus did not leave the country
    without assistance.

18.   I find that the Appellant was detained by the authorities  on  account
    that he was previously perceived to have links with  the  LTTE  in  Sri
    Lanka. On this fact together with  the  acceptance  that  there  is  an
    extant arrest warrant(s), I consider that there is a real risk that his
    name will appear on a stop-list, and thus there is a real risk that  he
    will be picked up  by  the  authorities  on  return  and  detained  for
    interrogation. What was accepted in GJ was that if a person is detained
    by the Sri Lankan security service on return there remains a real  risk
    of ill-treatment or harm requiring international  protection  and  that
    internal relocation was not an option. I find that the Appellant is  at
    risk of detention on return home by the Security Services and risks ill-
    treatment. This is particularly so in light of the fact that  there  is
    an outstanding warrant against him  issued  as  a  consequence  of  his
    failure to answer bail, the circumstances of which relate to his arrest
    on grounds that he is a suspected LTTE member. Even if,  for  arguments
    sake, the Appellant's name does not appear on a stop list, as Mr  Tufan
    pointed out, the Respondent's own guidance states that an asylum-seeker
    who has an outstanding warrant against them  "would  be  considered  at
    risk and a grant of asylum will normally be  appropriate."  I  am  thus
    satisfied and find that  the  Appellant  has  made  out  his  case  for
    international protection.

19.   I therefore allow the appeal  on  asylum  grounds  under  the  Refugee
    Convention.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be re-made.
I substitute a decision allowing the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.


Signed      Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

