
                                    [pic]
St

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11656/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At North Shields                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|on 23rd November 2016              |on 28th November 2016              |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                    H.S.A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs. M. Cleghorn, Counsel instructed by Halliday
                    Reeves Law Firm.
For the Respondent:    Mrs R. Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. The Secretary of State has been granted permission to appeal the
   decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mensah.The decision was to allow
   the appellant's appeal on the basis of humanitarian protection.

2. Although it is a Secretary of State who is appealing, for convenience I
   will continue to refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier
   tribunal.

3. At hearing, it emerged that the appellant had also sought permission to
   appeal in relation to the refusal of his claim to be recognised as a
   refugee and that the decision breached his articles 2 and 3. Although
   this application for leave to appeal predated the present it has not been
   dealt with.

4. Rather than have the unsatisfactory situation of two separate sets of
   proceedings in relation to the same case I suggested to the
   representatives that either I grant permission to appeal on all issues or
   else the appellant withdraws his pending application. It was agreed
   between the parties to proceed with the first option.

The First tier Tribunal

5. The appellant claimed he was a Somali national born on 1 October 1989.
   He said he was from a minority clan, the Reer Hamar. He had lived with
   his family until the age of 6 when they moved to Yemen. He grew up there
   and when he became older worked in various manual jobs, including work as
   a dishwasher, a cleaner and a waiter. He left Yemen on the 11th March
   2015 due to difficulties developing there and travelled to the United
   Kingdom. Here he made a claim for protection. He said he had no remaining
   family in Somalia.

6. His claim was refused on 13 August 2015 with the respondent questioning
   his nationality and clan claim.

7. At the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Mensah the presenting
   officer accepted that the appellant was a Somali national and a minority
   clan member. The judge accepted the appellant had left Somalia at the age
   of 6 and he was from the minority Reer Hamar clan. The judge heard
   evidence from three uncles the appellant had in the United Kingdom to the
   effect that they were unable to provide any financial support. The judge
   found their evidence to be credible.

8. The judge concluded that if the appellant were returned to Mogadishu he
   would not have support there and there would be no available funds from
   the United Kingdom. As a minority clan member the majority clan members
   would be unlikely to employ him over their own clans. The judge found
   that he would be in the position of a displaced person and vulnerable to
   further displacement with out even basic provisions. The judge referred
   to country information which indicated that displaced and homeless
   individuals had been forcibly evicted from Mogadishu. The judge concluded
   that given his absence from Somalia since the age of 6 and the lack of
   support mechanisms he could face living in circumstances that fell below
   that which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.

The Upper Tribunal

9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the judge
   failed to correctly apply the guidance given in MOJ and others(Return to
   Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 IAC and the approach of the Court
   of Appeal in Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442 in relation to the threshold for
   humanitarian protection claim based on destitution.

10. At hearing Mrs R.Pettersen submitted that the respondent did not accept
   he would be required to live in an IDP camp. I was referred to the
   guidance in MOJ and Others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT
   00442 to the effect that it was for a claimant to establish why they
   could not benefit from the economic boom in Mogadishu. It was said
   returnees were more likely to obtain employment than those that had never
   left. She submitted there was no reason why his family could not support
   him from here. Reference was also made to the voluntary assistance
   scheme.

11. Mrs. Cleghorn referred me to paragraph 26 of the decision of First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Mensah to the effect that the appellant would have no
   family support and no resources to rely on. She pointed out that a
   minority clan member was unlikely to be employed by a majority clan at
   the expense of a fellow clan member. I was also referred to the country
   information which indicated those in the IDP camps were targeted. She
   submitted there was no material error of law beyond that the appeal
   should also have been allowed on article 3 grounds. She pointed out that
   the judge's factual findings had not been challenged.

Consideration

12. The argument being advanced replicate those recorded at paragraph 24 of
   Tribunal Judge Mensah's decision.

13. The facts found by First Tier Tribunal Judge Mensah are covered by head
   note (ix) - (xii) of MOJ and Others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG
   [2014] UKUT. Head note (xi) is particularly germane :

         "It will, therefore, only be those with no clan or family support
         who will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad and who have
         no real prospect of securing access to a livelihood on return who
         face the prospect of living in circumstances falling below that
         which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms."

14. On the findings made all of these features are present. The absence of
   family support in Mogadishu was accepted. His uncles' evidence that they
   cannot support him was accepted.

15. It was argued by Mrs R.Pettersen that the judge failed to factor in the
   returns package that would be available. However this provides only
   temporary support.

16. The unknown question is whether the appellant would be able to obtain
   employment. The appellant did work in Yemen and stated he had some
   Arabic. The country guidance decision refers to an economic boom in
   Mogadishu and that people returning from abroad are obtaining employment
   at the expense of those who never been away. However, the economic boom
   has to be viewed in the context of a country which is rebuilding itself
   after many years of war. The notion that people returning from abroad are
   better able to secure employment may be premised on the belief that those
   who left showed initiative and adaptability. Those who have been abroad
   may have acquired new skills.

17. In the appellant's situation he was living in the Yemen in a refugee
   camp in low paid employment. The country information indicates that the
   majority clan members would favour their own clans in giving out work.
   Given the facts found by the judge I see no error of law in the
   application to the country guidance case. It was open to the judge to
   find that the appellant was entitled to humanitarian protection.
   Consequently, the respondent's appeal does not succeed.

18. I turn to the appellant's claim that his appeal should have been
   allowed on the basis of his article 3 rights. Paragraph 339C of the
   immigration rules provides that a the person will be granted humanitarian
   protection if they do not qualify as a refugee but there are substantial
   grounds for believing if returned they would face a real risk of
   suffering serious harm. Serious harm is defined as including unlawful
   killing, torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or a serious and
   individual threat to civilian life by reason of indiscriminate violence.

19. MOJ and Others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT found that
   the level of civilian casualties has reduced since 2011 and at present
   would not amount to an article 15 C risk. Rather, the conclusion that the
   appellant is entitled humanitarian protection would be founded on the
   risk of inhumane or degrading treatment. This indicates the similarity
   between humanitarian protection on this basis and article 3.

20. In SSHD -v- Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442 a Somali from a majority clan who
   had lived most of his life in the United Kingdom was being deported
   following two convictions of rape. He could not benefit from article 15
   because of his offending and the issue was whether his removal would
   breach his article 3 rights. The Court of Appeal analysed the country
   guidance decision and at paragraph 26 Lord Justice Burnett stated the
   fact the person might be returned to very deprived living conditions
   could not, save in extreme cases, lead to a conclusion that removal would
   violate article 3. At paragraph 31 Lord Justice Burnett referred to the
   suggestion that the likelihood of ending up in an IDP camp would be
   sufficient to engage the protection of article 3 but concluded that this
   cause and effect is inconsistent with the article 3 jurisprudence. His
   Lordship stated the position was accurately stated in paragraph 422 of
   the country guidance case:

         "The fact that we have rejected the view that there is a real risk
         of persecution or serious harm or ill treatment to civilians or
         returnees in Mogadishu does not mean that no Somali national can
         succeed in a refugee or humanitarian protection or Article 3 claim.
         Each case will fall to be decided on its own facts. As we have
         observed, there will need to be a careful assessment of all of the
         circumstances of a particular individual."

21. It was a matter of fact for First Tier Tribunal Judge Mensah to decide
   if the appellant faced an article 3 risk on return. The distinction
   between article 3 and humanitarian protection in the circumstance was a
   fine one. However my conclusion is that this was a matter for the judge
   and I find no material error of law in the fact the judge found on
   humanitarian protection and not human rights. The judge's conclusion in
   relation to the Refugee Convention is entirely consistent with the
   country guidance case.

22. In conclusion, I find no material error of law in the decision of First
   Tier Tribunal Judge Mensah. This was a carefully prepared decision in
   which clear findings of fact were made. The conclusions reached by the
   judge were open to the judge and are consistent with the country guidance
   case. It was a matter for the judge to decide whether on the facts the
   appellant faced an article 3 risk or was entitled humanitarian
   protection. The rejection of his claim to be a refugee was entirely
   consistent with the country guidance case and facts found.



Decision.

No material error of law has been demonstrated. Consequently, the decision
of First Tier Tribunal Judge Mensah allowing the appeal on humanitarian
grounds only shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

