

                                    [pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/11868/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                                                 |
|Decision & Reasons Promulgated                                       |
|On 3rd  May 2016                                                     |
|On 17th May 2016                                                     |
|                                                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                    H M M
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Muzenda, solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe  who  appealed  against  the
    decision to refuse her asylum on 17 August 2015.   Her  appeal  against
    that refusal was dismissed by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Adio
    ("the FTTJ") on 29 January 2016.

 2. Whilst no anonymity order was sought in these proceedings,  I  consider
    the appellant is entitled to  anonymity  given  my  references  to  her
    personal circumstances.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal; that application was refused
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison. The appellant applied  to
    the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal and I summarise the grounds
    as follows (numbering as in the grounds):

        A. The  Tribunal  had  erred  in  dismissing  the  appeal  "on  the
           perceived absence of a 'significant  MDC  profile'  contrary  to
           paragraph 2 [sic] of the guidance in  CM  (Zimbabwe)  CG  [2013]
           UKUT 59 (IAC).

        B. It was arguably perverse to conclude that the appellant would be
           accorded respect by the authorities in Zimbabwe  on  account  of
           her age. There was no factual basis for such a finding.

        C. The FTTJ failed to engage adequately or at all with  the  points
           of criticism which had nothing to do with the weight accorded to
           the evidence.

        D. Teachers and former teachers were at heightened  risk  and  more
           careful examination was required. A retired teacher such as  the
           appellant would not be accorded respect by Zanu-PF.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer in the
    following terms:

         "1. Although the First-tier  Tribunal  (FTT)  has  referred  to  CM
         (Zimbabwe) CG [2013] UKUT 59 (IAC) it is arguable that the FTT  has
         not considered whether the appellant would be reasonably likely  to
         engage in MDC activities likely to attract the adverse attention of
         ZANU-PF in Harare at all or but for a fear of persecution - see the
         CM guidance at headnote (5).

         2. It is also arguable that when considering  the  individual  risk
         factors the FTT's view that the appellant would be respected as  an
         elderly person retired from the teaching profession is  unsupported
         by any background evidence.

         3. All grounds are arguable and permission is granted."

 5. At the hearing before me,  the  parties'  representatives  agreed  that
    there was no challenge by either party to the findings of the  FTTJ  on
    credibility.   Nor  had  the  appellant  appealed  against  the  FTTJ's
    findings with regard to the appellant's activities in the UK (paragraph
    27) save insofar as the appellant submits  that  those  activities,  as
    found, amount to a
    "significant MDC profile".

 6. Mr Muzenda, for the appellant, submitted that it had been  accepted  by
    the FTTJ that the appellant had been involved in MDC  activities  since
    2009; there was, he said, no challenge to her assertion in her evidence
    that she would continue to resist the regime if returned  to  Zimbabwe.
    There was no finding  as  to  whether  she  would  carry  on  with  her
    political activities and whether they would bring her to the  attention
    of the authorities.  He submitted that this was a significant error  of
    law as noted at paragraph 5 of the CM headnote.  He submitted that  the
    FTTJ appeared to have fixed on the absence of a significant profile but
    the matter did not end there. Secondly, he submitted  that  it  was  an
    "unusual finding" that the appellant would be accorded respect  due  to
    her age; by inference she would be accorded such  respect  by  Zanu  PF
    (paragraph 29 of the decision).

 7. Mr Whitwell, for the respondent, said that paragraph 26 was the key  to
    the FTTJ's decision. The appellant was aged 70 and had retired from the
    teaching profession 14 years earlier. She had been involved  at  a  low
    level with the MDC (paragraph 23).  The  FTTJ  had  not  made  discrete
    credibility findings  but  there  were  findings  with  regard  to  her
    political activities in the UK (paragraph 27) to the effect that  these
    were "very scanty and seemed to have been geared towards the claim  she
    was making".  He further submitted  that  she  was  a  retired  teacher
    without an enhanced profile. Whilst the appellant's evidence (paragraph
    9) was that she would not relent from her activities, the FTTJ had  not
    been impressed by those activities finding they had been solely for the
    purpose of supporting her claim; it was implicit  that  she  would  not
    continue them once her appeal  was  over;  there  was  no  need  for  a
    specific finding on the issue. The  appellant  would  be  returning  to
    Harare and would not be at risk there (CM, paragraph 100).

 8. In reply, Mr Muzenda submitted for  the  appellant  that  the  FTTJ  at
    paragraph 27 was not making a "sharp finding" as to the "bona fides  of
    activities".  The FTTJ had accepted at paragraph 23  the  distance  the
    appellant had to travel to engage in such activities. The FTTJ had also
    accepted the appellant had had some problems in Zimbabwe in  the  past.
    It appeared from paragraph 27 that the  FTTJ  was  "unsure"  about  the
    appellant's motive for engaging in political activities in the UK.   He
    submitted that the FTTJ had over-simplified the situation for a  former
    teacher on return; this appellant  was  in  an  enhanced  category  and
    careful scrutiny of the evidence was required given  her  status  as  a
    former teacher. The FTTJ had failed to engage  sufficiently  with  that
    status.

My Findings

 9. I am unable to find there is a material error of law arising  from  the
    FTTJ's apparent failure to address the issue  of  whether  or  not  the
    appellant   would   engage   in   political   activities   on   return.
    Notwithstanding her evidence that "if she returns to Zimbabwe she  will
    not relent from her activities" (paragraph 9), it is implicit from  the
    FTTJ's findings at paragraph 27 that the FTTJ considered she would  not
    do so.  He specifically states that "her political activities are  very
    scanty and seemed to  have  been  geared  towards  the  claim  she  was
    making".  This finding  is  sustainable  on  the  evidence  and  it  is
    implicit the FTTJ found that, once her asylum proceedings are over, she
    would no longer undertake such activities. Thus, even if  there  is  an
    error of law in failing to make a specific finding on the issue, it  is
    not a material one because the only possible finding,  consistent  with
    the earlier findings, would be one that the appellant would cease  such
    activities once her asylum proceedings had been concluded.

10. There is no specific challenge to the FTTJ's finding that the appellant
    was involved in "low level participation in the MDC albeit she does not
    have an MDC card".  I am unable to find there is an error of law in the
    alleged failure to find the appellant a person with a  significant  MDC
    profile; the evidence does not support such a finding. The finding that
    she has participated at a low level is sustainable on the evidence  and
    consistent with other findings, particularly that to  the  effect  that
    her involvement with political activities has been "scanty".

11. I turn to the issue of whether there is an error of law as regards  the
    FTTJ's findings on the risk on  return  arising  from  the  appellant's
    status as a former teacher.  The appellant was aged 70 at the  date  of
    hearing; she had worked in Zimbabwe between 1968  and  2002  (paragraph
    21) when she came to the UK (paragraph 11). She was  a  primary  school
    teacher in Zimbabwe.  There is no challenge to the  finding  (paragraph
    21) that the appellant was not at risk of  persecution  when  she  left
    Zimbabwe in 2002; she came to the UK to visit her niece.  There  is  no
    challenge to the finding at paragraph 22 that the  appellant  "did  not
    have any plausible case to make a successful asylum claim"  during  the
    seven years she overstayed her visit visa, prior  to  claiming  asylum.
    Thus the FTTJ found that the appellant had finished her teaching career
    in Zimbabwe in 2002 (about thirteen years earlier) and that  she  would
    return as a 70 year old retired teacher who would not work in  Zimbabwe
    again (paragraph 26). She would be returned to  Harare  where  she  had
    lived for more  than  twenty  years  (paragraph  29).  She  would  have
    financial and practical support from  family  members  (paragraph  29).
    The FTTJ found (paragraph 26) that there was "no reasonable reason  for
    the  authorities  to  pay  attention  to  the  Appellant  despite   her
    background in the teaching profession  as  she  stopped  teaching  over
    thirteen years ago".  It has not been submitted to me that the FTTJ had
    overlooked any such reason.  Rather, the submission that she is at risk
    on return is based solely on the fact that she  is  a  former  teacher.
    The FTTJ was entitled to take into account the appellant's age,  career
    history and personal circumstances in considering the issue of risk.

12. At paragraph 29 the FTTJ concluded that the appellant  had  "not  shown
    that she faces a real risk of persecution ... on grounds that  she  has
    previously worked as a teacher".  In making this finding he  took  into
    account "the appellant is of an age whereby she is most  likely  to  be
    accorded the respect of an  elder  person  who  has  retired  from  the
    profession" (paragraph 29 also).  This is a finding which is not  based
    on any evidence or background material. It is therefore a finding which
    is  unsustainable  in  law.   I  ignore  this  finding,  therefore,  in
    considering whether the FTTJ's assessment  of  risk  on  return  for  a
    former teacher contains an error of law.

13. The headnote in CM is instructive:

           (10) As was the position in RN,  those  who  are  or  have  been
           teachers require to have their cases  determined  on  the  basis
           that this fact places them in an  enhanced  or  heightened  risk
           category, the significance of which will need to be assessed  on
           an individual basis;

14. Paragraph 261 of CM states as follows:

          "There is clear evidence also that  teachers  in  Zimbabwe  have,
          once again, become targets for persecution in Zimbabwe.  This  is
          confirmed by the  evidence  of  Professor  Ranger  considered  at
          paragraph 96 of this determination and  reinforced  by  the  news
          reports, examples of which are given at paragraphs 130  and  148.
          As many teachers have fled to  avoid  retribution,  the  fact  of
          being a teacher or having been a teacher in  the  past  again  is
          capable of raising an enhanced risk, whether or not a person  was
          a polling officer, because when encountered it will not be  known
          what a particular teacher did or did not do in another area."

15. There is no challenge to the finding of the  FTTJ  that  the  appellant
    would not be the subject of adverse interest by the  authorities  as  a
    result of her activities in the UK. This finding is sustainable on  the
    evidence in any event. Thus the FTTJ found the appellant did not have a
    profile which would "cause the CIOs to be  interested  in  her  at  the
    airport".  This is consistent with the guidance in HS (returning asylum
    seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094. The fact the  appellant  would
    not have a profile with the CIO was rightly taken into account  by  the
    FTTJ in assessing the appellant's risk on return as a former teacher.

16. I am satisfied that the FTTJ's findings with regard to risk  on  return
    for the appellant as a former teacher are sustainable on the  evidence,
    irrespective of the  erroneous  finding  that  she  would  be  accorded
    respect due to her age. I find that  the  finding  in  respect  of  the
    latter, whilst an error of law being unsustainable on the evidence  and
    background material, is not material.  Mr Muzenda's submissions to  the
    FTTJ  (paragraphs  18  and  19)   did   not   identify   any   specific
    characteristics or facts which heightened the risk for the appellant on
    return; he relied solely on her status as a former  teacher.  The  FTTJ
    was entitled to take into account the appellant's age and circumstances
    in considering that risk and did so appropriately, taking into  account
    the lack of CIO interest arising from  perceived  or  actual  political
    activities, the appellant's  age,  her  date  of  retirement  from  the
    profession, her familiarity with life in Harare and abilty to settle in
    that city, her stated lack of intention to return to teaching  and  the
    availability of financial and emotional support  from  family  members.
    The FTTJ's decision on risk on return is reasoned  and  sustainable  on
    the evidence. The appellant's pursuit of this appeal is no more than  a
    disagreement with the findings of the FTTJ.

17. For these reasons, I am unable to find that the decision  of  the  FTTJ
    contains an error of law.

Decision

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of  law.  The  decision  is  not  set
    aside.



A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Dated: 10 May 2016




Direction regarding anonymity - rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005
The appellant is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings, unless  and
until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No report of these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.



A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Dated: 10 May 2016

