
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/11122/2014
                                                               AA/11125/2014
                                                               AA/11129/2014
                                                               AA/11131/2014
                                                               AA/11135/2014
                                                               AA/11139/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20th January 2016                 |On 18th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   (1) N S
                                   (2) A A
                                  (3) M M A
                                  (4) M M A
                                  (5) J M A
                                  (6) A A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Bradshaw (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Andrew, promulgated on 15th October 2015, following a hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 12th October 2015.  In  the  determination,
    the  judge  allowed  the  appeals  of  the  Appellants,  whereupon  the
    Respondent subsequently applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

 2. The Appellants are all citizens of Libya and comprise a  family.   They
    were born on 3rd January 1966, 8th February  1977,  10th  August  1998,
    19th August 2000, 1st January 2006 and 12th  March  2007  respectively.
    The First Appellant, and her husband, together  with  [AAA],  the  last
    Appellant, arrived in the United Kingdom together on 9th July  2013  in
    possession of a visa.  The remaining three children  had  been  refused
    visas and had remained behind in Libya whereupon they were subsequently
    allowed to join the remaining family  in  the  UK  as  well.   On  20th
    November 2013, an application for further  leave  to  remain  was  made
    outside the Immigration Rules for  [AAA]  and  the  Appellant  and  her
    husband are dependants upon that application.   On  12th  August  2014,
    they  claimed  asylum.   The   Respondent   refused   the   Appellants'
    applications for asylum on 27th November 2014.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge observed that the manner in which the First Appellant and her
    dependants came to the UK was in order to get  medical  treatment  with
    respect to the health of [AAA], the last Appellant, because  they  were
    unable to access proper medical treatment for him in Libya.  The  First
    Appellant herself is a  dietician  and  has  undertaken  two  years  of
    medical  degree.   Her  husband  has  been  variously  described  as  a
    cardiologist or a cardiologist's technician.

 4. The judge went on to note how the last Appellant, the child [AAA],  had
    been diagnosed with autism  at  the  Portland  Hospital,  which  was  a
    private clinic in London, and the Libyan government had initially  paid
    the fees for this child's treatment but stopped doing so after November
    2013.   The  Appellant's  husband  had  returned  to  Libya  on   three
    occasions, and he did so in order to collect his other  three  children
    and bring them to the United Kingdom.

 5. A decision was then made by the family that they would  not  return  to
    Libya because of the ongoing war situation there and the  lack  of  the
    availability of treatment for [AAA] in Libya.  The judge  rejected  the
    asylum claim.  The judge also  rejected  the  humanitarian  claim,  and
    indeed went on to reject also the human rights claims under Articles  2
    and 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

 6. However, when considering the position of the child, [AAA], she went on
    to note that [AAA] was unlikely to be able to access any treatment  for
    his condition.  She said that,

         "I have read with care all the medical reports  that  I  have  been
         given.  I am further satisfied that the  Appellant  was  unable  to
         access any suitable medical attention for the child in Libya.   She
         had made attempts  to  do  so  in  Egypt  but  unsuccessfully  ..."
         (paragraph 37).

 7. The judge went on to consider the fact that the  family  did  not  come
    from Tripoli.  The judge also considered that [AAA] had

         "Been able to make some progress whilst he has been in  the  United
         Kingdom as evidenced by the reports in the Appellants' bundle.   To
         the lower standard I am satisfied that he and his family would have
         grave difficulties in accessing similar facilities and care to that
         he  receives  in  the  United  Kingdom  which  have  permitted  the
         improvement in his health" (paragraph 42).

 8. If, concluded the judge, she was  wrong  in  this  finding  then  under
    Article 8, she would allow the appeal because there  were  "significant
    obstacles in his return to Libya" (paragraph 45).  The judge considered
    the applicable Article 8 jurisprudence (see paragraphs 47 to 49).   She
    went on to allow the appeal under the ECHR.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application  state  that  the  judge  had  failed  under
    Article 8 ECHR to conduct a proportionality exercise as required.   The
    judge had also only had regard to paragraph 276ADE in that this was not
    applicable to a child under 18.

10. On 3rd November 2015, permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that, in the light of paragraph 40 of her decision, the judge had noted
    that there was "some evidence that treatment was  available  in  Libya"
    and this being so the case could not have succeeded under Article 8.

11. A Rule 24 response was entered by Mr Bradshaw, of Counsel, appearing on
    behalf of the Appellants dated 17th January 2016.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 20th January 2016, Mr Tufan,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State stated that the decision of
    the judge was contrary to established legal authorities.  For  example,
    in GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40, it had been established that,

         "The  absence  or  inadequacy  of  medical  treatment,  even   life
         preserving treatment, in the country of return, cannot be relied on
         at all as a factor engaging Article 8: if that is all there is, the
         claim must fail.  Secondly, where Article 8  is  engaged  by  other
         factors, the fact that the Claimant is receiving medical  treatment
         in this country which would not be  available  in  the  country  of
         return may be a factor in the proportionality  exercise  ..."  (see
         paragraph 111).

    Mr Tufan submitted that there was an  absence  of  "other  factors"  in
    addition to the medical treatment which meant that this case could  not
    succeed under Article 8.  Mr Tufan also relied upon the case of  Akhalu
    (Nigeria) [2013] UKUT 400.

    This case established that whereas the consequences of removal for  the
    health  of  a  claimant  who  would  be  unable  to  access  equivalent
    healthcare in their own country is plainly relevant to the question  of
    proportionality, this has to be weighed "against the public interest in
    ensuring that the limited resources of this  country's  health  service
    are used to the best effect for the benefit of those for whom they  are
    intended."  Mr Tufan submitted that neither of  these  conditions  were
    satisfied by the judge's analysis of the facts before her  and  so  the
    decision amounted to an error of law.

13. For his part, Mr Bradshaw submitted that he would rely upon the case of
    Das  Gupta  [2016]  UKUT  000218  which  cautioned  against  the  Upper
    Tribunal's overturning of determinations by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    except on the basis of the principles expressed in Edwards  v  Bairstow
    [1956] AC 14.  Mr Bradshaw  submitted  that  this  Tribunal  should  be
    cautious in overturning the decision below given that it  had  been  so
    carefully arrived at.  Mr Bradshaw  also  submitted  that  the  judge's
    approach to the matter before her was meticulous and  entirely  correct
    in law.  She had rejected the proposition that the Appellant came up to
    the standard of N v The UK, so as to succeed under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.  She did not regard the Article 3 threshold to have been met.

14. However, it is equally true that that threshold is more easily  met  in
    relation to a child than it is in relation to an adult:  SQ  (Pakistan)
    at paragraph 17.  What the judge had done was, at paragraph 37, to have
    referred to the relevant matters before her.   She  had  read  all  the
    medical reports in relation to the child.  She was not  satisfied  that
    any treatment appropriate to this child was available  in  Libya.   She
    was not simply saying that some treatment would be available.  She  was
    absolutely categoric in her belief  and  finding  that  no  appropriate
    treatment would be available.

15. Her overall assessment appears at paragraph 37  of  the  determination.
    She concluded that,

         "In view of the continuing difficulties in Libya, as highlighted by
         the expert report, I am satisfied,  to  the  lower  standard,  that
         there will have been no improvement in any way of the  services  to
         be offered in Libya to a child with autism" (paragraph 38).

16. Much had been made about her reference to paragraph  276ADE.   However,
    this had to be read in context.  What it meant was  that,  although  it
    did not apply to the child, it applied to the adult parents  who  could
    not relocate to Libya, given the condition of the child, and  therefore
    stood to fall under paragraph 276ADE.

17. Furthermore, given that the family had moved to the UK for the purposes
    of getting the medical treatment, they are bound  to  have  established
    some private life during this time.  The other children, who  are  aged
    10, 15, and 17, arrived later.  The judge was right in concluding  that
    it  was  in  the  best  interests  of  the  child   to   remain   here.
    Consideration was  given  by  the  judge  to  the  public  interest  in
    immigration control under Section 117B of the 2002 Act, as amended.

18. In reply, Mr Tufan submitted that this was not an  "exceptional"  case.
    The child was coming to the UK for  treatment.   He  was  coming  on  a
    temporary basis.  He then decides, with his  family,  to  remain  on  a
    permanent basis.  This cannot be regarded as "exceptional."

19. My attention was drawn to the case of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA  Civ
    874, where the court said that, "the ultimate question will be:  is  it
    reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with  no  right  to
    remain to the  country  of  origin?"  (see  paragraph  58).   Mr  Tufan
    submitted that this case established that, "if the parents are removed,
    then it is entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with  them"
    (see paragraph 60).  This was such a case and the judge  was  wrong  to
    have allowed the appeal.

No Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law.  This is a case where
    the strictures in Das Gupta [2016] UKUT 000218 apply in that  it  would
    be wrong for this Tribunal to intervene  in  anything  other  than  the
    principles set out in Edwards v Bairstow [1956] AC 14.

21. First, the judge was clear (see paragraph 18) that the family  came  to
    the UK because of a concern with the health of [AAA].  He was unable to
    access proper treatment in Libya.  He had even tried treatment in Egypt
    which was not accessible.  The judge repeated this at paragraph  37  of
    the determination.

22. It is also the case that in order to come to the UK they were funded by
    the Libyan government (see paragraphs 23 and 28).  Indeed,  the  expert
    report by Dr  Fatah  is  clear  that  there  is  no  certainty  of  any
    facilities for treatment for autism in Libya.  The judge was  right  to
    take this into account (see paragraphs 38 and 39).

23. Second, whereas the judge refers to the fact that the  child  would  be
    unable to avail himself of the "very  significant  obstacles"  test  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi), this has to be considered in the context that the
    parents, who fall under paragraph  276ADE(vi)  would  not  be  able  to
    relocate the child has to be left behind in his condition.

24. The judge thereafter gave consideration to the case law as  it  applies
    to Article 8, and the best interests of the  child,  and  excluded  the
    possibility that Article 3  of  the  ECHR  applied,  and  went  on,  in
    applying  the  five-stage  approach  in  Razgar,  together   with   the
    consideration of the public interest requirements of Section  117B,  to
    allow the appeal under Article 8.  That was a conclusion  open  to  the
    judge.  There is no error of law.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    13th February 2016

