
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11325/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 9th August 2016                   |On 31st August 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                  IMRAN [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mohzam, Solicitor of Burton & Burton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. Before the Tribunal the Secretary  of  State  becomes  the  respondent.
    However, for the avoidance of confusion and to be consistent,  I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 2. On 10th  June  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Heynes  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal S D Lloyd in which he dismissed the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds but allowed it  on  human  rights  grounds  against  the
    decision of the respondent to refuse  asylum,  humanitarian  and  human
    rights protection to the appellant, an adult citizen of Zimbabwe.

Error on a Point of Law

 3. The grounds of application by the Secretary of State do not take  issue
    with the judge's dismissal of the asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    claims but contend that the judge's favourable conclusions in  relation
    to the human rights claim are materially flawed.  In particular  it  is
    contended  that  the  judge's  conclusion  (paragraph  43)   that   the
    respondent was alleging dishonesty and fraud by the appellant is wrong.
     The respondent made no such allegation.  The issue of whether  or  not
    the appellant had, himself, made phone calls to the Home  Office  about
    the progress of his applications made in 2006 and  2007  was  simply  a
    matter of credibility.  In this respect it  is  also  argued  that  the
    judge  had  applied  an  inconsistent  approach  to  the  evidence   by
    suggesting that the operators who allegedly took  the  telephone  calls
    from the appellant had not been produced as witnesses and yet the aunt,
    who allegedly made the calls and not the appellant, was not required to
    attend the  hearing  and  would  "impose  too  high  a  burden  on  the
    appellant".  Further, the judge was wrong to  conclude  (paragraph  45)
    that screen prints from the respondent's IT system did not confirm that
    checks were made to  confirm  the  identity  of  the  caller  when  the
    appellant's date of birth and address had been noted.

 4. The respondent concludes by indicating that, if  the  First-tier  Judge
    had applied the correct burden of proof consistently  to  both  parties
    taking into consideration the evidence provided by the respondent, then
    it was not open to  the  judge,  on  a  balance  of  probabilities,  to
    conclude that the appellant did  not  make  the  phone  calls  alleged.
    However, the respondent concedes that the issue of the phone calls was,
    potentially, a determinative issue in  the  application  for  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules.

 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Bates emphasised that the judge had stated
    (paragraph 39) that the evidential issue was important  but  (paragraph
    40) simply identified it as a credibility issue.   Further,  the  judge
    clearly imposed the wrong burden of proof on the respondent  throughout
    as if an issue of fraud had been raised.

 6. Mr Mohzam drew my attention to the appellant's response  of  25th  July
    2016 in which it was contended  that  the  First-tier  Judge  conducted
    himself appropriately and was entitled to find the appellant  to  be  a
    credible witness.  The response also sought permission to adduce  fresh
    evidence by  way  of  a  detailed  witness  statement  to  support  the
    appellant's case.  In this  respect  I  reminded  Mr  Mohzam  that  the
    initial issue was whether or not the decision showed a  material  error
    on a point of law in relation to the  judge's  handling  of  the  human
    rights claim.  That issue would require an examination of  the  judge's
    approach to the relevant evidential issue rather than by the production
    of further evidence to support the appellant's evidential assertions.

Conclusions

 7. The judge's approach to consideration of the credibility issue  of  the
    phone calls allegedly made in 2006 and 2007 is in error.   Paragraph  7
    of the decision shows that the  judge  overruled  an  objection  by  Mr
    Mohzam, at the first hearing, to the respondent  producing  the  screen
    prints to show that the appellant contacted the Home Office a number of
    times towards the end of 2006 and 2007.  In the second sentence of  the
    same paragraph the judge identified the documents as "of importance  to
    the  issue  of  the  appellant's  credibility".   However,  the   judge
    subsequently deals with that credibility issue (paragraph 43) as if  it
    were an issue of dishonesty and fraud by the appellant with the  burden
    of proof resting upon the respondent throughout.

 8. The issue of fraud was not raised in the refusal nor does the  decision
    show that the matter was put to the judge by the Presenting Officer  on
    the basis that the appellant had denied that he had contacted the  Home
    Office.   As  the  respondent  contends,  the  matter  was   simply   a
    credibility issue to be concluded applying the lower standard of proof.
     This is not a case which falls within the guidance  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in AA (Nigeria) [2010]  EWCA  Civ  773  where  there  have  been
    specific  allegations  of  the  submission  of  false  information   or
    documents.  In any event, even if the relevant  circumstances  in  this
    appeal could be said to  come  within  that  guidance,  the  burden  of
    proving fraud does not rest upon the Secretary of State  throughout  as
    the Court of Appeal commented in Shehzad [2016] EWCA Civ 615.

 9. The error of the judge's approach to  the  credibility  issue  is  also
    highlighted by the judge's comments in paragraph  42  of  the  decision
    where he indicates: "it would be unfair to impose too high a burden  on
    the appellant to provide counter-evidence ...". That was  given  as  an
    erroneous reason for not taking into consideration that  the  appellant
    had not called as a witness the relative who was said to have made  the
    calls.  Further, the judge was also in error in stating (paragraph  45)
    that the records produced by the  respondent  did  not  show  that  any
    checks had been carried out to confirm the identity of the caller  when
    the screen prints revealed the  details  of  the  caller.   It  is  not
    possible to say that,  had  the  judge  applied  the  burden  of  proof
    correctly, then his favourable decision would have remained the same.

10. The errors I have identified are such that it will be necessary for the
    human rights issues to be considered again with the  hearing  of  fresh
    evidence.  At the hearing before me representatives indicated that,  if
    that were the case, the matter should be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the hearing of the human rights  appeal  afresh.   On  the
    basis that the consideration of human rights issues will involve  fresh
    evidence, I conclude that remittal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  will
    comply with the Practice Statement of the Senior President of Tribunals
    dated 25th September 2012 at paragraph 7.2(b).

11. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation  to  the  asylum
    appeal shall  stand.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    relation to the human rights claim shows errors on points of law and is
    set aside.  It is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing
    afresh.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014 nor do I consider one to be appropriate in the Upper Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

12. The remitted hearing will take  at  place  at  the  Birmingham  Hearing
    Centre on a date to be specified by the Resident Judge.

13. No interpreter will be required for the hearing unless  representatives
    indicate to the contrary.

14. Representatives for the appellant should submit a  consolidated  bundle
    of documents relating to the human rights issue  at  least  seven  days
    before the remitted hearing date.

15. The remitted hearing should not take place before Judge S D Lloyd.


Signed   Date 31st August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
