
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11821/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 June 2015                      |On 13 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                     F C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, Counsel,
For the Respondent:    Miss E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  Appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  We  make
    this order because the Appellant may be put at risk solely as a  result
    of her claim attracting publicity.

2.   This is an appeal brought by the  Appellant  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Myers who, by a determination promulgated  on
    24 March 2015, dismissed on  asylum  grounds,  humanitarian  protection
    grounds, and human rights grounds a refusal  to  grant  asylum  and  to
    remove the Appellant from the  United  Kingdom  which  was  made  on  4
    December 2014.

3.   The Appellant is a citizen of the Ivory Coast who came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2013 and claimed asylum. She gave birth to a daughter on  19
    April 2014. The Appellant claimed that back in 2008,  whilst  still  in
    the Ivory Coast, she had been forced by  her  family  into  a  marriage
    during which she was subject to violence including rape. She  said  she
    made her way to the United Kingdom and on arrival made contact with  an
    individual she had encountered when changing flights in France. He kept
    her locked up and raped her when she  refused  consensual  intercourse.
    After some while she managed to escape. However, the Appellant was  not
    considered to be a credible witness  and  her  evidence  on  these  key
    matters was not accepted. It was further found that the Appellant would
    not be at risk on her return to Ivory Coast.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew
    on 15 April 2015. It was on a very limited basis as follows:

    "1.  [...]

    2.   [...] I am satisfied that the Judge made findings that  were  open
         to her based on the evidence before her  and  I  do  not  find  any
         arguable error of law in this regard.

    3.   However, I do find an arguable error in that  the  Judge  did  not
         consider, in the light of the expert report, the risk there may  be
         to the Appellant on her return to  Ivory  Coast  from  the  general
         population, given she is returning with a young child."

5.   Ms Akinbolu realistically recognised at the outset of the hearing  that
    the limited grant of permission placed the Appellant in difficulties in
    advancing her appeal, but wisely did not seek to open  up  any  of  the
    other potential grounds where permission to appeal  had  been  refused.
    Her submissions were shortly stated and sharply focussed.

6.   The criticism which Ms Akinbolu made of the  determination  related  to
    paragraph 32 where the expert report of  Professor  Maria  Aguilar  was
    addressed. The material part reads:

         "[Professor Aguilar] concludes that it would be very difficult  for
         a single woman with a baby to cope on arrival in Abidjan  and  that
         she would be rejected by her own family and face  the  prospect  of
         being attacked and killed by her husband's family. She states  that
         she disagrees with the conclusions in the reasons for refusal  that
         the husband would not be able to find the Appellant if she returned
         to Abidjan because the police are corrupt and she  would  be  at  a
         high risk of violence and death. However, in my judgement Professor
         Aguilar has not addressed the issue of  why  and  how  husband  and
         family would decide to look for her two years after she left  Ivory
         Coast. I do not find anything in Professor Aguilar's  report  which
         would persuade me to depart from the country guidance in MD."

7.   Ms Akinbolu developed her submission by references to various  sections
    of Professor Aguilar's report, notably paragraphs 11, 19, 20,  21,  22,
    and 34-38. She suggested that the report  was  more  extensive  in  its
    content and reach than the First-tier Tribunal Judge had stated in  the
    passage quoted above. She stated that this alleged misstatement  as  to
    the effect of  the  report  infects  the  rest  of  the  determination,
    including the Judge's assessment of the plausibility of the Appellant's
    case as advanced in her oral evidence. She stated that the  conclusions
    in MD (Women) Ivory Coast CG [2010] UKUT 215 (IAC) were not sustainable
    as a general pattern in the light of the content of Professor Aguilar's
    report. She stated that both the Appellant and her daughter would be at
    risk were she to be returned to Ivory  Coast  due  to  clan  structures
    where violence from the society at large could be visited upon  runaway
    wives and single mothers.

8.   However, as Ms Akinbolu properly and readily conceded, paragraph 32  of
    the determination cannot be read in isolation. The preceding  paragraph
    (paragraph  31)  places  the  matter  in  context,   particularly   the
    following:

         "... if I accept that [the  Appellant]  will  be  rejected  by  her
         family (which I do not) she will have no  male  protector.  However
         she will be returning to a city where she has lived  all  her  life
         and where she has found employment in the past. She  gave  evidence
         that she thought she would be able to obtain employment in  Abidjan
         where she is acquainted with the culture and speaks  the  language.
         She has shown that she is resourceful in that she  has  managed  to
         survive by herself in the UK and I find that she will  be  able  to
         continue to  care  for  herself  and  her  daughter  on  return  to
         Abidjan." (emphasis added)

9.   Since none of these findings is impugned, and as permission  to  appeal
    was not granted in relation to  them,  Ms  Akinbolu  finds  herself  in
    difficulties in  seeking  to  make  good  her  submission.  She  fairly
    conceded that in the light of the Judge's findings at paragraph 31, her
    submission in relation to paragraph 32  based  on  Professor  Aguilar's
    report becomes unsustainable. The Judge made a proper finding based  on
    a careful assessment of the evidence that the appellant  would  not  be
    rejected by her family. That finding is not  challenged.  It  therefore
    follows that any potential risk posed to the Appellant from the general
    public given she is returning with a young child  is  neither  relevant
    nor persuasive because of the positive finding that the Appellant  will
    not be rejected by her family.

10.  Notwithstanding the attractive manner in which  Ms  Akinbolu  made  her
    short submission, it does not bear detailed scrutiny and we can find no
    error of law in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  On
    the contrary, we consider it to be a careful and meticulous  evaluation
    of all the available evidence, leading to a balanced  consideration  of
    the weight to be afforded to its component parts, and  expressed  in  a
    measured, cogent and thorough determination.




    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Mark Hill QC                         |                                     |
|Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal   |Dated 24 June 2015                   |

