
IAC-fH-nl-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/11065/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 13 January 2015                            |On 20 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                                     T m
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai of Counsel instructed by Turpin Miller.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Napthine promulgated on 25 March 2014 dismissing the Appellant's appeal
    against the Respondent's decision dated 23 November 2012 to remove  her
    from the United Kingdom following the refusal of her second application
    for asylum.



Background

 2. The Appellant first arrived in the United Kingdom on  23  October  2002
    when she was granted six months leave to enter as  a  visitor.   On  11
    April 2003 she submitted an  application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student and in due course leave was granted until 28 February 2004.   A
    further period of leave to remain as a student was granted on  30  June
    2004 until 30 June 2005.  On 7 April 2009 the  Appellant  attended  the
    Asylum Screening Unit and claimed asylum.  The application was  refused
    on 22 July 2009 and a subsequent appeal dismissed by Immigration  Judge
    Emerton in a determination promulgated on 23 September 2009  (reference
    AA/07818/2009).   Following  the  refusal   of   an   application   for
    reconsideration of Judge Emerton's decision the Appellant made repeated
    further representations to the Respondent.  Her representations were in
    due course rejected but they were accepted to constitute a fresh  claim
    giving rise to a further right of appeal  against  a  removal  decision
    made on 23 November 2012.  This removal decision of 23 November 2012 is
    the relevant immigration decision herein.

 3. The Appellant's appeal against that decision was heard on 7 May 2013 by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup and  dismissed.   An  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 13 June  2013
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne and  subsequently  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge McGeachy found that there had been an error of law and  that  the
    appeal should be remitted to be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal
    with all issues at large.  It was in such circumstances that the appeal
    came before Judge  Napthine.   The  factual  basis  of  the  claim  was
    summarised by Judge Napthine  at  paragraph  29  of  his  determination
    essentially by way of repetition  of  the  case  as  put  before  Judge
    Emerton.  That paragraph is a matter of record and I do not propose  to
    recite it now.  The Appellant also  relied  upon  a  skeleton  argument
    before Judge Napthine that summarised the basis of her case.

 4. It is to be noted that broadly there were two elements to  the  claimed
    history that the Appellant said were such as to  put  her  at  risk  in
    Zimbabwe.  Without  denoting  anything  by  way  of  priority  in   the
    enumeration:


    (1) She had been a teacher in Zimbabwe; and


    (2) She was perceived to be a supporter of the MDC  in  consequence  of
    her work at a bar where ZANU-PF supporters believed her to have allowed
    MDC supporters to hold meetings in the VIP area of the bar.


 5. Judge Napthine  dismissed  the  appeal  for  reasons  set  out  in  his
    determination.


 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  which
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cheales on 28 April 2014.


 7. The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 response resisting the appeal  dated
    16 May 2014.

 8. The matter first came before me on 17 June 2014 for an 'error  of  law'
    hearing.  On that occasion  the  representative  for  the  Home  Office
    indicated that he conceded the issue of 'error of law'.  However,  upon
    preparing a written decision to incorporate that concession  it  became
    apparent to me that the concession may have been made on a misconceived
    basis.  In the circumstances I prepared, and  the  Tribunal  issued,  a
    short 'Memorandum and  Directions'  which  explains  the  circumstances
    surrounding the  potential  misconception  of  fact  that  led  to  the
    Presenting Officer on that occasion seemingly conceding  the  issue  of
    error of law.  The text of the Memorandum and  Directions  is  appended
    hereto for ease of reference (Annex A).

 9. I issued Directions on that occasion including inviting the  Respondent
    to file and serve within ten days a written confirmation of whether  or
    not it was accepted that there was a material error of law on the  part
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Napthine.  No response was  received  from
    the Home Office, and in due course the matter was re-listed before me -
    although it appears from the file not before it had been sent to Hatton
    Cross for listing there.  In the circumstances the  matter  comes  back
    before me today with the issue of 'error of law' still outstanding.

Application to Amend Grounds

10. Before me today Ms Kiai on behalf of the Appellant sought permission to
    amend the grounds of appeal in respect of the challenge to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's approach to  credibility.   In  addition  to  the
    challenge  pleaded  in  the  grounds  in  respect  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004, Ms Kiai wished  to
    argue that the judge had erred in  his  approach  to  the  evidence  of
    witnesses supporting the Appellant's claim to have been  a  teacher  in
    Zimbabwe.  Although no written application was provided and no  written
    formulation of such a ground was presented,  Ms  Kiai  articulated  the
    basis of the additional challenge and Mr Nath indicated that he did not
    object to the grounds being expanded in this way.  Further he confirmed
    that he felt able to address such additional submissions today.


11. In the circumstances I permitted the amendment sought.

Consideration

12. The Appellant advances four bases of challenge to the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge which are helpfully summarised at paragraph 4
    of the Grounds submitted in support of the application  for  permission
    to appeal.

    (1)  The First-tier Tribunal Judge used matters identified by section 8
         of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act
         2004 as a starting point on the assessment of credibility.

    (2)  The  judge  erred  materially  in  his  approach  to  the  medical
         evidence.

    (3)   The  judge  materially  erred  in  considering  the   Appellant's
         credibility.

    (4)  The judge erred materially in  considering  the  Appellant's  case
         under Article 8 of the ECHR.


    Today's amendment supplements the first of those  grounds.   I  address
    the four grounds in turn.


13. In respect of the  challenge  to  credibility  and  in  particular  the
    amended ground advanced today, Ms Kiai observes  that  three  witnesses
    provided supporting statements before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    that the Appellant had  been  a  teacher  in  Zimbabwe.   The  relevant
    witness statements are to be found at pages 30-38  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  were  provided  by  Pastor
    Phyllis Burke, Pastor Alice Kazumba and Ms Gloria Munetsi.

14. The first of those named witnesses, Pastor Phyllis Burke  attended  the
    hearing before Judge Napthine and gave oral evidence in support of  her
    witness statement.  It is argued that  the  Judge  has  not  adequately
    engaged in this supporting evidence in reaching an  adverse  conclusion
    in respect of  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be  a  teacher  and/or  has
    otherwise not made clear findings on the credibility of  the  witnesses
    in this regard.


15. At paragraphs 57-66 of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  the
    following is stated:

         "57. At her asylum hearing before IJ Emerton she  did  not  produce
             evidence of being a qualified teacher in Zimbabwe.


         58.  The Appellant has now produced documents relating to her claim
             to have been a teacher  in  Zimbabwe.   In  considering  these
             documents I bear in mind that it is for the Appellant to  show
             that the documents can be relied  on;  that  I  must  consider
             whether the  documents  are  ones  on  which  reliance  should
             properly be placed after looking at all the  evidence  in  the
             round; that documents may be unreliable, even if it cannot  be
             established to the requisite standard of proof that  they  are
             forgeries; and that it is of course proper to consider whether
             unreliable documents may have been used to support  a  genuine
             claim (Tanveer Ahmed HX/23022/01*).


         59.  The Appellant's account is  fundamentally  inconsistent.   She
             claims to have finished her 'on the job' training as a teacher
             working during term time and studying during  school  holidays
             [para 3,  WS  dated  19/8/2009]  whilst  saying  in  her  oral
             evidence that she was attending Theological  College  at  that
             time.


         60.  Virginia Tigere supported the Appellant's claim to have been a
             full time student at the Theological College during  1994  and
             1995.  The Appellant could not have been working as a  teacher
             and undertaking her studies  for  her  teaching  qualification
             during those two years.


         61.  Pastor Burke also stated that the Appellant  was  studying  at
             the college whilst she herself was there  for  2�  years  from
             1997.


         62.  The Appellant claims to have continued in  her  teaching  post
             graduate diploma in business management at Sejke 5 High School
             until 2002, however, the letter which is said to come from the
             head teacher there states her employment ended in 2001.


         63.  The photograph of a woman at the front of a classroom in front
             of a blackboard does not prove that the  woman  was  teaching.
             Interestingly,  the  only  desk  and  chair  visible  in   the
             photograph shows the chair placed upside down on  top  of  the
             desk as is common practice when no teaching is taking place.


         64.  There is nothing to show why, when or where the photograph was
             taken.  The date written on the blackboard is only evidence of
             the fact that someone has written that date, not that that  is
             when the photograph was taken.


         65.  I find the evidence that the Appellant was ever a  teacher  in
             Zimbabwe so unreliable that I can place no reliance  upon  the
             document as evidence that she ever taught  in  Zimbabwe.   The
             evidence of the transmission of the letters  from  Seke  5  is
             unreliable.  Pastor Phyllis has not attended to give  evidence
             and in any event she  did  not  collect  the  documents.   She
             cannot say who provided them, or why.


         66.  I find that the Appellant has failed to prove, on  the  lowest
             standard, that she was ever a teacher in Zimbabwe."


16. I pause to note that there is on the face of it an error  at  paragraph
    65 in that in context it is clear that the reference to Pastor  Phyllis
    should have been a reference to Pastor  Alice  Kazumba  because  it  is
    through Pastor Alice Kazumba that the Appellant received  the  relevant
    documents.  Further,  Pastor  Phyllis  Burke  did  attend  the  hearing
    although Pastor Alice Kazumba did not.  I regard this as  a  mere  slip
    and do not consider anything material turns on the error as to name  at
    paragraph 65.  In my judgment it  does  not  undermine  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's overall assessment of the Appellant's case.


17. I consider it was open to the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to  conclude
    when faced with discrepant evidence from a number of different sources,
    as identified in the paragraphs cited above, that the  overall  picture
    was  unclear,  the  supporting  evidence  was  unreliable  and  in  the
    circumstances the Appellant had failed to establish that she had been a
    teacher.


18. In my judgment it is  sufficient  to  identify  that  the  evidence  is
    unclear and therefore a safe conclusion not possible, without having to
    descend to an express conclusion in respect of each  of  the  disparate
    and discrepant pieces of evidence.  In the circumstances I reject  this
    new aspect of the challenge brought  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision.

19. In respect of the second aspect  of  the  credibility  challenge,  that
    relating to section 8 of the 2004 Act, it is argued that the Judge used
    his assessment under  this  provision  as  a  "starting  point  on  the
    assessment of credibility" (Grounds at paragraph 5), and that this  ran
    contrary to the requirement to make a  global  assessment.   I  do  not
    accept this submission.

20. The Judge identified at paragraph 17 that he was required to  "consider
    all of the evidence before me before reaching any conclusion as to  the
    credibility of the Appellant's claims".

21. Further, at paragraph 48 he stated "I have looked at all  the  evidence
    including the medical and psychological evidence in  the  round  before
    making any findings including my findings on credibility".


22. Indeed, even the Appellant's grounds of challenge acknowledge "that the
    Immigration Judge has considered other parts of the evidence in  making
    credibility findings" (Grounds at paragraph 8).


23. In the circumstances, in my judgment the  fact  that  the  'section  8'
    assessment appears as the  first  of  a  number  of  factors  does  not
    indicate that it was given any  undue  prominence.   Indeed  the  Judge
    indicated appropriately that  it  was  "a  matter  which  affects  [the
    Appellant's]  credibility"  (paragraph  50)  without   for   a   moment
    suggesting that it was determinative.


24. Further in this regard I do not accept the submission that the  Judge's
    findings were extensive to an extent that indicated undue focus - as is
    argued at paragraph 9 of the Grounds.  Although the Judge addresses the
    matter over a number of paragraphs, many of those paragraphs consist of
    a single short sentence and must be seen in the context  of  a  lengthy
    determination.

25. There is more merit in the submission, however, to the effect that  the
    Judge failed fully to address  the  evidence  from  Dr  Brock  Chisholm
    concerning  the  Appellant's  mental  health  as  a   possible   factor
    preventing her, or inhibiting her, from claiming asylum at  an  earlier
    point.  In this context Miss Kiai emphasised  in  particular  paragraph
    128 of the report of Dr Chisholm dated 18 March 2013 which is in  these
    terms: "Avoiding reminders such as applying for asylum that necessarily
    requires a person to describe their traumatic experiences is consistent
    with her diagnosis of PTSD".


26. I observe, however, that such an  explanation  is  different  from  the
    Appellant's claim recorded by the Judge  and  rejected  for  the  sound
    reasons given at paragraph 52, of having been  unaware  of  the  asylum
    system.


27. In any event, in my judgment any contended error in this aspect of  the
    Judge's reasoning would not undermine his analysis and findings of  the
    discrepancies in the evidence in relation to the Appellant's  claim  to
    have been a teacher.  Accordingly in this context I  find  no  material
    error of law.

28. The second basis of challenge  seeks  further  to  impugn  the  Judge's
    approach to the medical evidence.


29. Paragraphs 12 and  13  of  the  Grounds  contend  that  the  Judge  was
    incorrect in saying at paragraph 67 of his determination that "there is
    no   record   of   the   Appellant   having   sought   treatment    for
    depression/stress before her asylum claim".  It is to be noted that  in
    addition to making this  comment  at  paragraph  67,  the  Judge  makes
    substantially the same comment at paragraph 76.

30. The relevant evidence relied upon in the  Grounds  relates  to  two  GP
    notes/letters dating from 2007 (Appellant's bundle pages  108-111).   I
    do not propose to set out the contents of those letters in  full:  they
    are a matter of record and the contenst are known to the  parties.   It
    is to be noted that the Appellant claimed asylum in  April  2009.   The
    GP's letters which are dated from August and December  2009  relate  in
    the main part physical symptoms and complaints dating from August 2007,
    and then add - with no specification as to dates - that  the  Appellant
    also has a history of depression.  There is nothing  in  either  letter
    that suggests or states  that  the  Appellant  made  any  complaint  of
    depressive symptoms prior to April 2009.


31. In my judgment it  follows  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    correct to state that "there is  no  record  of  the  Appellant  having
    sought treatment for depression/stress before her  asylum  claim".   It
    follows that the premise of paragraphs 12 and  13  of  the  Grounds  is
    thereby misconceived.

32. Before me Ms  Kiai  has  placed  particular  emphasis  on  the  Judge's
    approach to the evidence of Dr Chisholm.  In particular she  points  to
    the Judge's observations at  paragraphs  79-82  of  the  determination.
    Those paragraphs are in these terms:

         "79. Dr Chisholm  found  the  Appellant's  mental  state  which  he
             ascribes to PTSD and severe depression to the Appellant's ill-
             treatment at the hands of the ZANU-PF thugs.


         80.   He  acknowledges  that  the  Appellant  suffered  abuse  both
             physical and mental at the hands of Bishop Timothy the  pastor
             to whom the Appellant was directed by Pastor  Burke  when  she
             first came to the  UK.   It  is  clear  from  the  Appellant's
             account that the years she spent with Pastor Timothy, [a self-
             proclaimed bishop in the church he founded] was  a  period  of
             abuse from him and his wife.   The  Appellant  describes  very
             early starts in the morning, having to be at  the  church  for
             5.00am for prayers followed by all sorts of duties  until  she
             was allowed to leave at about midnight before going to bed  to
             ready herself for another early start at 4.30  or  5.00am  the
             next day.


         81.  That regime went for years.  The Appellant  describes  herself
             as being unable to sleep when  she  did  get  to  go  to  bed.
             Besides having menial duties such as cleaning the church,  she
             also had to look after the pastor's baby and  children,  teach
             students and provide catering for church members.


         82.  It is  not  surprising  that  the  Appellant's  mental  health
             suffered."


33. It is argued that the  statement  at  paragraph  82  that  "It  is  not
    surprising that the Appellant's mental health suffered" in  consequence
    of the treatment she received in the United Kingdom is indicative of an
    unduly dismissive approach to the evidence of Dr Chisholm which  opined
    attribution of the origin of the Appellant's mental  health  conditions
    to the ill-treatment she  had  received  in  Zimbabwe  -  or  at  least
    considered such symptoms as the Appellant exhibited  to  be  consistent
    with such an origin.  In this context my attention has been directed in
    particular to the 'supplementary  response'  prepared  by  Dr  Chisholm
    dated 22 August 2013 pursuant to the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Widdup dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal.   The  'supplementary
    response' is to be found at  pages  41-42  of  the  Appellant's  bundle
    before the First-tier Tribunal.


34. My attention has been directed in particular to paragraphs within  that
    response that emphasise the  author's  reasons  for  opining  that  the
    Appellant's mental health conditions were related to  the  events  that
    had befallen her in Zimbabwe.  In  particular  Dr  Chisholm  identified
    reasons why  he  considered  this  to  be  a  preferable  view  to  the
    possibility that the Appellant's difficulties arose only by  reason  of
    her circumstances in the United Kingdom.  He also addressed himself  to
    the question of whether or not the Appellant might  be  malingering  or
    otherwise exaggerating her symptoms.  In this context and generally  Ms
    Kiai has also directed my attention to the case of  Beqaraj  v  Special
    Adjudicator [2002] EWHC 1469 (Admin) and in  particular  the  following
    passage from the judgment of Mr Justice Forbes:

         "It is clear to me that the adjudicator used her  adverse  findings
         of credibility with regard to the claimant  and  his  wife  as  the
         means whereby to reject the important and significant  evidence  of
         Dr George and Dr Varley.  That was  putting  the  cart  before  the
         horse.  The evidence of  Dr  George  and  Dr  Varley  was  strongly
         corroborative of the truth of the account given by the claimant and
         his wife about the serious rape that was suffered by the wife.   It
         was therefore necessary for the adjudicator to take  that  evidence
         into account as part of  her  consideration  of  all  the  evidence
         before coming to any  conclusion  as  to  the  credibility  of  the
         claimant and his wife."


35. In my judgment - and notwithstanding the criticisms that have been made
    of the specific treatment of Dr Chisholm's evidence by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge -  it  is  nonetheless  the  case  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did in effect take the medical evidence into account  as
    part of an overall consideration of his evidence.  He did not treat,  I
    find, his other assessments as in some way determinative of the  weight
    to be accorded to the medical evidence.  Although paragraph 82, which I
    have already cited, appears to bring to a conclusion the passage of the
    determination that is dealing with the medical evidence,  it  does  not
    bring to a conclusion the  Judge's  consideration  of  the  Appellant's
    case.  Moreover, paragraph 82 does not  constitute  an  'out  and  out'
    rejection of the medical evidence, and certainly does not constitute  a
    determination of the Appellant's overall claim.  The Judge, bearing  in
    mind as I have already observed that he has directed himself as to  the
    necessity for an 'in the round' assessment, goes on at paragraphs 84-89
    to address himself to the Appellant's narrative of the incident in  the
    bar.  It is only then, at paragraph 90, that he  reaches  a  conclusion
    rejecting the Appellant's account.  It seems to me that  that  approach
    is consistent with the approach identified as necessary in the case  of
    Beqaraj.

36. That said, it is appropriate to observe that at  the  hearing  in  June
    2014, and as I have recorded in  the  'Memorandum  and  Directions',  I
    indicated that I was troubled  by  Judge  Napthine's  approach  to  the
    supporting medical evidence: (however, because at that time it appeared
    the error of law issue had been conceded on another  basis  I  did  not
    invite either  party  to  address  me  in  this  regard  or  state  any
    conclusion in the absence of submissions).   Notwithstanding  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge has clearly taken the medical  evidence  into
    account and has done so in the context of all of  the  evidence  before
    him, I consider that not all of the sense of 'being  troubled'  that  I
    expressed previously has been assuaged.  It is, for reasons  identified
    by Ms Kiai, a thorough report prepared by Dr Chisholm  bolstered  by  a
    strong and boldly defensive supplementary statement.


37. However, in my judgment ultimately any potential error in  this  regard
    could have made no difference to the outcome in the appeal.

38. I invited Ms Kiai to identify on what basis the events in  the  bar  or
    nightclub could be said to put the Appellant at risk if she were to  be
    returned to Zimbabwe, and to relate any such identifiable risks to  the
    current country guidance case, which continues to  be  CM  (EM  country
    guidance;  disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00059  (IAC).  (The
    headnote was helpfully incorporated into the written submissions before
    the First-tier Tribunal. It is also a matter of record and known to the
    parties. In the circumstances I do not reproduce it here.)

39. The First-tier Tribunal Judge said the  following  about  the  risk  on
    return in light of the findings that he had made, at paragraphs 95-97:

         "95. I find that the only potential trigger  for  attention  should
             the Appellant be returned is the fact that she  has  spent  10
             years in the UK and is a failed asylum seeker.   However  that
             is not a matter which should cause her any difficulty....


         96.  It is clear that when she left Zimbabwe on  her  own  passport
             and was not subject to any checks upon departure that  she  is
             of no interest to the authorities.  She was of no interest  to
             the authorities when leaving which undermines  her  suggestion
             that she had failed to return to continue to  be  interrogated
             by the police.  The idea that she had felt able to go and work
             in her cousin's bar or restaurant owned by her cousin and  her
             brigadier ZANU-PF supporting brother/husband and frequented by
             Mugabe loyalists does not suggest that she was of any interest
             to the authorities at that time.


         97.  Being able to leave on her own passport swathed in a headscarf
             and bandage  whilst  suffering  the  effects  of  her  claimed
             beating again suggests she was of no interest to anyone."


40. Ms Kiai suggests that if the account of events  in  the  bar  had  been
    accepted  the  Appellant  would  be  perceived  as  an  MDC  supporter.
    Further, that if the Appellant had provided a meeting place for the MDC
    this facilitated the discussion  and  exploration  of  their  political
    ideas, which might result in even more risk arising for her than  would
    be the case for a mere supporter of the MDC.   I  do  not  accept  that
    submission.  I do not accept that even if the Appellant were  perceived
    as permitting the holding of a  meeting  on  the  premises  this  would
    equate with her being a person having  or  perceived  to  be  having  a
    significant MDC profile, or otherwise would result in her  meeting  any
    of the risk categories identified in the country guidance case.


41. Accordingly in all of the circumstances I reject  this  aspect  of  the
    Appellant's challenge, based on the treatment of the  medical  evidence
    as corroboration of an assault meted out for being wrongly perceived as
    having allowed MDC members to congregate in a restricted  area  of  the
    bar in which the Appellant worked. Any error is  not  material  because
    there is no basis to consider that such an event would have given  rise
    to a current risk.

42. The third basis of challenge argues that the Appellant should have been
    treated as a vulnerable witness.  As was acknowledged  at  the  hearing
    before me in June 2014, no application was made before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the Appellant to be treated in this matter, and the  issue
    was not otherwise raised on behalf of the Appellant before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  I do not accept that this is something that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge should inevitably have done of his  own  motion  on
    the basis of the available supporting evidence. In any event,  even  if
    the Appellant were to be treated as a  vulnerable  witness  -  or  more
    particularly even if there had been some error in failing so  to  treat
    her -  this  would  not  affect  or  otherwise  undermine  the  Judge's
    reasoning in support of the finding in respect of the Appellant's claim
    to be a teacher which is based on the confusingly  discrepant  evidence
    from disparate sources.

43. The fourth ground of appeal relates to Article 8 of the  ECHR.   It  is
    pleaded that the Judge failed to take into account that  the  Appellant
    had been forced into a situation of domestic servitude  whilst  in  the
    United Kingdom and that the consequences of this issue and  the  impact
    this had upon her vulnerability on return  to  Zimbabwe  had  not  been
    considered.  In this context Ms Kiai  again  emphasises  in  amplifying
    this submission the contents of the  medical  evidence,  in  particular
    that of Dr Chisholm.

44. The Judge addresses the question of Article 8 from paragraph 117 of his
    determination.  Essentially, he concludes  that  the  Appellant  has  a
    support mechanism available to her similar  to  the  support  mechanism
    that she has available in the UK by way of her  close  connection  with
    her church.  In my judgment the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  reasoning
    in this regard is adequate and in all of the circumstances  I  find  no
    material error of law.


45. Accordingly, notwithstanding my reservations about the thoroughness  of
    the approach to the supporting medical evidence, most notably  but  not
    exclusively that of Dr Chisholm, because  this  is  a  case  where  the
    reasons for rejecting the Appellant's claim to be a teacher were  sound
    and sustainable, and that the other aspect of  the  Appellant's  claim,
    that is to say the matters arising from the  possible  perception  that
    she allowed MDC members to use a private area of the bar in  which  she
    was employed, even if accepted would not be reasonably likely  to  give
    rise to a risk on return,  I conclude that the Appellant has failed  to
    demonstrate any material error of law in the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal.

46. Having  reminded  myself  of  the  provisions  of  Section  12  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 I am content to say there is
    no material error of law.  In the alternative, if there were  an  error
    of law I would not exercise the discretion to set aside the decision of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to  section  12(2)(a).   In  those
    circumstances the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  stands  and  the
    challenge to it is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
    at the hearing on 13
January 2015.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A.  Lewis    Dated:  19  January  2015





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                                   ANNEX A

    TEXT OF 'MEMORANDUM AND DIRECTIONS SENT ON 18 JUNE 2014 FOLLOWING THE
                           HEARING ON 17 JUNE 2014

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Napthine promulgated on  25  March  2014,  dismissing  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Respondent's decision  dated  23  November  2012  to
    remove the Appellant from the UK following the refusal  of  her  second
    application for asylum.

 2. Before me today the parties indicated that there was common  ground  as
    to there being an error of law on the part of Judge Napthine. They were
    also in agreement regarding the future conduct of the appeal:  that  it
    should be heard again before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. By way of clarification I invited Mr Duffy  to  identify  the  specific
    paragraphs in the Appellant's grounds in support of the application for
    permission to appeal which he acknowledged amounted to an error of law.
    He struggled immediately to put his finger on a specific  paragraph  in
    what are lengthy grounds, but stated that he accepted the substance  of
    paragraph 3 of the grant of permission to appeal, which he  paraphrased
    as being an inconsistency between the Judge's finding  that  a  witness
    who confirmed that the Appellant had been  a  teacher  was  a  credible
    witness, and the Judge's rejection of the  Appellant's  claim  to  have
    been a teacher.

 4. In the circumstances I did not invite Ms Short to amplify the challenge
    to the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  but  invited  the
    parties' observations on future conduct. As indicated above, they  both
    agreed that the effect  of  the  Judge's  error  went  to  the  overall
    credibility assessment of the Appellant and warranted a fresh  hearing.
    Indeed, it was possible to fix a date for hearing at Hatton Cross on  2
    December 2014.

 5. Thereafter, I had a brief discussion with Ms Short about  the  pleading
    in the grounds that  the  Appellant  should  have  been  treated  as  a
    vulnerable witness - noting, which Ms Short confirmed,  that  this  did
    not appear to have been the subject of a submission before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge - and indicating in such circumstances I would have
    been unlikely to find much merit in that ground of challenge.  However,
    I also indicated that I was troubled by Judge  Napthine's  approach  to
    the supporting medical evidence - but did not invite  either  party  to
    address me in this regard or state any conclusion  in  the  absence  of
    submissions.

 6. Upon coming to write up the 'error of law' determination it has  become
    apparent that Mr Duffy may have  been  mistaken  in  his  reference  to
    paragraph 3 of the grant of permission to appeal.

 7. This appeal has some history. It  relates  to  the  Appellant's  second
    application for asylum - an earlier application having been refused  on
    22 July 2009 and a subsequent appeal  dismissed  by  Immigration  Judge
    Emerton in a  determination  promulgated  on  23  September  2009  (ref
    AA/07818/2009).  Following  the   refusal   of   an   application   for
    reconsideration, the Appellant made repeated further representations to
    the Respondent:  her  representations  were  rejected,  but  they  were
    accepted to constitute a 'fresh claim' giving rise to a  further  right
    of appeal against a removal decision made on 23 November 2012. This  is
    the relevant immigration decision herein.

 8. The Appellant's appeal was heard on 7 May 2013 by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Widdup and dismissed. An application for permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal was granted on 13 June 2013 by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Osborne, and subsequently Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy  found
    that there had been an error of law  and  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to be heard afresh in the First-tier with all issues at large.
    It was  in  such  circumstances  that  the  appeal  came  before  Judge
    Napathine.

 9. It would appear that Mr Duffy's reference to paragraph 3 of  the  grant
    of permission to appeal relates to Judge Osborne's grant in respect  of
    the previous appeal hearing before Judge Widdup.

10. In such circumstances it seems clear to me that Mr  Duffy's  concession
    was premised on a misconception. In my judgement - save with one caveat
    - the interests of justice require that I reconvene the  appeal  before
    me in order that I hear further submissions on the issue  of  error  of
    law, with a view to immediately proceeding to a rehearing of the appeal
    if I find there is an error of law. (This will also have the  advantage
    of likely leading to a quicker resolution than  awaiting  the  December
    listing at Hatton Cross.)

11. The single caveat is this: if the Respondent confirms the concession on
    error of law justifying a fresh hearing - whether that be on the  basis
    seemingly erroneously indicated by Mr Duffy or on some  other  basis  -
    then it will be unnecessary to reconvene the hearing before  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the case can proceed in accordance  with  the  listing  at
    Hatton Cross.

12. Accordingly, I make the following Directions:

   (i) The Respondent is to file and serve within ten days of  the  sending
         of these Directions written confirmation of whether or  not  it  is
         accepted that there was a material error of  law  on  the  part  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Napthine, such that a  fresh  hearing  of
         the Appellant's appeal is  warranted.  In  the  event  that  it  is
         conceded that there was such an error of law, the Respondent is  to
         particularise the accepted error.


   (ii) In the event that the Respondent concedes the  issue  of  error  of
         law, a brief Determination will be prepared to this  effect  by  me
         and promulgated to the parties and the appeal  will  proceed  to  a
         rehearing as already listed at Hatton Cross on 2 December 2014.


   (iii) In the event that the Respondent does not  concede  the  issue  of
         error of law, the hearing date at Hatton Cross will be vacated  and
         the appeal will be listed before me at Field  House  on  the  first
         available date for consideration of the issue of error of law  with
         a substantive rehearing to remake the decision  on  the  appeal  to
         follow immediately in the event  that  such  error  is  found.  The
         appeal will be listed for one day to permit sufficient time.


   (iv) In this latter circumstance it will be necessary for the  Appellant
         to attend Field House with her witnesses. Any  further  documentary
         evidence or statements upon which she may wish to  rely  should  be
         filed and served at least seven days prior to the hearing.




