
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11181/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 13 May 2015                       |On 1 June  2015                      |
|Prepared on 18 May 2015              |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    S. R.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant, a citizen of  Pakistan,  born  on  2  October  1977,
         entered the United Kingdom by  air  with  his  family  and  claimed
         asylum at port on 26 November 2013.  The  Respondent  refused  that
         claim on 4 December 2014 and in consequence she made a decision  of
         the same date to remove him and his family to Pakistan.

      2. An appeal against that removal decision was heard and dismissed  by
         First Tier Tribunal Judge Duff  in  a  Decision  promulgated  on  4
         February 2014. The parties are agreed that the Judge is to be taken
         to have accepted that the Appellant had generally given a  truthful
         account of his experiences in Karachi as a Shia Muslim businessman,
         because the Respondent had not challenged the core of that  account
         as untrue. Some details, as offered  under  cross-examination  were
         however rejected by the Judge as an exaggeration  of  the  original
         account, and untrue [22]. No  issue  arises  in  relation  to  that
         finding, which was plainly one that was open to him to make.

      3. Thus the Judge accepted, as had the Respondent, that the  Appellant
         had been a volunteer for both the MQM political party, and for  the
         MWM religious group, and a member of a  workers  union.  The  Judge
         also accepted that the Appellant and his partner in  business  (who
         was also his cousin) had received on 4  October  2013  a  blackmail
         demand for 500,000Rs, threatening his own life,  and  that  of  his
         family in the event of non-payment. The demand had been  backed  up
         by phonecalls informing him that the family were being watched, and
         giving details of their  movements  to  back  up  that  claim.  The
         Appellant had complained to the police, believing  this  to  be  an
         attempt at extortion by either the Taliban  and/or  the  Lashkar-e-
         Jhangvi. He had been promised that the matter would be investigated
         and was told that a number of other  people  had  received  similar
         threats. The Appellant believed that a number of other  members  of
         the same  workers  union  as  himself  had  also  received  similar
         threats.

      4. The Judge also accepted  that  the  Appellant,  frustrated  at  the
         inability  of  the  police  to  simply  resolve  the  problem,  and
         believing that a number of its members had been similarly targeted,
         spoke at a press conference called by the  workers  union  to  talk
         about the threats, and the extortion demands. He gave his  name  to
         the press in the course of  that  conference.  Shortly  thereafter,
         without awaiting  the  outcome  of  the  police  enquiry  into  his
         complaint, and using family visit visas that had been  obtained  in
         July 2013, the Appellant and his family travelled to the UK  on  26
         November 2013. They did so shortly after the press conference,  and
         he did not claim that the press conference itself had  led  to  any
         threat against him, or attempt to harm him.

      5. In February 2014, and whilst the family were in the UK,  the  Judge
         accepted that the  Appellant's  cousin  and  business  partner  was
         murdered.

      6. The murder of another cousin, an Inspector of police (and  thus  an
         officer  of  some  rank),  on  15  April  2013  had  preceded   the
         Appellant's own difficulties. This murder was said by the Appellant
         to have resulted from his cousin's refusal  to  accede  to  demands
         that  he  release  some  prisoners.  Save  that  his   cousin   was
         necessarily a member of the Appellant's family,  and  also  a  Shia
         Muslim,  it  was  not  suggested  by   the   Appellant   that   the
         circumstances of this cousin's murder  had  any  relevance  to  the
         Appellant's own  position  other  than  to  demonstrate  that  Shia
         Muslims do hold positions  of  rank  within  the  police  force  in
         Pakistan.

      7. Permission to appeal was granted by First Tier Tribunal Judge Kelly
         on 25 February 2015 on the basis that it was arguable the Judge had
         confused the issues of the  sufficiency  of  state  protection  and
         internal relocation.

      8. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice on 17 March 2015. She  argued
         therein that the Judge had directed himself appropriately, and  had
         found that state protection was afforded at an  adequate  level  to
         Shia Muslims against the actions of non state  agents,  as  he  was
         entitled to do given the evidence that was  before  him.  Moreover,
         there was in reality no error in  his  approach  to  the  issue  of
         internal relocation. The Judge had done no more than point out that
         if the threat faced by the Appellant and his  family  was  a  local
         one, as he believed it to be, then it could be entirely avoided  by
         the expedient of relocation away from Karachi  to  a  predominantly
         Shia area within Pakistan.

      9. Thus the matter comes before me.

    Grounds

     10. Ms Brakaj, who did not represent the Appellant in  the  First  Tier
         Tribunal, argued that the threat of  blackmail/extortion  that  was
         faced by the Appellant was not a threat that was  confined  to  his
         home area, but was demonstrably a national threat  because  of  the
         organisations that were responsible  for  it.  The  Respondent  had
         accepted (and had never withdrawn her concession  to  this  effect)
         that the threats made against the Appellant were made by either the
         Taliban or Lashkar-e-Jhangvi [RFR 44], on the  basis  of  his  self
         declared belief that this was the case. Ms Brakaj argued that  both
         were  national  organisations  enjoying  a  national  reach  within
         Pakistan.

     11. Ms Brakaj accepted that the threat was one that would be likely  to
         have arisen because of a  combination  of  the  perception  of  the
         Appellant's religion and his wealth, because it was not an  attempt
         to simply murder the Appellant on account of his religion,  but  an
         attempt to extort a significant sum of money from him. She accepted
         that the individuals who had issued threats against  the  Appellant
         must be based locally to himself in Karachi, but argued that  those
         individuals were part of a national organisation albeit  both  they
         and their organisation were non state agents. Thus she argued,  the
         threat the Appellant faced extended across the whole  of  Pakistan,
         and it was not one  that  was  limited  to  his  home  area  within
         Karachi.

     12. Ms Brakaj also argued that the evidence showed that  there  was  no
         sufficiency of state protection for Shia Muslims within Pakistan in
         general terms, and that this was consistent  with  the  Appellant's
         own experience. He had seen no action from the  police  other  than
         the promise to investigate his complaint, and this had plainly  not
         been successful since his cousin/business partner (who had received
         the same threats) had been murdered in February 2014.

     13. Separately, since it  was  not  disputed  that  the  Appellant  had
         pursued both his religious and political  convictions  when  living
         within Karachi through his membership and actions on behalf of  the
         MQM, and the WMW, and the workers union,  it  was  argued  that  he
         could reasonably be assumed  to  genuinely  wish  to  pursue  those
         convictions wherever he lived in a  similar  way.  The  pursuit  of
         those convictions would however inevitably bring adverse  attention
         to him wherever he lived within Pakistan. Thus, even if  there  did
         exist  areas  within  Pakistan  where  Shia  Muslims  were  in  the
         majority, or areas where there were no sectarian tensions, it would
         not be reasonable to expect him to relocate to  them.  Although  it
         was the Appellant who had placed evidence before  the  Judge  about
         the ability of Shia Muslims in general to relocate within  Pakistan
         to areas where there were  no  sectarian  tensions  [ApB  p131]  Ms
         Brakaj argued that the particular circumstances  of  the  Appellant
         meant that he would not be able to do so in safety.

     14. These arguments do not in my judgement  engage  with  the  relevant
         country guidance decisions of the Upper  Tribunal  in  relation  to
         Pakistan, and the Judge's decision upon the  sufficiency  of  state
         protection. Although the Judge did not have the benefit of it,  his
         decision was consistent with the guidance to be found in  AK  &  SK
         (Christians: risk) Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 569.

     15. The Judge was plainly not satisfied that  there  was  any  lack  of
         sufficiency of state  protection  for  the  general  population  of
         Pakistan against criminal acts, including blackmail  and  extortion
         threats made by non state agents [27]. That was a decision that  he
         was perfectly entitled to reach upon the evidence, and in the light
         of the current country guidance, and it is not in  fact  challenged
         by the Appellant. His case is that  the  evidence  shows  that  the
         state systematically fails to offer adequate  state  protection  to
         those who are Shia Muslims, but there is no merit in that  argument
         either, which the Judge also rejected  [27].  Although  brief,  the
         Judge gave entirely adequate reasons for his rejection of the claim
         that there was  no  adequate  state  protection.  On  analysis  the
         Appellant's criticisms  of  that  rejection  are  no  more  than  a
         disagreement with it.

     16. It is not  enough  for  the  Appellant  to  argue  that  since  his
         cousin/business partner was murdered it  necessarily  follows  that
         there was any lack of sufficiency of state protection -  the  state
         has not failed to discharge its obligations to its citizens  merely
         because it has been unable to  prevent  a  criminal  act.  This  is
         however the real core of the Appellant's challenge to  the  Judge's
         decision. As such it is misconceived.

     17. If there was adequate state protection available to  the  Appellant
         in Karachi, then as  identified  in  the  grant  of  permission  to
         appeal, there was no need for the Judge to go on  to  consider  the
         issue of  internal  relocation  at  all.  Any  error  made  in  the
         consideration of that issue would not be material to the outcome of
         the appeal. Since there was no error of law in the Judge's approach
         to the evidence upon the issue of the adequacy of state protection,
         it follows that I dismiss the appeal.

DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 4
    February 2015 therefore contained no error of law in the  dismissal  of
    the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to be set aside and
    remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 18 May 2015




Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.



Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 18 May 2015



