
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11084/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated |
|on 2nd August 2016                        |On 16th August 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               hei van nguyen
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate; Gray & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam, born on 1st  June  1999.   He  has
   not asked for anonymity.  For reasons explained in a  letter  dated  24th
   July 2015, the respondent refused his asylum  claim,  but  granted  leave
   until 1st December 2016.

2. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  refusal  of
   asylum.  He claimed to be at risk:

   i) from traffickers who put him to work in a cannabis factory in the UK;

  ii) from loan sharks, from whom his father obtained money to finance their
      travel; and

 iii) as a Catholic.

3. In his determination promulgated on  24th  May  2016  Judge  McGrade,  in
   summary:

   i) found the appellant not to be a credible witness;

  ii) rejected the claim that he had been trafficked;

 iii) rejected the claim of risk from loan sharks;

  iv) found that even if there were any risk, the appellant  could  relocate
      within Vietnam;

   v) noted that the appellant  had  not  faced  any  adverse  treatment  on
      account of his Catholicism in Vietnam, and that nothing had been  said
      to suggest that upon return he would engage in activities which  might
      lead to him being targeted by the Vietnamese authorities;

  vi) accepted objective evidence of  real  difficulties  for  Catholics  in
      Vietnam, but found no  information  that  the  appellant  intended  to
      assume a prominent and more active role in the church; and

 vii) dismissed the appeal.

The appellant's grounds of appeal and oral submissions.

4. Ground 1 is that the  judge  erred  by  taking  into  account  statements
   allegedly made by the appellant to the British Transport Police, when the
   respondent failed to produce  the  interview  record.   MH  (respondent's
   bundle: documents not provided) [2010] UKUT 1682 is cited.

5. Ground 2 is headed "failure to adequately consider evidence  material  to
   the outcome of the appeal when assessing credibility", and is broken down
   into several components, in summary:

   i) an apparent discrepancy over how the appellant lost contact  with  his
      father is not, on reference to the evidence, a discrepancy at all;

  ii) in noting an apparent conflict about the number of  people  with  whom
      the appellant travelled, the judge  failed  to  take  account  of  the
      explanation in the appellant's statement;

 iii) alternatively, no clear discrepancy is identified,  and  the  evidence
      was consistent;

  iv) in finding an apparent discrepancy  or  failure  to  explain  why  the
      appellant left social work accommodation, the  judge  overlooked  that
      the appellant said  he  was  told  a  social  worker  would  come  the
      following day, and when no social worker came, he left;

   v) the judge says he has had the advantage  of  hearing  the  appellant's
      oral evidence, but failed to set out what it was and why  it  did  not
      amount to a satisfactory explanation for discrepancies;

  vi) the judge held it against the appellant that he was unsure whether  he
      ever had a passport, but fell into procedural unfairness by failing to
      give him the opportunity to clarify.  The appellant  would  have  said
      that it was only on later explanation that he  knew  what  a  passport
      was;

 vii) the judge failed to observe the basic nature of a screening interview,
      when only brief details are sought.  Had the appellant been given  the
      opportunity to explain, he would have said that further  details  were
      elicited only in further conversations with his guardian.

6. Ground 3 is that the judge erred in relation to  the  joint  Presidential
   Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 on children and  other  vulnerable  witnesses,
   failing to make allowances for the age and vulnerability of the appellant
   when considering discrepancies or other shortcomings in his evidence.

7. Ground 4 is that  the  judge  failed  to  exercise  anxious  scrutiny  in
   respect of the risk as a Catholic.  The country information is  that  not
   only high level members are at risk and that Catholicism  is  seen  as  a
   threat to national security.  The appellant would be at risk on religious
   grounds wherever he might relocate.

8. Mr Winter said that nothing of significance emerged from the  number  and
   gender of those accompanying the appellant when he  travelled  by  lorry.
   The interview with the Transport Police had not been  produced,  although
   there was a legal obligation to do so.  The appellant's accounts  of  how
   he and his father became separated could be read  sensibly  together  and
   were not at variance.  The explanation by the appellant in his  statement
   might not have added a great deal, but it was nevertheless an  error  for
   the judge not to mention it.  The decision contained no summary  of  what
   the appellant said in oral evidence.  There were several points which had
   unfairly not been put to the appellant and to  which  he  now  offered  a
   reply.  Together with ground 3, based on the  guidance,  the  effect  was
   that there had been no proper assessment of credibility.  That issue  was
   material, because the judge had not dealt with sufficiency of protection,
   and had not properly resolved the case on  the  alternative  of  internal
   relocation.   The  case  might  in  principle  be  answered  (apart  from
   Catholicism) by internal relocation, but the judge erred  on  that  point
   also.  There is presently no country guidance on the risk to Catholics in
   Vietnam.  The skeleton argument on which  the  appellant  relied  in  the
   First-tier Tribunal specified the evidence of difficulties for Catholics.
    In that evidence, no distinction was to  be  found  based  on  level  of
   activity in the church.  It was  therefore  beside  the  point  that  the
   appellant had no significant profile within the church, the risk being to
   all level of participants.

The respondent's written response and oral submissions.

9. It was for the judge to consider the evidence before him and decide  what
   weight to place upon it,  including  the  statements  allegedly  made  to
   British Transport Police, even without direct production of the interview
   records.  If the appellant sought to challenge that account it would have
   been open to him to seek an adjournment and address the  issue.   It  was
   open to the judge to  rely  on  the  appellant's  evidence  and  to  note
   inconsistencies, not for him to "descend into the  arena  and  engage  in
   cross-examination".  The grounds amounted only to a continuing series  of
   disagreements.  The judge was fully aware  of  the  appellant's  minority
   (paragraph 24) and there was no evidence that he  took  an  inappropriate
   approach.  Serious inconsistencies emerged in  the  appellant's  account,
   and the findings of the judge were available to him.

10. Further in response to ground 1, Mrs O'Brien said that  MH  was  a  case
   going particularly to the absence of bank documentation.  While it  might
   sometimes be unfair to  rely  indirectly  on  documents  which  were  not
   produced, the present case was very  different.   The  evidence  emerging
   from the interview with  British  Transport  Police  was  stated  in  the
   decision letter and was available for the appellant's response.   He  had
   not sought to contest what was said about that interview  in  the  First-
   tier Tribunal, and had made no point there about  non-production  of  the
   original interview record.  It was too late to raise the issue only after
   his appeal was dismissed.  There had been discrepancies, and  the  weight
   to be given to them was up to the judge.

11. On ground 2, there had been discrepancies.   The  weight  to  attach  to
   them was a matter for the judge, short of irrationality,  which  was  not
   and could not be averred.  As to leaving social work  accommodation,  the
   judge's finding was to the effect that the appellant had not provided any
   sensible explanation.  His narration of his departure did not  amount  to
   an explanation in any respect which might  have  helped  his  case.   The
   judge was entitled to examine the appellant's evidence, and did not  have
   to put every point of his analysis to the appellant for further comment.

12. On ground 3, there was nothing to suggest that  the  appellant  had  not
   taken full account of the appellant's age and vulnerability.   A  recital
   of the guidance note would have  added  nothing  to  the  decision.   The
   complaint was a matter of form rather than substance.

13. Ground 4 was based on a point not included in the grounds of  appeal  to
   the First-tier Tribunal, but to which great weight was now sought  to  be
   attached, based on the finding that the appellant  is  a  Catholic.   The
   judge's decision reflected the case as it had been put to  him.   It  had
   not been argued on the basis of risk by being a Catholic alone.   In  any
   event the respondent's Operational Guidance Note, the first item produced
   by the appellant, was to the effect that there might  be  risk  to  those
   actively protesting about occupation of former  Catholic  properties,  or
   against the regime.  It did not suggest there was any risk, for  example,
   to those who attended mass.   The  Catholic  Church,  while  it  has  its
   difficulties with the regime, is officially  registered.   There  was  no
   error in the judge's conclusion that the appellant was not at risk simply
   as a Catholic.

14. Internal relocation  was  an  answer  to  the  claim.   The  issues  the
   appellant raised about internal relocation  were  no  more  than  general
   difficulties which might be faced by any young adult in Vietnam.  Even if
   he had been found credible, his case would have failed.

The appellant's reply.

15. There was no reference to the guidance in the decision, and not  even  a
   sentence on the vulnerability of the appellant.   The  judge  might  have
   acknowledged that the appellant is a child, but he  should  have  gone  a
   step further.  The religious aspect of the claim had  been  raised  as  a
   response to First-tier Tribunal directions, in advance  of  the  hearing.
   It had been  developed  by  the  background  evidence  produced  and  the
   skeleton argument.  It might amount to the proposition that all Catholics
   in Vietnam were at risk but the "flood gates"  argument  was  irrelevant.
   The evidence had not been assessed to any real extent by  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.  The appellant had been accepted as a Catholic,  so  the  issue
   did not depend on credibility.

Conclusions.

16. In significant respects, the grounds attempt to improve the  appellant's
   case with the benefit of hindsight.

17. The appellant made no argument in the First-tier Tribunal based  on  the
   absence of the original interview record with British  Transport  Police.
   The discrepancy was plainly before him on the materials produced  by  the
   respondent, so he had a reasonable opportunity to deal  with  it.   There
   has been no substantial unfairness.  Ground 1 takes a technical point too
   late, and discloses no error.

18. The appellant did not base any submission in the First-tier Tribunal  on
   the Presidential Guidance Note.  He does not cite any particular  passage
   which ought to have been applied.  His youth and  possible  vulnerability
   were central and obvious features of the case.  I see no reason to  think
   that an experienced judge might have failed to have these matters in mind
   when assessing  the  evidence,  without  recital  of  any  mantra.   That
   disposes of ground 3.

19. Ground 2 searches valiantly for error on the facts, and to elevate  that
   into error of law.  It  may  well  be  argued  that  there  is  not  much
   difference between the appellant's two accounts of how  he  lost  contact
   with his father, but it was for the judge to assess  the  evidence  as  a
   whole, taking account of such discrepancies and shortcomings as he  found
   in it.  All his points are rational.  An experienced judge is well  aware
   of the distinction between screening and  substantial  interviews.   That
   distinction does not explain away why the appellant said at first that he
   did not know why his father wanted  to  leave  Vietnam,  but  later  gave
   another account.

20. Reading the determination fairly and as a whole, I seen no error in  the
   overall adverse credibility conclusion.

21.  On  internal  relocation,  the  grounds  are  only   re-assertion   and
   disagreement.  Away from his home  area  in  Vietnam,  the  appellant  on
   return as a young adult would be at  no  greater  disadvantage  than  any
   other such Vietnamese citizen making his  own  way  in  the  world.   The
   judge's decision on this point is brief, but it is  not  shown  that  any
   other decision might reasonably have been reached.

22. The remaining ground is whether the judge erred, as a matter of law,  by
   finding that the appellant would  not  be  at  risk  simply  by  being  a
   Catholic.

23. The references made in the course of the hearing in the  Upper  Tribunal
   show a  difficult  relationship  between  the  Church  and  the  national
   authorities, with a perception of a threat to national  security.   There
   are reports of detentions for participation in  peaceful  vigils  and  in
   demonstrations at properties formerly owned by the Church, and of assault
   and intimidation by thugs instigated by the government against  Catholics
   engaging in private study and worship  at  unregistered  locations.   The
   strongest example cited is in the respondent's OGN  at  paragraph  2.5.5,
   derived from a radio station's report in September 2013 of police  having
   "fired multiple gunshots and lobbed grenades in front  of  a  church  and
   violently dispersed hundreds of Catholics demanding the  release  of  two
   parishioners in a north central  "province".   Other  reports  relate  to
   seizures of land and property  from  the  church  by  local  authorities.
   There are reports of general restriction on religious  practice,  but  at
   the same time there is a system  of  registration  with  the  government.
   Catholic practice plainly goes on within those restraints. I was referred
   to no evidence which might reasonably have been held to rise to the level
   of a general risk of persecution of all Catholics in Vietnam.

24. The judge noted that the background evidence did show real  difficulties
   for Catholics in Vietnam.  His brief  summary  at  paragraph  21  of  the
   background evidence is accurate.  The evidence does not include  explicit
   statements that risk does not extend  to  ordinary  practitioners  of  no
   significant  profile,  not  engaging  in  protests  or  in   unregistered
   practices, but that is its obvious tenor.  The  judge's  conclusion  that
   there would be no risk to this appellant as a result of  his  Catholicism
   discloses no factual or legal error.  Further scrutiny of the  background
   evidence shows that he needed to say no more than he did.

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


                           [pic]


                           15 August 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
