
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11333/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th April 2017                           |On 10th August 2017           |
|                                             |                              |


Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                              MR DAWIT ASMELASH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. K Lawson, Cohesion Legal Services Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr. G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Williams promulgated on 22nd September 2016.  The  underlying  decision
    that was the subject of  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT") was the decision of the respondent  dated  19th  June  2015  to
    refuse the appellant's protection claim.


 2. The appellant was born on 26th May 1988 in Mendefera, and claims to  be
    a national of Eritrea.  His father, now  deceased,  was  also  born  in
    Mendefera.  His mother, with whom the appellant has lost  contact,  was
    born in Asmara.  He is of Tigre/Tigrinya ethnicity.


 3. The Judge of  the  FtT  found  that  the  appellant  is  a  Pentecostal
    Christian.


 4. At paragraphs [19] to [21] of his decision, the FtT Judge  acknowledged
    the appellant's historical and geographical knowledge  of  the  region.
    The FtT Judge considered the appellant's nationality at paragraphs [25]
    to [35] of his decision. He found at paragraph [25]


         "It is not reasonably likely, having regard to the  matter  in  the
         round, that the  appellant  is  an  Eritrean  (notwithstanding  his
         general knowledge of the country),  for  the  reasons  given  below
         (paragraphs 26-35)."


 5. Having regard to the Country Guidance set out in ST (Ethnic Eritrean  -
    nationality - return) Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT 00252 and the decision of
    the Court of Appeal in MA (Ethiopia) -v- SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 289,  the
    FtT Judge found the appellant has not established  that  he  no  longer
    qualifies for Ethiopian citizenship, nor that he has been (or would be)
    arbitrarily deprived of Ethiopian citizenship. The FtT Judge found,  at
    [32], that the appellant has not acted bona fides, and  approached  the
    Ethiopian Embassy to take all reasonably practical  steps  to  seek  to
    obtain the requisite documents to enable him to return.


 6. The Judge considered the letter relied upon by the appellant  from  the
    'Eritrean Community in Lambeth'.  The weight attached to the letter was
    limited since it provides no evidence as to  the  specific  information
    that was gleaned to inform the decision, that the  appellant  was  from
    Eritrea, and no oral evidence was given by the  author  that  could  be
    tested in cross examination.


 7. The  omnibus  conclusion  of  the  FtT  Judge  as  to  the  appellant's
    nationality and his ability to return to Ethiopia is  to  be  found  at
    paragraph [34] of the decision;


             "I am satisfied that the appellant is an Ethiopian subject who
             was born in Ethiopia.  The appellant speaks  the  language  of
             Ethiopia and has lived and worked in Ethiopia for a  prolonged
             period of time. It is reasonably likely that he would be  able
             to obtain travel documentation to return to Ethiopia.".


 8. The appellant complains  that  in  reaching  his  decision  as  to  the
    appellant's nationality,  the  FtT  Judge  failed  to  appreciate  that
    Mendefera was part of  Ethiopia  at  the  time  of  the  birth  of  the
    appellant's parents, but in 1993, those expelled became Eritreans.  The
    appellant submits that his parents lived in Ethiopia  until  2000,  and
    they were then deported back to Eritrea.  The appellant complains  that
    the FtT Judge speculated that the appellant  is  an  Ethiopian  citizen
    because he  spoke  in  Amharic  during  his  interview  and  failed  to
    adequately consider the evidence before him, as to where the  appellant
    had lived between 2003 and 2013.


 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan on 10th
    January 2017. The matter  comes  before  me  to  consider  whether  the
    decision of the FtT involved the making of a material error of law, and
    if so, to remake the decision.


10. Before me, Mr Lawson relied upon the grounds of appeal and submits that
    the appellant's evidence that his family were deported from Addis Ababa
    to Assab in Eritrea, at the beginning  of  2000  was  set  out  in  the
    appellant's witness statement.  He submits that  Eritrea  and  Ethiopia
    remained one country until the civil war and the fact that  the  family
    had adopted the national language of  Ethiopia,  rather  than  Eritrea,
    should not have been held against the appellant.  After the  civil  war
    the  two  countries  separated,  and  the   family   became   Eritrean.
    Mendefera, where the appellant and his father were born became part  of
    Eritrea,  and  the  appellant  now  has  no  entitlement  to  Ethiopian
    nationality.  Mr Lawson submits that  after  the  civil  war,  Eritrean
    nationals lost their Ethiopian citizenship and the family were deported
    from Ethiopia.  As to the events  between  2003  and  2013,  Mr  Lawson
    submits that the appellant gave evidence that  he  had  fled  to  Sudan
    after his release in 2003.  He referred me to the answers given by  the
    appellant during  his  asylum  interview.   When  it  was  put  to  the
    appellant that he had claimed, in his screening interview, that he  had
    left Eritrea in 2003 and stayed in  Addis  Ababa  with  relatives,  the
    appellant claimed he had not said that at all, and that he was in  fact
    referring to his time in Sudan.  The  appellant  had  said  during  the
    interview that he had mentioned that error to his  solicitors,  and  he
    understood that they had sent representations to  the  respondent.   Mr
    Lawson submitted that the solicitors have been asked to provide a  copy
    of the letter sent to  the  respondent  correcting  the  error  in  the
    screening interview but no response has been received.


11. Finally, Mr Lawson submits that the Judge erred  in  attaching  limited
    weight to the letter from the 'Eritrean Community in Lambeth',  as  set
    out at paragraphs [35] of the decision.  He submits that the letter  is
    a  strong  piece  of  evidence  from  a  reputable  organisation,  that
    following  enquiries,  confirm  that  the  appellant  is  an   Eritrean
    national.  He submits that greater weight should have been attached  to
    that evidence by the Judge.


12. In reply, Mr Harrison submits that the Judge made detailed findings  of
    fact that were open to him on the evidence. He submits that the  weight
    to be placed upon a specific piece of evidence, is  a  matter  for  the
    Judge and at paragraph [35] of his decision, the Judge  identifies  two
    reasons for attaching limited weight to the letter from  the  'Eritrean
    Community in Lambeth'.  First, the lack of detail as  to  the  specific
    enquiries carried out to establish that the appellant  is  an  Eritrean
    national, and second, the fact that the writer of the  letter  did  not
    attend the hearing and so his evidence could not be tested. He  submits
    that for both the reasons given, it was open to the Judge to treat  the
    letter with caution and attach little weight to  it.  He  submits  that
    reading the decision as a whole, it was open to the Judge to find  that
    the appellant is a national of Ethiopia for the reasons set out.


  13. In R & ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982, the Court of Appeal held
      that before the Tribunal can set aside a decision of a  Judge  on  the
      grounds of error of law, it has to be satisfied that the correction of
      the error would have made a material difference to the outcome, or  to
      the fairness of the proceedings. A finding might only be set aside for
      error of law on the grounds of perversity  if  it  was  irrational  or
      unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  one  that  was   wholly
      unsupported by the evidence.


14. I have carefully read through the decision of  FtT  Judge  William  and
    noted the many criticisms cited  at  paragraphs  [6]  to  [12]  of  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal.   The Judge noted at paragraph  [26]  of
    his decision that the appellant was born in Mendefera  in  1988,  which
    was then part of Ethiopia.  He noted, at  [27],  that  the  appellant's
    parents are also of Ethiopian nationality, and  that  by  operation  of
    Ethiopian nationality law, the appellant is an Ethiopian national.  The
    Judge found that the appellant's claim to be an  Eritrean  national  is
    undermined by the fact that he  speaks  fluent  Amharic  (the  national
    language of  Ethiopia),  and  only  understands  limited  Tigrinyan  (a
    national language of Eritrea).  The Judge also noted, at [31], that the
    appellant had accepted in the screening interview that he has relatives
    in Addis Ababa with whom he lived, working in  a  garage  for  7  years
    until 2010.   The Judge found that the appellant was able to  live  and
    work in Ethiopia, as he was a citizen of that country.  The Judge found
    that the appellant's  claimed  life  in  Ethiopia  from  2003  to  2010
    undermines the credibility of his claimed arrest, detention and  escape
    from Eritrea and illegally travelling/living in Sudan between 2003  and
    2013.


15. The appellant's credibility  was  at  the  heart  of  the  FtT  Judge's
    assessment of the appellant's nationality.  At paragraph  [13]  of  his
    decision, the Judge records the appellant's account that in 2000 he was
    deported to Assab, Eritrea.  In  looking  at  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant, the FtT Judge notes at paragraph [20] of his decision,  that
    the appellant's claim to have been deported from Ethiopia to Eritrea in
    2000 sits well with the country guidance information of Ethiopia having
    expelled 70,00 Eritreans living in the country during the war.  The FtT
    Judge considered, at paragraph [31], the appellant's  account  that  he
    was expelled from Ethiopia in the  context  of  the  appellant's  claim
    during his screening interview that the appellant had  lived  in  Addis
    Ababa with relatives, and worked in a  garage  for  seven  years  until
    2010.  The Judge found that he was able to do so as he was a citizen of
    Ethiopia.


16. The grounds of appeal state that  the  appellant's  parents  spoke  the
    Tigrinyan language, but the appellant speaks very little Tigrinyan back
    to his parents because he attended school where the language spoken was
    predominantly, Amharic.  I reject the appellant's claim  that  the  FtT
    Judge speculated that the appellant is an Ethiopian citizen because  he
    spoke Amharic during his asylum interview and at  the  hearing  of  the
    appeal before the FtT.  A proper reading of paragraph [30] as a  whole,
    demonstrates  that  the  Judge  carefully  considered  the  appellant's
    evidence that he was brought up by parents who spoke Tigrinyan, and who
    were  proud  of  their  Tigrinyan  heritage.   The  Judge   noted   the
    appellant's claim that he had lived  in  Eritrea  for  nearly  3  years
    following his return from Ethiopia,  but  found  that  the  appellant's
    claim was undermined by his parent's lack of interest and only "now and
    then speaking" their native language, and the appellant's inability  to
    speak that language.


17. I also reject the appellant's claim that the FtT Judge erred as to  the
    assessment of where the appellant had lived between 2003 and  2010.   I
    have carefully read the screening interview.  The appellant  was  asked
    about his travel history and he claimed that he left  Eritrea  in  2003
    and went to Ethiopia.  He claimed he was with  others,  and  they  were
    helped by smugglers, but his mother  had  made  the  arrangements.   He
    stated he was going to meet his relatives in Addis  Ababa  and  he  was
    working in their garage.  He stated he was there until  2010  and  that
    although he could do as he liked there, he was not being paid,  and  so
    he had to go.  He claimed that he then went  to  Sudan.   He  explained
    that a friend gave him the name of a smuggler, and he was then taken to
    Sudan where he stayed for 3 years.  A careful reading  of  the  account
    given by the appellant during the screening interview discloses a  very
    specific account of  the  appellant  having  travelled  with  smugglers
    arranged by his mother from  Eritrea  to  Addis  Ababa,  and  then  the
    appellant having travelled with smugglers  arranged  by  himself,  from
    Ethiopia to Sudan.  There was no evidence before  the  FtT  Judge,  and
    there is no evidence  even  now,  of  the  appellant's  representatives
    having  raised  any  error  in  that  screening  interview   with   the
    respondent. In my judgement, the FtT Judge considered  the  appellant's
    inconsistent account's and it was open to the Judge to  find  that  the
    appellant's claimed life in Ethiopia between 2003 and 2010 as  provided
    by the appellant in the screening interview, undermines the credibility
    of the appellant's claimed arrest, detention and escape from Eritrea.


18. I also reject the appellant's claim that the Judge erred  in  attaching
    limited weight to the letter from the 'Eritrean Community in  Lambeth',
    as set out  at  paragraphs  [35]  of  the  decision.   The  appellant's
    credibility was a significant  issue,  and  the  Judge  considered  the
    content of the letter in the round with all the other  evidence  before
    him.  The Judge felt that he could only attach limited  weight  to  the
    letter because the letter "provides no  evidence  as  to  the  specific
    information that was gleaned to inform the decision that the  appellant
    is from Eritrea".  I have carefully read the letter.  The letter  makes
    general and vague claims that village elders have told them that "..his
    family  belong  to  this  city  and  they  have  confirmed  that  these
    particular families have previously dwelled in  their  village  and  by
    this methodology we have  managed  to  authenticate  Dawith  Asmelash's
    Eritrean nationality..".  As the Judge notes, the author of the  letter
    did not attend the hearing so that the  evidence  could  be  tested  in
    cross-examination.  Given the vague claims in the letter,  it  was  not
    unreasonable to expect the author of the letter to be in a position  to
    explain the source of the information given in the letter, and how  the
    source is able to speak to such matters. The weight to be  attached  to
    the letter was in my judgment, a matter for the Judge.  It  was  in  my
    judgement, open to the Judge to attach little weight to the letter  for
    the two reasons he gave.


19. I have carefully read  the  paragraphs  that  the  appellant  seeks  to
    criticise and the decision as a whole. The Judge carefully sets out the
    evidence before him and considers the inconsistencies in the  evidence,
    and  the  explanations  given  by  the  appellant.   It  is  now   well
    established that although there  is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
    explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which the appeal
    is determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a
    whole makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the Judge.
     It is equally well established that a finding might only be set  aside
    for error of law on the grounds of perversity if it was  irrational  or
    unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  one  that   was   wholly
    unsupported by the evidence. On appeal, the Upper Tribunal  should  not
    overturn  a  judgment  at  first  instance,  unless  it  really  cannot
    understand the original judge's thought  process  when  the  Judge  was
    making material findings.  Here, it cannot be  said  that  the  Judge's
    analysis of the evidence is irrational or perverse. The Judge  did  not
    consider irrelevant factors, and the weight that  he  attached  to  the
    evidence either individually or cumulatively, was a matter for  him.  I
    am satisfied that the  Judge's  decision  is  a  sufficiently  reasoned
    decision that was open to him on the evidence.


Notice of Decision


20. The appeal is dismissed.


21. No anonymity direction  was  made  by  the  FtT.   There  has  been  no
    application for an anonymity direction before me.

Signed                                  Date          2nd August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
