
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11647/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25 January 2018                       |On 30 January 2018                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                     MEB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  SECRETAY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, a senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


   1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
      or any form of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
      identify the original Appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
      others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction  could
      give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania whose date of birth is recorded
      as [ ] 1998. He is from the Gorani minority group.  He  travelled  to
      the UK concealed in a lorry arriving on 21  April  2014.  He  claimed
      asylum on 23 April 2014 on the basis that he fears men in Albania  to
      whom his father owed money. He claims he was forced to work for  them
      in Albania and was trafficked by them. He also fears violence at  the
      hands of his father.

   3. The respondent refused the appellant's claim. The respondent did  not
      accept that the appellant was at risk of persecution in Albania.  The
      respondent also considered his claim on the  basis  of  private  life
      concluding  that  the  appellant  does  not  meet   the   suitability
      requirements of section S-LTR because of a conviction  for  a  sexual
      offence.

   4. The decision of the respondent of 10 August 2015 was appealed against
      to the First-tier Tribunal.

   The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

   5. In a decision promulgated on  26  October  2017  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Freer dismissed the appellant's appeal. The first-tier Tribunal
      rejected the appellant's account  as  not  credible,  that  he  could
      relocate and so was not at risk from his  father.  The  human  rights
      appeal was dismissed.

   6. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against the First-tier
      Tribunal's decision to the Upper tribunal.

   7. On 5 December 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge I D  Boyes  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

   8. At the commencement of the  hearing  Mr  Tarlow  indicated  that  the
      respondent accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law and
      that it amounted to a material error. Contrary  to  the  case  of  EG
      (post-hearing internet research) Nigeria [2008] UKAIT 00015 the judge
      had conducted internet research and made  material  findings  on  the
      basis of that research.

   Discussion

   9. In light of the respondent's concession I do not need to consider  in
      any great detail the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

  10. I agree that the First-tier Tribunal judge erred  in  law.  Regarding
      the appellant's account of being trafficked and forced to work  in  a
      car wash, the judge set out:

         "48. An evidential chain requires proof at every step in it.  There
         is one missing here. It is not in evidence  that  Albania  has  car
         washes in its mountainous north-east. If there are none  there,  it
         removes the whole central plank of the account and thus  the  claim
         and ruins his credibility without more...

         ...

         50. Until 1991, there were only about 6,000 cars in  the  whole  of
         Albania and its roads were legendary for their awfulness. Currently
         there are many more cars in Albania, many of them  in  the  cities.
         The only significant road in the north-east is the A1, starting  at
         Durres on the coast.  Near Kukes it connects with a  national  road
         as a dual carriageway on the way to Kosovo. The  Gorani  people  as
         noted live in a small number of villages on the border  and  it  is
         not shown that there would be any demand there for a car wash  i.e.
         it is not shown why traffic on the A1 would go and stop there...The
         emphatic conclusion is that  if  he  was  unable  to  describe  the
         location as being on a dual carriageway, then he was not working on
         the sole major highway in the area, which  was  the  only  sensible
         place to locate a car wash..."

  11. The grounds of appeal assert that the  existence  of  car  washes  in
      North Eastern Albania was not an issue raised by the SSHD or  at  the
      hearing. The appellant has not been provided with an  opportunity  to
      produce rebuttal evidence but, in any event, the judge was  factually
      incorrect to suggest that the appellant was unable to say  where  the
      car wash was. The appellant in evidence stated that the car wash  was
      in Keneta which is a suburb of Durres.

  12. The Upper Tribunal in EG held, at paragraph 5, that to  conduct  post
      hearing research on the internet and  to  base  conclusions  on  that
      research without giving that parties the opportunity  to  comment  is
      wrong.

  13. In this case the judge has reached  conclusions  on  the  appellant's
      credibility  substantively  based  on  the  research  conducted  post
      hearing. The appellant has not had an opportunity to comment on  that
      evidence. Further, the judge  has  made  a  factual  error  and  made
      incorrect assumptions. The appellant as  recorded  by  the  judge  in
      paragraph 13(iv) stated that the car wash was in Keneta, a suburb  of
      Durres which according to the judge's research is the  staring  point
      of the A1.

  14. I find that there is a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal decision. I set that  decision  aside  pursuant  to  section
      12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

  15. I considered whether or not I could re-make the  decision  myself.  I
      considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings.
      I am satisfied that the nature and extent of  judicial  fact  finding
      that is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-
      made is such, having regard to the overriding objective, that  it  is
      appropriate to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

  16. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be  heard
      at the First-tier Tribunal  at Taylor House before any  judge   other
      than Judge Freer  pursuant to section 12(2)(b) and  12(3)(a)  of  the
      TCEA. A new hearing will be fixed at the next available date.

Notice of Decision


The appellant's appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
allowed. The case is remitted for a de-novo hearing at Taylor  House  before
any judge other than judge Freer.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 29/1/2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw



























