
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11568/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th March 2018                             |On 28 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [e m]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Moan, promulgated on 15th June 2017, following a hearing at  Birmingham
    Sheldon Court on 5th  June  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Albania, who was born  on  [  ]
    1989.  She appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  7th
    August 2015, refusing her application for asylum and  for  humanitarian
    protection under paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that she  was  abducted  by  an
    agent, namely, [NM], to whom money was owed for a visa  application  by
    her, and he forced the Appellant to engage in sexual activities  before
    transporting her to the UK in  the  back  of  a  lorry.   However,  the
    Appellant had not been identified  by  the  Competent  Authority  as  a
    victim of trafficking.  The Respondent Secretary  of  State  held  that
    material  claims  were  not  credible.   Second,  and  in  any   event,
    sufficiency of protection existed in Albania  for  trafficked  victims.
    The Appellant was in the UK with her Albanian child but she  could  not
    qualify for leave under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and  there
    were no significant obstacles to her reintegration into Albanian  life,
    due to the length of time that she had previously spent in Albania, and
    with due regard being given to the welfare of her  child,  particularly
    as there were no exceptional circumstances  to  justify  the  grant  of
    leave outside the Immigration Rules.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held  that  there  were  significant  difficulties  with  the
    Appellant's accounts.  There were credibility issues as to when she was
    locked in a hotel room but not forced into  prostitution  between  mid-
    November 2014 and 4th January 2015; there were discrepancies about  the
    account she gave  regarding  the  journey  to  the  UK,  including  the
    intermediate stopover which was vague; there were discrepancies in  the
    details of how she ran away from the lorry when it arrived  in  the  UK
    and this was inconsistent and not credible, particularly that she would
    be allowed to escape from the lorry when it stopped.

 5. Moreover, the visa was not applied for immediately after  her  marriage
    to her husband in January 2014, but there was a  delay.   Against  this
    background it was not credible to suggest, as the Appellant  did,  that
    she believed the agent could reduce the  visa  waiting  time  to  three
    months when it would otherwise have taken fifteen months.

 6. There was a doctor's report from Dr Gratton  to  the  effect  that  the
    Appellant had PTSD, but  even  if  this  was  accepted,  what  remained
    significant were the inconsistencies in the  Appellant's  accounts,  so
    that the judge held that,

         "... it was incontrovertible that she left Albania on 10th December
         2014 by road via a checkpoint, at a time  when  she  said  she  was
         locked in a room and sexually exploited.  That simply could not  be
         reconciled  and  completely  undermines  the  Appellant's  material
         claims" (paragraph 39).

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  failed  to  properly
    engage with the  expert  report  from  the  clinical  psychologist,  Dr
    Gratton, which was dated 12th April 2017.  They  also  state  that  the
    judge made speculative findings on material matters.

 8. Finally, they state that the judge  failed  to  give  reasons  for  her
    findings on the conclusions of the NRM, with  respect  to  whether  the
    Appellant had been trafficked, and also failed to resolve  conflict  of
    evidence regarding the Appellant's presentation on her entry to the UK.



 9. On 24th  November  2017,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the
    Tribunal.

Submissions

10. At the  hearing  before  me  on  5th  March  2018,  the  Appellant  was
    represented  by  Mr  I  Palmer  of  Counsel,  and  the  Respondent  was
    represented by Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, a Senior Home Office  Presenting
    Officer.  Mr Palmer relied upon his well-crafted Grounds of Appeal.

11. First, he submitted that the judge's treatment of the  expert  evidence
    of the clinical psychologist, Dr Jacqueline Gratton, dated  12th  April
    2017  was  flawed.   Dr  Gratton's  clinical  diagnosis  was  that  the
    Appellant's  "difficulties  warrant  a  diagnosis   of   post-traumatic
    disorder which is currently within the moderately severe range ..." and
    that she "currently meets the criteria warranting a diagnosis of  major
    depressive disorder (MDD) which is currently in the  moderately  severe
    range".  However, the judge, in considering this evidence,  stated  (at
    paragraph 14) that, "the fact that  Dr  Gratton  found  her  clinically
    credible does not undermine my assessment that she is not credible".

12. Second, contrary to  the  judge's  finding  that  Dr  Gratton  did  not
    consider whether the  Appellant's  presentation  was  due  to  domestic
    violence or  familial  violence  (at  paragraph  21)  the  expert  does
    consider and rules out the possibility of  other  scenarios  accounting
    for the symptoms that the Appellant exhibited (at paragraphs  8.5.1  to
    8.5.5).  It was an important aspect of the Appellant's claim  that  she
    suffered violence at the hands of her  perpetrators  and  Dr  Gratton's
    diagnosis did not undermine that.  Indeed, Dr  Gratton's  diagnosis  of
    PTSD and MDD is capable of playing a material part in the assessment of
    credibility.

13. Third, the  judge's  conclusions  on  credibility  are  irrational  and
    speculative.  The judge found that the Appellant having been taken away
    by her traffickers, could not have been put to  work  as  a  prostitute
    from the time they discovered she was pregnant,  and  the  judge  found
    that it was unlikely that none of the clients of  the  Appellant  would
    have sex with her when she was presenting as pregnant, observing  that,
    "by her own admission the agent and his friends continued  to  sexually
    abuse her"  (paragraph  31).   Mr  Palmer  submitted  that  it  was  an
    irrational conjecture to state that  the  Appellant's  claim  that  she
    continued to be sexually abused by her traffickers and associates  when
    she presented as pregnant, was inconsistent with  her  claim  that  the
    "clients" did not  want  to  have  sex  with  her  on  account  of  her
    presentation.  Similarly, the judge entered into  speculation  that  it
    would be unlikely to use an agent to shorten the time for obtaining the
    visa to Australia (at paragraph 28) because there had been a  delay  in
    applying for a visa immediately after her marriage.

14. Fourth, the judge's assessment of  the  information  contained  in  the
    Immigration and Enforcement British Embassy  Tirana  letter  dated  1st
    September 2016 was also flawed.  She refers (at paragraphs 22,  32  and
    40) to the Appellant's credibility having been undermined "in the  face
    of damming information from the Albanian checkpoint" and  at  paragraph
    32, she concludes that the information has been "collated  from  border
    checks where no doubt she would have  had  to  produce  her  passport".
    However, on the documentary evidence before her, it was not open to the
    judge to conclude that the Appellant "would have had to" or indeed  did
    produce her passport at the checkpoint.

15. The Appellant's evidence is that she last saw her ID documents  at  the
    flat before she was abducted by the traffickers (which is  recorded  at
    paragraph 37 of the determination).  Her  evidence  was  that  she  was
    concealed in the back of a lorry and did not come to contact  with  the
    authorities.  The judge also refers to a "striking similar  photograph"
    which is said to have been produced for the purposes of comparison from
    a database on the system and alongside it, it is the  biodata  records.
    What the judge appears to be suggesting (at paragraph 22) is  that  the
    photograph on the TIMS was taken of the person leaving Albania on  10th
    December 2014.  This, however, is  an  erroneous  conclusion.   On  the
    information before her, this is not  a  screenshot  photograph  of  the
    person who is said to have left Albania on that date by road to Kosovo.
     Equally, the biodata details are not said to have been  taken  on  the
    date of the exit.

16. Finally, the judge erred in law in making findings on material  matters
    when (at paragraph 40) she stated  that  she  does  not  "consider  the
    conclusions of the NRM to be perverse or even incorrect".  This finding
    is not reasoned.  The judge is invited to deal with the police email of
    25th July 2016 (which was served with  the  Embassy  letter)  and  this
    states that the Appellant was willing to cooperate in any investigation
    and that the reason  no  further  action  was  taken  was  because  "no
    exploitation occurred in the UK and there were no lines of  enquiry  in
    relation to her entry to the UK".  The judge was invited to  find  that
    this was in breach of the NRM  guidance.   The  judge  failed  to  make
    findings on material  evidence  and  matters  affecting  a  trafficking
    decision.

17. For her part, Ms Brocklesby-Weller, submitted  that  the  determination
    was well-reasoned and comprehensive.  Considerable detail was given  by
    way of reasons as to why the claim could not succeed.  For example, the
    judge starts at paragraph 15 by reference to the country guidance  case
    of TD and AD (trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092,  and  noted  that
    the trafficking of women in Albania was an issue.  She then went on  to
    consider the medical evidence straight away (paragraphs to 16  to  21).
    Thereafter, there was evidence, which the judge expressly referred  to,
    of the Appellant having travelled out of the country, and this evidence
    came from the Ministry of Interior in Albania.  She was registered as a
    national, had her date and place of birth set out, her maiden name  and
    her married name, and her parents' names and the date of her  marriage.
    The details that the Ministry of Interior had included the  Appellant's
    identification card number and the passport  number,  together  with  a
    photograph and details of when she travelled out of the country,  which
    was on 10th  December  2014,  and  was  by  road  (paragraph  22).   Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller submitted  that  the  idea  was  intercepted  at  the
    checkpoint.  It was recorded at the Albanian  border.   The  judge  was
    entitled to give it due credence.  In the same way, as far as the claim
    that the Appellant  has  been  trafficked  is  concerned,  the  judge's
    consideration of the NRM Report.  The judge  took  this  properly  into
    account and was  entitled  to  state  that  its  conclusions  were  not
    perverse or even incorrect (at paragraph 40).

18. There was no reply by Mr Palmer.

No Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

20. First, there are the inconsistencies, which abound in this appeal,  and
    to which the judge had proper regard (at paragraph 39).

21. Second, there is the evidence of the  Appellant  having  left  by  road
    Albania on 10th December  2014  before  the  Ministry  of  Interior  in
    Albania.  This evidence  bears  consideration.   The  letter  from  the
    British Embassy in Tirana, dated 1st September 2016, explains that  the
    information given by the Albanian Ministry of Interior to  the  British
    Embassy in Tirana, confirms that there is an Albanian national  who  is
    registered on the national civil register of Albania with  the  details
    of the Appellant.  Her mother and father's names are given.  It is also
    stated that she changed her surname from  [M]  to  [Mx]  following  her
    marriage on 24th January 2014 (see F1).

22. There are not only scanned copies of the  official  response  from  the
    general directorate of the civil registry at the Ministry  of  Interior
    of Albania, as well as  scanned  copies  of  the  personal  and  family
    certificates of the Appellant, but there  is  a  comparison  photograph
    from the TIMS system provided.  The photograph, which is clear  enough,
    has not been challenged as  a  photograph  that  is  not  that  of  the
    Appellant, in any credible way.

23. Third, this in turn ties in expressly with  the  consideration  of  the
    medical evidence, especially that of Dr Gratton,  because  the  judge's
    statement that, "the fact that Dr Gratton found her  to  be  clinically
    credible does not undermine my assessment that  she  is  not  credible,
    especially in the face of the damming  information  from  the  Albanian
    checkpoint" (paragraph 40) has to be read as a  whole,  if  one  is  to
    comprehend why precisely the judge comes to  the  conclusion  that  she
    does.

24. Simply reading the first half of that sentence does not do  justice  to
    the precise finding made by the judge and the reason  for  making  that
    finding.  For all these reasons, there is  no  error  of  law  in  this
    determination.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th March 2018
