
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11703/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th May 2012 and 6th September 2013          |On 9th October 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                AISHA MOHAMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Worthington of Cole & Yousaf Solicitors (8th
                    May 2012)
                    Miss S Khan (6th September 2013)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer (8th
                    May 2012 and 6th September 2013)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  Immigration
    Judge Sarsfield made following a hearing at Bradford on  21st  November
    2011.

Background

 2. The Appellant claims to be a citizen of Somalia  born  on  6th  January
    1994. The Respondent believes her to be a citizen of Tanzania  born  on
    12th July 1987.  She applied for asylum on 22nd March 2011  having been
    in the UK since March 2009.  Her claim was based upon her ethnicity  as
    a Somali Bajuni clan.

 3. The Appellant was interviewed in Swahili and  does  not  speak  Somali.
    When she claimed asylum her fingerprints were matched  against  a  visa
    application made in Nairobi in March 2009.  The visa  was  applied  for
    using a Tanzanian passport issued on 27th August 2008 in  the  name  of
    Fatuma Mohamed Salun born on 12th July 1987.  The  Secretary  of  State
    believed that the Appellant was a Tanzanian citizen and the  claim  was
    refused on that basis.  Additionally she noted that there were a number
    of discrepancies in the Appellant's dates and  that  her  knowledge  of
    Somali and her home island of Chovai  was  not  commensurate  with  her
    having lived there.

 4. At the hearing before the Immigration Judge the Appellant gave evidence
    and relied on  a  report  from  an  expert  witness  Brian  Allen.  His
    expertise has not been challenged by the Respondent and indeed  it  has
    been relied upon in a number of other cases before the Upper  Tribunal.
     Following a three hour  interview,  he  stated,  in  a  very  detailed
    report, that he was completely convinced that the Appellant was  indeed
    a Bajuni from Chovai as she claimed.

 5. The Immigration Judge did not believe  that  the  Appellant  had  given
    credible evidence.  He relied  upon  an  age  assessment  report  which
    showed that she was not a child as she claimed but over the age of  18,
    did not accept that the Tanzanian passport was false and that both  the
    Tanzanian and the UK authorities  would  have  been  deceived,  and  he
    outlined a number of discrepancies in her evidence.   With  respect  to
    the report, he said that the Appellant could have learnt  some  of  the
    information which she gave to Mr Allen and concluded that  the  details
    which she gave were not comprehensive. He dismissed the appeal.

Grounds for Permission to Appeal

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that Mr  Allen
    had said in his report that he had lived in Kenya for eleven years  and
    in Tanzania for ten and was very familiar with the  Swahili  accent  in
    both countries, and yet, despite looking for  signs  of  the  Appellant
    coming from a different Swahili speaking country, he said that he could
    find none. Mr Allen said that she had clear Bajuni features  and  spoke
    with a strong Bajuni accent. Furthermore she gave her evidence  in  her
    screening interview and before the Immigration Judge  in  Kibajuni  and
    often used Kibajuni words when speaking to the expert.

 7. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Designated  Immigration  Judge
    Shaerf.  He said that the reasons which the Immigration Judge had given
    for his findings on the Appellant's account and  expert's  report  were
    brief and not focused on the substantive issues  in  the  appeal.   The
    Judge did not consider the possibility that her account  might  not  be
    credible  but given the expert's analysis and knowledge of Kibajuni her
    ethnicity might still be as clamed.

Submissions

 8.  Mr  Worthington  relied  on  his  grounds.   He  submitted  that   the
    Immigration Judge had to consider the report in the round together with
    all of the other evidence and was obliged to give  proper  reasons  for
    departing from the expert's view.  Mr Allen had commented  on  matters,
    for example the Appellant's Bajuni features and accent, which could not
    have been learned by her in the gap between her  asylum  interview  and
    her interview with Mr Allen.

 9. Mrs Pettersen submitted that the determination was sustainable and that
    the Immigration Judge was entitled to  rely  upon  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had made a visa application  on  the  basis  of  a  Tanzanian
    passport, which was strong evidence of her nationality.   She  observed
    that Mr Allen had not dealt with the question of whether the  Appellant
    was a  Tanzanian  national,  appearing  to  believe  that  it  was  the
    Respondent's case that she was from Kenya which diminished  the  weight
    which could  be attached to his report.

Consideration of whether there is a Material Error of Law

10. The Immigration Judge was entitled to agree with  the  Respondent  that
    the Appellant was a national of Tanzania on  the  basis  that  she  had
    produced a Tanzanian passport, had lied about her age, had given  vague
    evidence about her claimed  home area and had not  claimed  asylum  for
    two years after entering the UK.  The problem with the determination is
    that  the  Appellant  had  adduced  very  strong   evidence   from   an
    unchallenged expert that her ethnicity was as claimed.  The Immigration
    Judge was obliged to deal with  that  evidence  and  to  give  detailed
    reasons for finding that it could not be relied upon.

11. It is entirely possible that the Appellant is a Bajuni from Somalia  as
    claimed and yet has not given credible evidence about the circumstances
    of her departure. The Immigration  Judge  concentrated  his  mind  upon
    discrepancies in the Appellant's various accounts, and  those  findings
    may well be open to  him.  However,  that  is  not  a  safe  basis  for
    discounting the expert's  clear  and  reasoned  conclusions  on  tribal
    identity and nationality. It is no answer to the expert's view that the
    Appellant speaks Swahili with a Bajuni accent and that she  has  Bajuni
    features to say  that  there  were  discrepancies  in  her  account  in
    relation to her home island or her evidence of when and where  and  for
    how long she was in contact with the agent was discrepant.

12. Furthermore this is an Appellant who claims effectively  to  have  been
    trafficked  and  sexually  abused.   The  Immigration  Judge  makes  no
    findings on this aspect of her claim, simply stating that even  if  she
    was under the control of another she had had every opportunity to alert
    the UK authorities about her situation.

13. The decision of the Immigration Judge is set aside.

14. The directions given for this hearing were for an error of law  hearing
    only.  No interpreter was booked.   Furthermore,  Mr  Worthington  said
    that Mr Allen was ready and willing  to  give  oral  evidence   to  the
    Tribunal and clearly it would be most helpful to hear from him.  It was
    agreed that he should  be  asked  to  provide  a  supplementary  report
    dealing with the question of whether the Appellant was likely to  be  a
    Tanzanian Bajuni as opposed to a Kenyan Bajuni.

The Resumed Hearing

15. After an inordinate and unexplained delay the matter came before me  on
    6th September 2013.  On that occasion I heard oral evidence  from  the
    Appellant and from  the  expert  Brian  Allen.   He  has  provided  two
    reports, one dated 14th November 2011 and the second 18th May 2012.   I
    have also been provided with two statements from  the  Appellant  dated
    11th November 2011 and 18th April 2012 respectively which  she  adopted
    to stand as her evidence-in-chief.  The Respondent produced her  bundle
    of documents, including  the  interview  record  and  refusal  letters,
    together with an additional short bundle relating to the issue  of  the
    Appellant's passport.

16. It was agreed between  the  parties  that  the  issue  of  whether  the
    Appellant was a Kibajuni from Somalia was determinative of this appeal.
     It is the Respondent's case that she is from Tanzania and removable to
    Tanzania.  It is the Appellant's case that her Tanzanian documents  are
    forgeries.  Her oral evidence was given in Kibajuni.

17. The Appellant says that her father arranged for her  to  leave  Somalia
    because of the danger to her there from the Hawiye clan.   In  2009  he
    arranged for an agent called Ali Juma to take her away.   Under  cross-
    examination she said that she left her island of Chovai when she was 14
    years old.  Her father was a fisherman and  paid  the  agent  from  his
    earnings. She travelled with him on a boat to Mombasa where they stayed
    for two days and from there they  went  to  another  place  where  they
    stayed for about two months.  She was taken to a  building  where  they
    spoke Swahili and where her fingerprints  and  photograph  were  taken.
    She was then returned to Kenya before flying to the UK  in  2009.   She
    says that she was given a red passport to travel  with  but  she  knows
    nothing about it.

The Expert Evidence

18. Dr Allen lived in Tanzania for ten years and lived and worked  in  East
    Africa for over twenty years.  Since  2002  he  has  become  an  expert
    witness  on  the  Bajuni  of  Somalia.   He  has  conducted  over   350
    nationality  testing  interviews  involving  extended  interviews  with
    Somali Bajuni asylum seekers and writing  reports  which  are  used  in
    court to prove nationality.  He is a speaker of Kiswahili and  Kibajuni
    and familiar with the customs and dialects of the  region  although  he
    himself is not a trained linguist. He said that  he  had  refused  work
    when he believed that  a  person  was  not  from  Somalia  as  claimed,
    probably around 15% between 2002  and  to  2005  and  less  since  then
    because he operated a filter system.

19. Dr Allen says, in his report, that there is strong  evidence  that  the
    Appellant is of Somali nationality and by the end  of  his  three  hour
    interview with her he was completely convinced that the Appellant was a
    Bajuni from Chovai as claimed. He had a  lengthy  interview  with  her,
    some three hours, which was conducted in Swahili  but  she  often  used
    Kibajuni  words.  There  was  strong  evidence  of  her  Bajuni  tribal
    identity. Her descriptions of customs  were  very  much  in  line  with
    traditional Bajuni customs, she was familiar with Kibajuni,  and  spoke
    with a strong Bajuni accent and she knew of the mixed  origins  of  the
    Bajuni. She has Kibajuni features, namely an oval face and lighter skin
    colour.

20. Like other Bajuni girls from the island, he said  that   the  Appellant
    had no education, apart from Koranic teaching. There was no  reason  to
    think that she had had any different standard of  education  from  many
    other people he had met on her  island.   She  was  not  familiar  with
    English and spoke in simple sentences, mixing Swahili and Bajuni  words
    together.  She was not able to construct complex sentences and did  not
    demonstrate abstract thoughts.  The  communication  was  basic.   Young
    Bajuni girls were disempowered, being kept at home and doing what their
    parents said.  She would have been given no  explanation  of  what  was
    happening to her by either her parents or the agent and would have  had
    no understanding of what was happening to her.

21. Dr Allen was critical of the Home Office  interview.   She  would  have
    been frightened which would have affected her ability  to  recall.   He
    said that the Appellant could only  demonstrate  limited  knowledge  in
    response to what questions were asked.  For example, asking  her  about
    regions would be meaningless to her.  On the other hand she would  have
    been able to name a couple of the Bajuni islands, which  she  did,  and
    the currency. She could be expected to name some of the foods, and  the
    ones which she named at interview were typical of food  cooked  on  the
    Bajuni islands.  He said that he was struck by  the  immediacy  of  her
    replies and the way that she linked pictures to  her  answers  when  he
    interviewed her.  She told him the names of some of the foods which her
    mother cooked, giving them Kibajuni names, in line with  Somali  Bajuni
    usage, rather than Kenyan Bajuni.   Kenyans and Tanzanians do  not  use
    them, which was very indicative of her origin.

22. The Appellant was able to name the different Bajuni  clans  during  his
    interview with her.  She told him that her father went  to  Kismayo  to
    sell the fish which was in line with fishing practice  on  the  island.
    There was a large fish market in Kismayo and many fishermen go there if
    they cannot sell in Chovai.  She  displayed  a  detailed  knowledge  of
    Chovai which a Tanzanian Bajuni would not have.

23. Dr Allen said that when he was living in Tanzania he did not  meet  any
    Somali Bajuni because there were very few in Tanzania,  although  there
    would be a small number in transit.  He left Tanzania in  2000  and  by
    then the Kibajuni had started to flee Somalia, but he did not have  any
    contact with them although he had met some since they  arrived  in  the
    UK.  There were no Somali camps in Tanzania and no records of how  many
    there were.  If any were born in Tanzania they  would  be  entitled  to
    citizenship.

24. He said that if the Appellant was from Tanzania and had some  education
    she would know some English.  There was nothing about her  accent  that
    would place her in Tanzania and no indication that she came from either
    Tanzania or Kenya.

25. Mrs Pettersen put to Dr Allen that at  her  interview  the  Appellant's
    answers did not sit well with  the  knowledge  she  displayed  when  he
    interviewed her some six months later.  Dr Allen agreed and  said  that
    there could be a number of factors.  One could have  been  fear,  or  a
    difficulty with the interpreter, or trauma from  the  journey,  all  of
    which would affect her recall.

The Respondent's Case

26. It is the Respondent's case that the passport which the Appellant  used
    to come to the UK is genuine and belongs to  her.   It  was  issued  in
    Zanzibar on 27th August 2008.  The Appellant  did  not  leave  Somalia,
    according to her chronology, until 2009. If she was in Zanzibar in 2008
    this undermined the entire basis of her claim, and the Appellant  could
    not have got the passport without making a personal application.

27. Mrs Pettersen said that the date of application was 23rd March 2009 and
    the Appellant was issued with a student visa.  It seems that it was  an
    online application and the Appellant was not interviewed  although  she
    would have  had  to  supply  documentation.   She  said  that  the  new
    Tanzanian passport, which this is, contains the holder's  fingerprints,
    signature and photograph which are  digitally  required.   All  of  the
    details would have had to have been put into the passport when  it  was
    issued which was in 2008.  However according to the Appellant  she  had
    no contact with the agent until 2009.

28. She accepted that the Appellant displayed a certain amount of knowledge
    about the Bajuni when she was interviewed by Dr Allen but there  was  a
    gap between the interviews and  she  could  have  learnt  and  acquired
    knowledge.

29. Miss Khan submitted that the burden lies with the  Respondent  to  show
    that the  Appellant  is  from  Tanzania  since  that  is  what  she  is
    asserting. She could  have  approached  the  Tanzanian  authorities  or
    provided evidence that the Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  checked  the
    passport and could have produced a report to show that the passport was
    a genuine one.

30. It is the Appellant's case that this is  not  her  passport,  that  the
    signature belongs to someone  else  and  that  agents  would  have  the
    mechanisms for obtaining false passports because this is what they did.
     It is likely that the passport would  have  been  said  to  have  been
    issued in 2008 because it would be more credible for a visa application
    in 2009 if it had not just been issued.

31. So far as the fingerprints were concerned she said that  the  Appellant
    accepted that she had given her fingerprints for the  visa  application
    but did not say that they had been  taken  twice.   She  relied  on  Dr
    Allen's evidence that the Appellant would  not  have  been  capable  of
    obtaining a visa as a student because  she  simply  did  not  have  the
    educational background to do so.

32. She submitted that the Appellant was able to give some answers  at  the
    interview in relation to her claimed background, but a  number  of  the
    questions were inappropriate, for  example  asking  her  about  regions
    which would be meaningless to her.  Furthermore she was only either  17
    or just 18 years old at the time of the interview and it is likely that
    she would have found the situation intimidating.

Findings and Conclusions

33. I  cannot  see  any  support  in  the  documents  for  Mrs  Pettersen's
    submission that the Appellant would have had to have  applied  for  her
    passport in person in Tanzania.  The excerpt from Wikipedia, upon which
    Mrs Pettersen relied, does not in fact say that a personal  application
    is required.  I accept that it is likely that East African agents  are
    perfectly capable of obtaining a false passport if given the  money  to
    do so.  The  Appellant's  fingerprints  were  matched  against  a  visa
    application made in Nairobi on 31st March 2009  and  she  accepts  that
    fingerprints were taken for the visa.

34. I have no reason to doubt Dr Allen's expertise nor his bona fides.   He
    interviewed the Appellant for three hours  and  is  clearly  absolutely
    convinced that she is a Somali Bajuni. Whilst  it  is  always  possible
    that the Appellant may simply have prepared well for her interview with
    Dr Allen I find that it is not reasonably  likely.  In  any  event,  he
    comments on her typical Bajuni features.  I accept that  the  Appellant
    was very young  and  would  have  been  intimidated  by  the  interview
    situation which could have  inhibited  her  ability  to  give  accurate
    answers. The Appellant's knowledge of Chovai was limited  at  interview
    but there is a reasonable explanation.

35. There is no reason at all not to rely on his opinion in the absence  of
    convincing evidence from the Respondent that the Appellant  would  have
    had to present in person in Zanzibar in 2008 in order to have  obtained
    the passport.

36. I also accept, from Dr Allen, that  it  is  highly  unlikely  that  the
    Appellant would have been able to obtain a  student  visa  because  her
    level of education is far removed from that  displayed  in  the  online
    application form.  In that application  form  she  says  that  she  was
    educated  in  English  at  advanced  secondary  level.   There  is   no
    indication at all that this Appellant has any English language ability.



37. Dr Allen does not hold himself out to be a linguistic expert but he has
    lived in East Africa for twenty years and speaks  some  Kibajuni.   The
    Appellant gave her  evidence  in  Kibajuni.   It  was  clear  that  she
    understood the interpreter.  I find that she speaks and understands the
    language which is some evidence of her origins.

38. In the reasons for refusal letter  the  author  says  that  during  her
    screening interview the Appellant was only asked simple questions which
    could not be  considered  evidence  that  she  was  fluent  in  Bajuni.
    However the fact that she gave oral evidence in  Kibajuni  without  any
    difficulties with  the  interpreter  establishes  her  fluency  in  the
    language.

39. I conclude that the Appellant is not entitled to the Tanzanian passport
    upon which she travelled to the UK and is not removable there.

Decision

40. The decision of the Immigration Judge has been set aside.  It is remade
    as follows.  The Appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.  Miss
    Khan said that no separate human rights arguments would be made.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
