

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: AA119002015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment     |Decision Promulgated and sent           |
|Tribunal                           |                                        |
|on 10 May 2017                     |on 22 May 2017                          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    HAMA
                       (Anonymity direction in force)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr J Howard of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mrs Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            ERROR OF LAW FINDING




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Lucas ('the Judge') promulgated on 17  October  2016,  following  a
        hearing at Taylor House on 15 September 2016, in  which  the  Judge
        dismissed the appellant's protection and human rights appeals.
     2. Permission to appeal was granted on a renewed  application  on  the
        grounds it was arguable that the Judge made a material error of law
        regarding the risk on return to Eritrea as a woman of draft age.



Background


     3.  The  appellant  is  an  Eritrea  national  born  in  1987.  Having
        considered the evidence the Judge sets out relevant  findings  from
        [58] of the decision under challenge. The Judge states in [59] that
        the Tribunal is mindful of the current country  guidance  decisions
        and that the respondent accepted that the appellant is a citizen of
        Eritrea which is the country to which removal directions have  been
        set.
     4. The Judge did not accept the appellant is a witness  of  truth  and
        formed the view that she had come to the UK for reasons other  than
        a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason [61].
     5. The core of the appellant's account regarding events in Eritrea was
        not accepted and nor was it accepted that the  appellant  faced  an
        adverse risk from the authorities in Eritrea.  At  [63]  the  Judge
        notes, on the appellant's own admission, that she was  exempt  from
        military service on account of her marriage to an Eritrean citizen.
     6. At [67]-[68] the Judge finds:


         67.  The Tribunal forms the view that the Appellant had no  profile
             at all when she left Eritrea and that her  claim  was  without
             any foundation at all. She has produced no  evidence  to  show
             that she has even lived in Eritrea recently and  the  Tribunal
             has noted that she has admitted owning  an  Eritrea  passport.
             She  has  clearly  sought  to  distance   herself   from   the
             consequences of this  admission  in  her  Screening  Interview
             because the possession of an Eritrea passport presupposes that
             it was legitimately issued to her. The consequence of this  is
             that if she possessed and/or continues to possess  an  Eritrea
             passport, she had the ability to leave  Eritrea  with  it.  If
             therefore she was able to leave Eritrea with her own passport,
             it goes without saying that  she  must  have  been  within  an
             exempt  category  and  could  not  have  left   that   country
             illegally, whenever she did. The only evidence of her actually
             living in Eritrea in  the  recent  past  comes  from  her  own
             evidence and those of her supporters who  have  attended  this
             Tribunal to assist her claim.  While  the  Tribunal  does  not
             doubt that those witnesses have attended this Tribunal in good
             faith, the Tribunal does not place  great  weight  upon  their
             evidence since the main purpose of their evidence is to assist
             the claim that  is  otherwise  lacking  in  any  substance  or
             credibility.


         68.   The  Tribunal  has   carefully   considered   the   objective
             information and Country Guidance relating to Eritrea. It  does
             not regard the Appellant  as  a  witness  of  truth.  She  has
             clearly come to the UK for reasons unrelated to a well-founded
             fear for Asylum. She is not at risk of military  service  upon
             Eritrea and the fact that she possessed  an  Eritrea  passport
             means that she fell within an exempt category of citizens  who
             are able to acquire a national passport. There would have been
             no point in the Appellant acquiring a national passport if  it
             was not going to be used.


     7. The Judge did not accept the appellant left Eritrea  illegally  and
        that an examination of  the  records  in  Eritrea  would  show  the
        appellant was issued and possessed a valid Eritrea  passport  [71].
        The appellant's account was rejected as lacking credibility and  it
        was not accepted she is a  draft  evader  nor  that  she  left  the
        country illegally and therefore did not  fall  within  any  of  the
        categories of risk identified in the relevant country guidance with
        regard to Eritrea [72].



Grounds



     8. Permission to appeal was sought on four grounds.
     9. Ground 1  asserts  the  Judge  failed  to  apply  relevant  country
        guidance as it was accepted the appellant is  an  Eritrea  national
        but it is  claimed  the  Judge  failed  to  appropriately  consider
        whether the appellant would be  perceived  on  return  as  a  draft
        evader or deserter and hence face a real risk of persecution. It is
        asserted the Judge failed to explain whether the appellant will  be
        perceived as having left illegally  and  therefore  at  persecutory
        risk  and  failed  to  explain  which  of  the  limited   exception
        categories of person the Appellant is otherwise considered to  fall
        within. It is also asserted the Judge failed to  make  findings  in
        relation to the appellant's contention that  passport  expired  and
        the effect that would have upon return to Eritrea.
    10. Ground 2 asserts the Judge failed to give adequate reason as to why
        significant weight cannot  be  attached  to  the  evidence  of  the
        appellant's witnesses particularly given that the Tribunal accepted
        that the witnesses attended the tribunal in good faith.
    11. Ground 3 asserts the Judge  failed  to  make  findings  as  to  the
        persecutory risk the Appellant faced on  return  to  Eritrea  as  a
        member of a Particular Social Group namely  a  single  loan  female
        returning with a child and/or persecutory risk the appellant  faces
        on return as a failed asylum seeker.
    12. Ground 4 asserts the Judge failed to make findings in  relation  to
        the appellant's fear her daughter would be subject to FGM on return
        to Eritrea, failed to give reasons why paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of
        the Immigration Rules did not apply,  and  failed  to  address  the
        respondent's duties  under  section  55  Borders,  Citizenship  and
        Immigration Act 2009.
    13. The Secretary of Status filed a Rule 24  reply  which  asserts  the
        Judge directed himself appropriately and has given adequate reasons
        for the finding the appellant did not leave Eritrea  illegally  and
        that overall the appellant was  not  credible  in  her  account  of
        events and that, given the findings by  the  Judge,  the  appellant
        cannot demonstrate that she would be at risk on return to Eritrea.



Error of law


    14. The current country guidance case relating to Eritrea, judgment  of
        which was handed down on 7 October 2016 between  the  date  of  the
        First-tier Tribunal hearing and promulgation of the decision  under
        challenge, is MST and Others (national service -  risk  categories)
        Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 00443 (IAC) in which it was held that:


        (i) Although reconfirming parts of the country guidance given in MA
        (Draft evaders - illegal departures - risk) Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT
        00059 and MO (illegal exit - risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT
        00190 (IAC), this case replaces that with the following:


        (ii) The  Eritrean  system  of  military/national  service  remains
        indefinite and since  2012  has  expanded  to  include  a  people's
        militia programme, which although not  part  of  national  service,
        constitutes military service;


        (iii) The age limits for national service are likely to remain  the
        same as stated in MO, namely 54 for men and  47  for  women  except
        that for children the  limit  is  now  likely  to  be  5  save  for
        adolescents in the context of family  reunification.  For  peoples'
        militia the age limits are likely to be 60 for  women  and  70  for
        men;


        (iv) The categories of lawful exit have not  significantly  changed
        since MO and are likely to be as follows: (a)  Men  aged  over  54;
        (b) Women aged over 47 (c) Children  aged  under  five  (with  some
        scope for adolescents in family  reunification  cases;  (d)  people
        exempt  from  national  service  on  medical  grounds;  (e)  People
        travelling abroad for  medical  treatment;  (f)  People  travelling
        abroad for studies or for a conference; (g) Business and sportsmen;
        (h) Former freedom fighters (Tegadelti) and their  family  members;
        (i) Authority representatives in leading positions and their family
        members;


        (v) It continues to be the case (as in MO) that most Eritreans  who
        have left Eritrea since 1991 have done so illegally. However, since
        there are viable, albeit still limited, categories of  lawful  exit
        especially for  those  of  draft  age  for  national  service,  the
        position remains as it was in MO, namely that a person whose asylum
        claim has not been found credible cannot be assumed  to  have  left
        illegally. The position also remains nonetheless (as in MO) that if
        such  a  person  is  found  to  have  left  Eritrea  on  or   after
        August/September 2008, it may be that inferences can be drawn  from
        their health history or level of education or their skills  profile
        as to whether legal exit on their part was feasible, provided  that
        such inferences can be drawn in the light  of  adverse  credibility
        findings. For these purposes a lengthy period  performing  national
        service is likely to enhance a person's skill profile;


        (vi) It remains the case (as in MO) that failed asylum  seekers  as
        such are not at risk of persecution or serious harm on return;


        (vii) Notwithstanding that  the  round-ups  (giffas)  of  suspected
        evaders/deserters, the "shoot to kill" policy and the targeting  of
        relatives of evaders  and  deserters  are  now  significantly  less
        likely occurrences, it remains the case, subject to  three  limited
        exceptions set out in (vii) (c) below,  that  if  a  person  of  or
        approaching draft age will be perceived on return as a draft evader
        or deserter, he or she  will  face  a  real  risk  of  persecution,
        serious harm or ill-treatment contrary to Article 3  or  4  of  the
        ECHR.


        (vii)  (a)  A  person  who  is  likely  to  be   perceived   as   a
        deserter/evader will not be able to avoid  exposure  to  such  real
        risk merely by showing they have paid (or are willing to  pay)  the
        diaspora tax and/have signed (or are willing to sign) the letter of
        regret;


        (vii) (b) Even if such a person may avoid punishment in the form of
        detention and ill-treatment it is likely that he  or  she  will  be
        assigned to perform (further) national service, which, is likely to
        amount to treatment contrary to Articles 3 and 4 of the ECHR unless
        he or she falls within one or more of the three limited  exceptions
        set out immediately below in (vii)(c);  (vii)(c))  It  remains  the
        case (as in MO) that there are persons likely not to  face  a  real
        risk of persecution or serious harm notwithstanding that they  will
        be perceived on return as draft evaders and deserters, namely:  (1)
        persons  whom  the  regime's  military  and  political   leadership
        perceives as having given them valuable service (either in  Eritrea
        or abroad); (2) persons who are trusted family members of,  or  are
        themselves part of, the regime's military or political  leadership.
        A further  possible  exception,  requiring  a  more  case  specific
        analysis is (3) persons (and their children  born  afterwards)  who
        fled (what later became the territory of) Eritrea during the War of
        Independence;


        (vii)  Notwithstanding  that   many   Eritreans   are   effectively
        reservists having been discharged/released  from  national  service
        and unlikely to face recall, it remains  unlikely  that  they  will
        have received or  be  able  to  receive  official  confirmation  of
        completion of national service. Thus it remains the case, as in  MO
        that "(iv) The general position adopted in MA, that a person of  or
        approaching draft and not medically unfit who is accepted as having
        left Eritrea illegally is reasonably likely  to  be  regarded  with
        serious hostility on return, is  reconfirmed,  subject  to  limited
        exceptions..."


        (ix) A person liable to perform service in the people's militia and
        who is assessed to have left Eritrea illegally, is  not  likely  on
        return to face a real risk of persecution or serious harm.


        (x) Accordingly, a person whose asylum claim  has  not  been  found
        credible, but who is able to satisfy a decision-maker (a)  that  he
        or she left illegally, and (b) that he or she is of or  approaching
        draft age, is likely to be perceived on return as a draft evader or
        deserter from national service and as a result face a real risk  of
        persecution or serious harm;


        (xi) While likely to be a rare case, it is possible that  a  person
        who has exited lawfully may  on  forcible  return  face  having  to
        resume or commence national service. In such a case there is a real
        risk of persecution or serious  harm  by  virtue  of  such  service
        constituting forced labour contrary to Article 4(2) and  Article  3
        of the ECHR;


        (xii) Where it is specified above that there  is  a  real  risk  of
        persecution in the  context  of  performance  of  military/national
        service, it is highly likely that it  will  be  persecution  for  a
        Convention reason based on imputed political opinion.



Discussion



    15. In relation to Ground 1, the Judge found the appellant  was  exempt
        from military service based on the appellant's own evidence to this
        effect and the admission recorded in [63]. There is no challenge to
        this finding in the Grounds and the Judge was arguably not required
        to give further reasons when adequate reasons had  been  given  for
        the finding on this point.
    16. Whilst the country guidance case sets out guidance on those who may
        be at risk it is not suggested it is a definitive statement such as
        to warrant a finding that unless a person is specifically found  to
        fall within one of the identified categories it must be found  they
        are likely to face a real risk on return.  The  burden  of  proving
        entitlement to international protection falls upon  the  person  so
        asserting.  In  this  case,  although  that  was  the   thrust   of
        submissions made, such claim is undermined by the  appellant's  own
        evidence.
    17. No arguable legal error is made out in the Judge  placing  reliance
        upon  the  appellant's  own  statement  that  she  is  exempt  from
        national/military service, arising from the fact she is married  to
        a soldier of the Eritrea army. The appellant claimed in her  asylum
        interview that her husband joined the Army in 2006.
    18. A paper from the Immigration and Refugee Board of  Canada,  titled,
        Eritrea: Military service, including age of recruitment, length  of
        service, grounds for exemption, penalties for  desertion  from  and
        evasion  of  military  service,  and  availability  of  alternative
        service [ERI104179.E], available on  the  Refworld  UNHCR  website,
        notes "According to the British Embassy in Asmara, married women or
        women with young children are usually exempt from military  service
        (UK 17 Aug. 2011, para. 9.44). Country  Reports  2011  also  states
        that girls who  are  already  married  are  generally  exempt  from
        training at Sawa and military service (US 24  May  2012,  Sec.  6).
        Sources indicate that  pregnant  women  may  also  be  exempt  from
        national service (Bozzini 2011, 96;  Human  Rights  Watch  16  Apr.
        2009, 44) or reserve duty (ibid.). However, Bozzini indicates  that
        pregnant women are not "promptly" issued demobilization  papers  to
        prove their exemption (16 Feb. 2012, 9). He  notes,  further,  that
        some women in the national service do  have  children  (Bozzini  16
        Feb. 2012, 9)".
    19. This view is reflected in the guidance in MST where it is found  at
        [292]:


        292.      According to the 2015 UNCOI Report [395] -  [398],  there
             is a "practice of tolerance with regard  to  women's  national
             service obligation when they are married  or  have  children".
             However,  very  few  women  have  been  formally  released  or
             discharged which makes it difficult for them to  get  identity
             cards or travel permits, although married women can get travel
             permits issued at an officer's discretion.


    20. It is arguable that such discretion would be exercised in favour of
        a person who is not only a married woman, and hence exempt  in  her
        own right, but also married to a member of the Eritrea military. It
        is noted in the appellant's screening interview of  the  18  August
        2015 that she described herself as "Mrs" in reply to question 5, at
        question 13a she described her status as "married", at 13b provided
        a date of marriage as 1 November 2010, and in reply to questions 14
        and 15 provided her spouses  fore  name  and  surname/family  name.
        There is no indication that the appellant does not remain a married
        woman.
    21. If the appellant had been exempted she would not be perceived as  a
        draft evader. The Judge accepted the appellant had left legally  as
        she was in the possession of  a  valid  passport  which  the  Judge
        concluded she had used to leave  Eritrea.  As  such  there  was  no
        evidence to support a claim that the appellant would  be  perceived
        as having left illegally.
    22. The appellant claimed she had been issued with a  passport  by  the
        Eritrea authorities which she indicated in the Screening  Interview
        had been left in Sudan. The appellant was born in Sudan but  claims
        to have returned to the family home in Eritrea and  in  the  asylum
        interview to have been issued with the passport in 1997. When asked
        why she had the passport the response was "just to  have  it".  The
        applicant claims a question 162 that her  passport  expired  before
        she used it and after that she became overage.
    23. The Judge finds above that the appellant was  in  possession  of  a
        valid passport that she used to leave Eritrea. It is noted  in  the
        Refusal Letter that the appellant's evidence in  relation  to  when
        she left has been contradictory, claiming on the one hand  to  have
        left in 2010 by foot, to have travelled to Sudan where she remained
        until 2015 in the screening interview, yet also  to  have  left  in
        2014 travelled on  foot  across  the  border  to  Sudan  where  the
        applicant remained for one month before travelling on  24  November
        2014 by air to Paris, France, via Qatar, then to Lille  in  France,
        Calais for four months and then by lorry to the UK, entering on  24
        March 2015. If the appellant was issued with  a  passport  in  1997
        this indicates she was recognised by the Eritrea authorities as  an
        Eritrean national. At this time, the appellant would have been aged
        10. There have been a number of changes relating to the validity of
        passports in Eritrea some only being valid for five years prior  to
        changes in 2010 reducing the period of validity two years which  is
        observed by commentators as being used as a means  by  the  Eritrea
        authorities  to  raise  revenue  by  charging  additional  passport
        application fees.
    24. One issue for the Judge in relation to this matter was the  failure
        of the appellant to tell the truth. There is no  challenge  to  the
        statement by the appellant, relied upon by the  Judge,  that  as  a
        result of the fact she is married to a soldier in the Eritrea  army
        she is exempt from national service or to her claim  to  have  been
        issued with a  passport.  The  restriction  on  travelling  out  of
        Eritrea is to prevent those who are eligible for  national  service
        from leaving, hence the categories mentioned in headnote 4  of  MST
        and Others. It is for  this  reason  those  eligible  for  national
        service will find it difficult, if not impossible,  to  secure  the
        necessary papers to allow them to leave Eritrea, hence the focus on
        risk arising from leaving illegally.
    25. The Judge was arguably entitled  to  conclude  that  a  person  who
        wished to leave Eritrea, who had no issues with regard to  military
        service or the Eritrean authorities, who is entitled to possess  an
        Eritrean passport, had the ability to leave with it. The  appellant
        has not discharged the burden upon her to show she had been  denied
        a passport and clearly had available to her  significant  resources
        if  she  was  able  to  fly  from  Sudan  to  Paris,  France.   The
        documentation the appellant relied upon for the  purposes  of  that
        journey must have been sufficient to satisfy  relevant  immigration
        authorities in the airports through which she travelled both at the
        point of departure, in transit, and on arrival.
    26. The appellant arguably failed to make out, in light of her  profile
        as found, that she will be perceived to be  a  deserter/evader  who
        left Eritrea illegally or a person who will be assigned to  perform
        national service likely to amount to treatment contrary to Articles
        3 and 4 ECHR.
    27. Ground 2 challenges the weight the Judge gave to  the  evidence  of
        supporting witnesses but weight to be given to that evidence was  a
        matter for the  Judge.  The  Judge  considered  the  material  made
        available with the required degree  of  anxious  scrutiny  and  has
        given adequate reasons for the findings made. It has not been  made
        out the weight given is in any  way  perverse  or  irrational  when
        considering the decision as a whole. The appellant's core claim was
        rejected as not being truthful,  including  that  relating  to  the
        alleged risk referred to in  the  appellant's  statement  dated  20
        September 2016 that her daughter is at risk of FGM. The  Judge  has
        given adequate reasons for  finding  the  appellant  not  to  be  a
        witness of truth who has not provided  evidence  to  the  Judge  to
        support  a  claim  that  there  is  a  real  risk  of  FGM  in  the
        circumstances of this family unit.
    28. Country guidance does not show that a sole woman with a child  will
        face a persecutory risk as a result of membership  of  the  alleged
        particular social group. The appellant is, in any event, married as
        both she and the Judge refer to her husband. The appellant's  claim
        that country material supports an assertion of real  risk  requires
        further consideration.
    29. It is not disputed that the situation for women in Eritrea  is  not
        as it is  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  appellant's  own  country
        material records that whilst the law prohibits discrimination based
        on race, religion, political  opinion,  ethnic  origin,  social  or
        economic  status,  disability,  gender,  age,  and  language,   the
        government did not enforce such  prohibitions.  The  law  does  not
        specifically  criminalise  spousal  rape  but  no  information  was
        available on the prevalence of rape which it is  stated  is  seldom
        reported. Sexual violence against women and girls  is  said  to  be
        widespread in military training camps and that the sexual  violence
        by officers in camps and the army amounted to torture and that  the
        forced domestic service of women and girls who were  also  sexually
        abused  in  training  camps  amounted  to  forced  sexual  slavery.
        Domestic violence was reportedly commonplace but such cases  rarely
        brought to  trial  due  to  societal  pressures  where  women  were
        normally refrained from openly discussing domestic violence.
    30. In relation to FGM this is prohibited by the law of Eritrea and the
        UN Children's Fund are reported to have stated that the  prevalence
        of FGM/C declined over time with the 2010 population health  survey
        finding older cohorts had a higher prevalence than younger  cohorts
        and with work being  undertaken  by  the  UN  Population  Fund  and
        Government to discourage the practice.
    31. The appellant failed to produce sufficient evidence to  show  there
        is a real risk to her daughter on return of being subjected to FGM,
        as it is not said that she or her husband are  in  favour  of  such
        practice or that there is likely to be strong societal pressures to
        have her daughter cut. The child was born on 2 July 2015.
    32. In relation to the claim the Judge failed  to  make  a  finding  in
        relation to the risk of persecution as a result of a membership  of
        a PSG, is accepted there is no specific reference to  this  element
        of the claim but there is a decision by the Judge  to  dismiss  the
        asylum claim. The question  is,  therefore,  whether  the  material
        relied on by the appellant establishes  a  credible  real  risk  of
        persecution for this reason, such as to make the dismissal  finding
        arguably unsafe.
    33. Paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules states that:


             "An asylum applicant will  be  granted  asylum  in  the  United
             Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:


             (i)  he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at  a  port  of
                  entry in the United Kingdom;
             (ii)      he is a refugee, as defined in regulation  2  of  The
                  Refugee or Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection
                  (Qualification) Regulations 2006;
             (iii)     there are no reasonable grounds for regarding him  as
                  a danger to the security of the United Kingdom;
             (iv)      he  does  not,  having  been  convicted  by  a  final
                  judgment of a particularly  serious  crime,  he  does  not
                  constitute danger to the community of the United  Kingdom;
                  and
             (v)   refusing  his  application  would  result  in  him  being
                  required to go (whether  immediately  or  after  the  time
                  limited by any existing  leave  to  enter  or  remain)  in
                  breach of the Geneva Convention, to a country in which his
                  life or freedom would threatened on account of  his  race,
                  religion, nationality, political opinion or membership  of
                  a particular social group".


    34.  The  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International   Protection
        (Qualification) Regulations 2006. Regulation 6 states:


             (1) In deciding whether a person is a refugee....


                  (d)  a group shall be  considered  to  form  a  particular
                      social group where, for example:


                      (i)   members  of  that   group   share   an   innate
                           characteristic,  or  a  common  background   that
                           cannot be changed, or share a  characteristic  or
                           belief that is  so  fundamental  to  identity  or
                           conscience that a person should not be forced  to
                           renounce it, and
                      (ii)     that group has a distinct  identity  in  the
                           relevant country,  because  it  is  perceived  as
                           being different by the surrounding society;


                  (e)  a particular social group might include a group based
                      on a common characteristic of sexual orientation  but
                      sexual orientation cannot be  understood  to  include
                      acts considered to be  criminal  in  accordance  with
                      national law of the United Kingdom;


    35. In Shah and Islam and Others v SSHD HL (1999)  INLR  144  Steyn  LJ
        accepted that women in Pakistan were a social group  based  on  the
        immutable characteristic of gender and the fact that, as  a  group,
        they were unprotected by the laws of Pakistan.
    36. In RG (Ethiopia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 339  the  Court  of  Appeal
        said that for women in a country to constitute a particular  social
        group their circumstances need not match exactly those of women  in
        Pakistan in order to fall within the  Shah  and  Islam  principles.
        Widespread  societal  discrimination   combined   with   inadequate
        protection by the police and the courts  may  suffice  without  any
        disability for women being enshrined in law. The  Court  of  Appeal
        said that in each case the issue was fact specific.
    37. There was no challenge by Mrs Aboni to the submission by Mr  Howard
        that the appellant fell  within  a  particular  social  group,  but
        whether that group is as a single woman with a child  is  debatable
        in light of the adverse credibility findings made and the fact  the
        evidence strongly suggests the appellant is a married  woman  whose
        husband serves in the Eritrea army, and therefore not  single.  The
        appellant has failed to establish that she falls within the  social
        group it is claimed the well-founded fear of persecution arises  in
        relation to.
    38. In relation to the meaning of  persecution  under  the  Refugee  or
        Person  in  Need  of   International   Protection   (Qualification)
        Regulations 2006, Regulation 5(1) states:


             "In  deciding  whether  a  person  is  a  refugee  an  act  of
        persecution must be:


             (a)  sufficiently serious by its nature or  repetition  as  to
                  constitute a severe violation of a basic human  right,  in
                  particular a right from which derogation  cannot  be  made
                  under Article 15 of the Convention for the  Protection  of
                  Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or
             (b)   an  accumulation  of  various  measures,   including   a
                  violation of a human right which is sufficiently severe as
                  to affect an individual in a similar manner  as  specified
                  in (a).


             (2)  An act of persecution may, for example, take the form of:




                  (a)  an act of physical or mental violence,  including  an
                      act of sexual violence;
                  (b)  a legal, administrative, police, or judicial  measure
                      which  in  itself  is  discriminatory  or  which   is
                      implemented in a discriminatory manner;
                  (c)  prosecution or punishment, which is  disproportionate
                      or discriminatory;
                  (d)   denial  of   judicial   redress   resulting   in   a
                      disproportionate or discriminatory punishment;
                  (e)  prosecution or  punishment  for  refusal  to  perform
                      military service  in  a  conflict,  where  performing
                      military service would include crimes or acts falling
                      under regulation 7.


             (3)  An act of persecution must be committed for at least  one
                  of the reasons in Article 1(A) of the Geneva Convention. "


    39. The legal definition of the term "refugee" is set  out  at  Article
        1A(2) of the Refugee Convention,  which  defines  a  refugee  as  a
        person who:


             Owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons  of
             race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social
             group or political opinion  is  outside  the  country  of  his
             nationality and is unable or owing to such fear, is  unwilling
             to avail himself of the protection of that  country;  or  who,
             not having a nationality and being outside the country of  his
             former habitual residence is unable or, owing  to  such  fear,
             unwilling to return to it.


             The definition can be broken into constituent parts:


    . Possession of a fear that is well founded rather than fanciful
    . Of treatment that is so bad it amounts to being persecuted
    . For one of five reasons, referred to as  'Convention  reasons':  race,
      religion, nationality, membership of  a  particular  social  group  or
      political opinion
    . Being outside one's country
    . Being unable or unwilling to obtain protection in that country.


    40. On the basis of the information before the Judge and  although  the
        appellant has established an argument for there being a  real  risk
        of discrimination and within the military setting ill-treatment for
        some, the appellant arguably failed to discharge  the  burden  upon
        her to establish that she faces a real risk of an  objective  well-
        founded  fear  of  treatment  so  bad  that  it  would  amount   to
        persecution as a result of her being a  member  of  the  particular
        social group relied upon. Nor has the  appellant  established  ill-
        treatment sufficient to amount to a breach of Article  3  what  are
        entitled to a grant of Humanitarian Protection on this basis.
    41. As such, the  failure  of  the  Judge  to  make  specific  detailed
        findings in relation to this element  has  not  been  shown  to  be
        arguably material as the outcome has  to  matter  being  considered
        would have been the same, that the appellant  has  not  established
        that she was entitled to  be  recognised  as  a  refugee  for  this
        reason.  Accordingly, any error has not been shown to be material.
    42. The country  guidance  case  does  not  support  an  assertion  the
        appellant faces a persecutory risk solely as a failed asylum seeker
        and  in  light  of  the  findings  that  the  core  account  lacked
        credibility the appellant failed to establish the existence of very
        significant obstacles preventing the appellant's  return  with  her
        young child or that return would breach the respondents obligations
        pursuant to section 55, which are elements contained in the reasons
        for refusal letter in relation to which it has not been  shown  the
        resultant  conclusions  are  in  any  way  arguably  irrational  or
        unlawful.
    43. The grounds of challenge fail to make out any arguable legal  error
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal which must therefore
        stand.

Decision

    44. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.




   Anonymity.


    45. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 17th of May 2017












