
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11650/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25 May 2016                           |On 18 July 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SS
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr Lewis, Counsel instructed by Theva Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb dated 11 April 2016.  The  appeal
    relates to a decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hendry  promulgated
    on 10 March 2016. The Judge had allowed the asylum  claim.  The  appeal
    before me is that of the Secretary of State, but to ease following this
    decision I shall continue to refer to the claimant as the Appellant and
    the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

2.    The Respondent's grounds of appeal seeking permission  to  appeal  had
    contended that the Judge had misdirected himself in law because:

   1) The Judge had failed  to  identify  why  the  Appellant  would  be  of
      interest to the Sri Lankan authorities post 2009  given  his  lack  of
      profile as an activist;
   2) The Country Guidance case of GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees)
      Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) set out  the  risk  categories  but
      this Appellant did not fit into the same;
   3) There was no basis for the Judge's presumption that the Appellant  had
      been placed on a stop or watch list;
   4) In any event the Appellant himself had said  that  he  had,  "put  his
      freedom fighting days behind him".

3.    Mr Duffy was commendably brief when he amplified those grounds at  the
    hearing before me. He said that the Appellant was outside of  the  stop
    list. There was no arrest warrant. Given the Appellant's intentions  it
    meant that he was not at risk. It was the Appellant's own evidence  and
    it won't lead to anything. The Judge  did  not  adequately  reason  his
    decision. I was invited to set aside the decision and to remake it  and
    to dismiss the appeal.

4.    Mr Lewis said that  there  had  been  a  very  experienced  Presenting
    Officer before the Judge. Mr Lewis said he was also  at  that  hearing.
    The case stood or fell  on  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant,  i.e.
    whether or not there was a continued interest in the Appellant. It  was
    not proper for the Secretary  of  State  to  now  go  behind  what  was
    recorded by the Secretary of State and therefore there was no challenge
    to the credibility findings by the Judge.

5.    The evidence of the Appellant was that the authorities had raided  his
    home. They had accused him of the incident with the LTTE and  such  was
    the interest that not only did they search his house, they also got his
    father to report and therefore  there  is  continued  interest  in  the
    Appellant. That finding had not been challenged said Mr Lewis.

6.    Mr Lewis referred to the  Country  Guidance  decision  in  GJ  and  he
    referred to the headnote at 7a and to paragraph 168 of the decision. He
    said it was on that basis that there  was  this  concession.  Mr  Lewis
    referred to paragraphs 55 and 56 of the Judge's decision and to  7d  of
    the decision in GJ.   The  stop  list  has  never  been  published  and
    therefore whether or not someone will be  stopped  or  not  has  to  be
    inferred from the evidence.

7.    Mr Lewis said that in respect of the  "no  arrest  warrant"  I  should
    look at paragraph 12.19 at  page  95  of  the  Country  of  Information
    Report. It was clear that  if  the  Appellant  did  produce  an  arrest
    warrant then he would not be credible. Therefore it was  not  right  to
    ask him for an arrest warrant.

8.    Mr Lewis said  that  there  was  no  challenge  to  the  findings  and
    therefore on the basis of GJ it has to be presumed he will be tortured.
    It was recorded as a case  which  relied  on  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant I was invited to uphold the decision of the Judge.

9.    Mr Duffy said he had nothing further to add in reply.

10.   I had reserved my decision.

11.   Having considered the decision of the Judge again in some  detail  and
    reflecting on the parties respective submissions I conclude that  there
    is no material error of law in the Judge's decision.

12.   I have come to this decision for the following reasons.

13.   Firstly, Mr Lewis was at the hearing before the  Judge  and  I  accept
    his  submission  that  there  were  certain  concessions  made  by  the
    experienced Presenting Officer there as to how the case was being  put.
    Indeed I note that it is specifically stated at  paragraph  47  at  the
    first bullet point that the Judge  recorded  the  following  about  the
    Presenting Officer's submissions, "Unusually, he did not  rely  heavily
    on the refusal letter, because he did not share the conclusion  in  the
    letter  that  there  was  a  serious  discrepancy  in  the  appellant's
    description of LTTE  training,  and  the  objective  evidence  of  such
    training".

14.   The Judge went on to  record  that  the  Presenting  Officer  did  not
    necessarily accept that the Appellant was a member of the LTTE, "but he
    could not absolutely say he was not a member". The Judge also  recorded
    that the Presenting Officer did indeed say as Mr Lewis submitted before
    me, that if the Judge accepted the Appellant's evidence that he  was  a
    member of the LTTE then he may be at risk. In addition at paragraph  48
    the Judge noted Mr Lewis had said that the appeal succeeded or fell  on
    the credibility of the Appellant.

15.   It was therefore against that background that the  Judge  was  looking
    at this case  and  considering  the  risks  and  thereby  applying  the
    decision in GJ.

16.   Secondly, the  Judge  made  careful  and  proper  findings  about  the
    Appellant's credibility. He explained in sufficient detail why he found
    the Appellant to be a credible witness.  There  is  no  appeal  against
    those findings. Therefore when taken together with the way in which the
    appeal was argued by both parties before the Judge, it  is  clear  that
    there is no material error of law. The Presenting Officer  left  it  to
    the Judge to decide the credibility issues. If the Appellant was  found
    to be a credible witness then  it  was  conceded  that  appeal  was  to
    succeed. Therefore because the  Judge  found  the  Appellant  to  be  a
    credible witness, he  followed  the  route  suggested  to  him  by  the
    Presenting Officer and  allowed  the  appeal.  There  is  no  error  in
    approach or substantively.

17.   Thirdly, in any event the Judge accepted that the  Appellant's  father
    had been visited by the military and that the Appellant's father had to
    report to them on a regular basis. This too showed  continued  interest
    in the  Appellant  and  indeed  a  recent  continued  interest  in  the
    Appellant. As a consequence there was no error in law in respect of the
    Judge's application of the Country Guidance decision in GJ.

18.   Therefore in my judgment the decision of the shows no  material  error
    of law.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge did not involve the making  of
a material error of law and stands.

An anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                       Date: 1 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


