
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11702/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th August 2016                   |On 24th August 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                                     HM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Rahath Abdar, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of  Afghanistan  with  a  disputed  date  of
    birth.  According to the Respondent the correct date of birth should be
    2nd March 1999 but according to the Appellant it should  be  2nd  March
    2002.  The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Paul sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  17th  May  2016  who
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Respondent
    dated 14th August 2015.  That decision was  to  refuse  to  grant  the
    Appellant asylum or humanitarian protection under  paragraphs  336  and
    339 of the Immigration Rules.

2.   The Appellant told the Respondent he had left Afghanistan at age  6  or
    thereabouts and travelled to Turkey where he resided for  a  number  of
    years.   He  then  travelled  with  an  Afghan  family  to  an  unknown
    destination before being separated and eventually put on a lorry to the
    United Kingdom arriving on 20th January 2015.  He  was  encountered  by
    the police  shortly  thereafter.   He  had  a  screening  interview  on
    18th February 2015 and a full asylum interview on 20th July 2015.   On
    14th August 2015 the decision to refuse was  made  by  the  Respondent
    which is the subject of these proceedings.

The Decision at First Instance

3.   The Appellant's claim was that as a young person without any  resources
    or family in Afghanistan he would be unable to return to that  country.
    The Judge proceeded on the basis that the Appellant was  the  age  that
    the Appellant claimed.  The refusal  letter  refusing  the  Appellant's
    application for asylum referred to a Merton  compliant  age  assessment
    received by the Respondent from Kent Social Services  dated  4th  March
    2015 in which the social workers had estimated the Appellant's date  of
    birth to be 2nd March 1999.  Although the Judge did not give any reason
    why he accepted the Appellant's contrary evidence as  to  age,  I  note
    from the file that although the  Merton  compliant  age  assessment  is
    referred  to  in  the  Respondent's  decision,  no  copy  of  that  age
    assessment was ever provided by the Respondent. In the circumstances it
    would appear the Judge had little choice but to accept the  Appellant's
    claimed date of birth (notwithstanding the  very  serious  reservations
    the  Judge  went  on  to  express  as  to   the   Appellant's   general
    credibility).

4.   On the basis of the Appellant's age the Judge was dealing with  a  case
    which involved an Appellant aged 14 years who was referring to  events,
    some of which had occurred when he was 6  years  old.   The  Judge  was
    aware and directed himself at paragraph 26 that he had to exercise care
    and caution in considering a young person's account.  He stated he  had
    carefully considered this case and all the  evidence  provided  by  the
    Appellant but was satisfied the Appellant had not told the truth.   The
    Appellant had given no reason why he had been moved at a young age from
    Afghanistan to Turkey nor had he been able to say how he had  ended  up
    living with another Afghan family in that country.  The Judge wrote  at
    paragraph 28 "I simply do not accept that this  Appellant  was  shipped
    from Kabul to Turkey at a  very  young  age  with  his  brother  simply
    because of some family dispute in Kabul".

5.   The Judge cited the case of KA Afghanistan [2012]  EWCA  Civ  where  it
    was held that  an  Appellant  who  had  been  so  uncooperative  as  to
    frustrate any attempt to trace his family would put himself beyond  the
    protective and corrective principle. This would not be because  he  was
    being punished for mendacity but because he had  failed  to  prove  the
    risk  on  return.   There  would  be  no  causative  link  between  the
    Respondent's breach of duty in such a claim to protection.   The  Judge
    was satisfied the Appellant had family in Kabul and that the  Appellant
    was not separated from them in the circumstances described.  The  Judge
    was prepared to accept the Appellant had come  to  the  United  Kingdom
    with his brother but had  deliberately  covered  up  contact  with  his
    brother thereafter so as to appear to put  the  Respondent  in  a  more
    difficult position in relation to tracing the Appellant's family.  Core
    elements of the Appellant's case could not be relied upon and he had no
    valid claim for protection.

The Onward Appeal

6.   The Appellant appealed against that decision on three  grounds  arguing
    that the Judge  had  manifestly  erred  in  considering  assessing  and
    determining  the  Appellant's  credibility  and  in  turn  the  appeal.
    Firstly it was difficult to discern in the  determination  the  Judge's
    application of caution when assessing the credibility of a minor.   The
    Judge had failed to adequately reason his  findings,  such  as  a  non-
    acceptance that the Appellant would have been sent from Kabul to Turkey
    at a very young age or that that happened because of a  family  dispute
    or the rejection of the account of being separated from his brother  in
    Turkey.

7.    Secondly  the  Judge  had  conflated  the  tracing   obligations   and
    corrective leave.   The  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  KA  had  been
    overturned by the Supreme Court.  In the absence of adequate  reception
    arrangements the Appellant was a refugee and the Judge  had  failed  to
    consider and determine this claim.  Thirdly  the  grounds  stated  that
    there were categories of people who were at a heightened risk on return
    to Kabul and the Appellant was entitled to humanitarian protection.

8.   The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford on 4th July 2016.  He granted permission
    to appeal on the grounds that  it  was  arguable  that  the  Judge  had
    conflated the Respondent's tracing obligations and  the  assessment  of
    risk on return.  He did not grant permission on either the treatment by
    the Judge of the evidence of the Appellant as a  young  person  or  the
    humanitarian protection claim.

9.   The Appellant renewed the application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal in relation to those two grounds  where  permission  had
    not been granted.  The renewed application for permission came  on  the
    papers before Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein on  29th  July  2016.   At
    paragraph 4 he wrote:
         "Having read the determination and without wishing to unduly  raise
         the Appellant's hopes I am just persuaded that  [the  treatment  of
         credibility] ground is arguable and I therefore grant permission to
         appeal in respect of it."

    Judge Goldstein was not  persuaded  by  the  argument  in  relation  to
    humanitarian protection and refused permission on that ground.

10.  The Respondent replied to the grant of  permission,  stating  that  the
    Judge clearly had regard to all of the evidence presented and had  made
    credibility findings on that evidence.  The Judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant would not have been sent  to  Turkey  at  such  a  young  age
    because of a family  dispute  involving  his  father.   The  Judge  was
    satisfied that the Appellant  had  family  in  Kabul  and  he  was  not
    separated from them in the claimed circumstances.  There  would  be  no
    risk on return.





The Hearing Before Me

11.  At the outset of the hearing the Appellant's solicitor noting that  the
    humanitarian protection claim had not been  granted  permission  raised
    with me whether that should still be the case.   I  indicated  that  my
    understanding of the relevant decision in AK Afghanistan was that while
    some parts of Afghanistan were so dangerous that a claim could be  made
    under Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive, that did not  apply
    across all of Afghanistan. If the Appellant  were  to  be  returned  to
    Kabul (as the Respondent indicated) he would not be  able  to  bring  a
    claim under the Qualification Directive.  In that respect I agreed with
    the decision of the previous two Judges who had both refused permission
    to appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

12.  Dealing with  the  remaining  two  grounds  the  Appellant's  solicitor
    argued that the Judge had failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
    findings.  The Appellant had given explanations why he had travelled to
    Turkey but there were no  findings  made  on  that  matter  or  on  the
    explanations given  by  the  Appellant  for  his  separation  from  his
    brother.  A lack of explanation by the Appellant did not  equate  to  a
    lack  of  credibility  on  the  Appellant's  part.    The   Appellant's
    explanation was quite simple, he had been trying to flee Turkey and got
    separated.  If the Judge wished to find that was not sensible then some
    reasoning was required.

13.  Similarly there  was  inadequate  reasoning  at  paragraph  28  of  the
    determination where the Judge had refused to accept that the  Appellant
    had been shipped from Kabul to Turkey at a very young age.   There  was
    no indication of what evidence the Judge was relying upon in  making  a
    finding that the whole of the Appellant's account of the  circumstances
    relating to  the  Appellant's  brother  was  unreliable.   Neither  the
    Appellant nor the Respondent had said that the Appellant arrived in the
    United Kingdom with his brother.  It was not clear  whether  the  Judge
    was saying that  the  Appellant  had  never  gone  to  Turkey  but  had
    travelled directly to the United  Kingdom  or  whether  the  Judge  was
    saying that the Appellant had not  fled  Afghanistan  aged  6  and  his
    family were still there.  It was important for the  Appellant  and  the
    Upper Tribunal to know as  that  would  have  an  impact  on  reception
    facilities.  It was accepted that a failure to trace by the  Respondent
    did not of itself lead to some form of corrective leave  being  granted
    to the Appellant but the failure to trace left open the question of the
    return of the Appellant.  The Tribunal had accepted the Appellant was a
    minor and therefore the Appellant was a refugee.

14.  In response it was argued that when assessing the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant the Judge could not have been clearer  that  he  was  dealing
    with special considerations.  Following the Court of Appeal decision in
    JA Ghana [2015] EWCA Civ 1031 (at paragraph  31)  the  Judge  would  be
    presumed to know  and  apply  relevant  guidelines  or  guidance  which
    dictate the approach to evidence such as that which  related  to  child
    and other vulnerable witnesses.  It was not the case that the Judge had
    to do more than reject the core of  the  claim  but  rather  go  on  to
    formulate an alternative, see MA Somalia.   The  Judge  was  not  in  a
    position to know what had happened because the Appellant had  not  told
    the truth about when he had left Turkey.

15.  What the Judge had to do  was  to  decide  whether  the  Appellant  had
    family in Kabul.  The Appellant  had  given  different,  difficult  and
    contradictory answers.  He had tried to go back on his initial claim to
    have family in Kabul saying that there was no family there.  The  Judge
    had found the Appellant was being deliberately deceptive.  Although the
    Appellant had sought to cover up contact with his brother he  had  come
    to the United Kingdom with SIM cards enabling him  to  contact  people.
    The question of  when  the  brother  entered  the  United  Kingdom  was
    something of a red herring and made no difference to the assessment  of
    the risk to the Appellant upon return.  The  Appellant  had  family  he
    could return to.  The Respondent's unaccompanied minors policy was much
    broader than just a consideration of whether an  Appellant  had  family
    back in the country of origin.  The Respondent understood the need  for
    general protection for unaccompanied minors.   Later  authorities  were
    irrelevant where as in this case  the  Respondent  had  recognised  the
    Appellant to be an unaccompanied minor.

16.  In conclusion the Appellant's solicitor argued that the Judge  was  not
    obliged to make findings and that was not what he was  being  asked  to
    do.  He was simply being asked to make findings on evidence before  him
    and give the reasons for his findings.  A core finding was on the issue
    of when the Appellant fled Kabul.  It was not reasoned  why  the  Judge
    should be critical of the Appellant's cooperation with tracing.  He had
    always cooperated.  He had given a telephone number to  the  Respondent
    but they had not acted on that.  It was difficult to see  how  a  minor
    Appellant  could  be  criticised  for  issues  such  as  when  he  left
    Afghanistan.

Findings

17.  There are two issues to be determined in this  appeal.   The  first  is
    whether the Judge's treatment of the Appellant's  evidence  bearing  in
    mind the Appellant's age as found by the Judge  was  sufficient  and/or
    whether it complied with  all  relevant  guidance.   The  second  issue
    relates  to  whether  the  Judge  dealt  adequately  with  any  tracing
    obligations on the Respondent and the  assessment  of  risk  on  return
    given the Appellant's age.

18.  In assessing the evidence of a minor Appellant the Tribunal  is  always
    going to have some difficulty since some understanding of the  position
    of a child Appellant  must  inform  an  analysis  of  that  Appellant's
    evidence.  The Judge in this case was clearly aware of that  obligation
    and directed himself specifically to it as I have outlined  above  (see
    paragraph 4).  It might  also  have  been  helpful  if  the  Judge  had
    referred in the course of the determination to  paragraph  351  of  the
    Immigration Rules which states:
         "However account should be taken of the applicant's maturity and in
         assessing the claim of a child  more  weight  should  be  given  to
         objective indications of risk than to a child's state of  mind  and
         understanding of his situation.   An  asylum  application  made  on
         behalf of the child should not be refused solely because the  child
         is too young to understand his situation or to have formed a  well-
         founded fear of persecution.  Close attention should  be  given  to
         the welfare of the child at all times".

19.  It is fair to point out that the Appellant was describing events  which
    had occurred some years before  when  he  was  very  young.   In  those
    circumstances he could not be expected to be precise with all  relevant
    details.  The Respondent's case was that the Appellant  had  fabricated
    his travel, stay in Turkey, etc. and that in fact he had travelled from
    Afghanistan to the United Kingdom in the  course  of  2015.   What  the
    Judge had to do was to decide between these two  conflicting  arguments
    and make a finding as  to  which  case  he  preferred.   Paragraph  351
    reminds decision makers that more weight should be given  to  objective
    indications of risk, than to a child Appellant's understanding  of  the
    situation.  What the Judge was concerned  about  was  that  there  were
    aspects of the Appellant's claim which  were  something  that  a  young
    person could reasonably  be  expected  to  be  able  to  describe  (see
    paragraph 28 of the determination).

20.  There was evidence referred to by the Judge of what the  Appellant  had
    on him when he was stopped by police.   He  was  found  with  a  mobile
    telephone, some British money and a British SIM card along with four to
    five British contact numbers written  on  paper.   The  Appellant  told
    Immigration Officers he thought his brother may be  in  London.   These
    were not matters which went to a child Appellant's understanding of his
    situation.  These were objective factors.  The Appellant's  account  of
    how he had arrived in the United Kingdom did not sit easily  with  what
    the Immigration Officers found on the Appellant when they searched him.
     The Appellant had been unable to sustain a  consistent  narrative  and
    even allowing for the fact of his age it still meant that the Judge had
    no reliable evidence from the Appellant on  which  he  could  base  any
    findings.  What the Judge had to  do  was  to  look  at  what  reliable
    evidence he did have before him  and  make  his  findings  accordingly.
    This the Judge did.

21.  Whilst it may have been a step too far for the Judge to have  indicated
    he was prepared to accept that the Appellant  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom with his brother (when neither the Appellant nor the Respondent
    had advanced that), the only relevance of that would  be  any  possible
    impact it might have on an assessment of the  Appellant's  credibility.
    Clearly if the Appellant had reason  to  believe  his  brother  was  in
    London then at some point something else must have  happened  following
    the separation for the Appellant now to be  able  to  know  that.   The
    Judge surmised that it was because the Appellant had  in  fact  entered
    the United Kingdom with his  brother  and  thus  would  know  that  the
    brother was in London, but even if that was not the case there  had  to
    be some form of  contact  (which  the  Appellant  was  not  willing  to
    disclose) such that the Appellant now knew where his brother  was.   In
    any event there were ample other problems with the Appellant's evidence
    such that the issue of exactly how  the  Appellant  came  to  know  his
    brother was in London was something of a side issue.  I do  not  accept
    that the challenges to  the  Judge's  assessment  of  credibility  have
    indicated any material errors of law in the determination.

22.  The second matter  (assessment  of  risk  on  return  etc)  is  as  the
    Appellant's  solicitor  correctly  submitted   interlinked   with   the
    treatment of the Appellant's credibility.  The Judge held at  paragraph
    33 of  the  determination  that  the  family  tracing  option  was  not
    available in this case on the information provided.   The  point  being
    that if the Appellant was not telling the truth (as the Judge found was
    the case) about his family's situation there was nothing the Respondent
    could usefully  do  to  trace  the  Appellant's  family.   Clearly  the
    Appellant had been provided with some  resources  along  the  way,  his
    account of how he obtained the British money was that he obtained it en
    route whilst in Greece, and he had been given telephone numbers in  the
    United Kingdom to contact.   Whoever  it  was  who  was  assisting  the
    Appellant in this way could ordinarily have been  regarded  as  someone
    who could assist the Appellant upon return.   The  Judge  held  it  was
    difficult for the Respondent to take that matter any further in view of
    the confusion caused by the Appellant's inaccurate account of  himself.
    I do not therefore find that the second challenge to the  determination
    can be made out either.  There are no material errors  of  law  in  the
    determination such that it falls to be set  aside  and  I  dismiss  the
    Appellant's onward appeal.  I make an anonymity order as the  Appellant
    is still a minor.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and will therefore stand.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed this 23rd day of August 2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee was payable and the appeal has been dismissed there can be no  fee
award.


Signed this 23rd day of August 2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

