
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11329/2015
     AA/11331/2015
     AA/11332/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On August 24, 2017                    |On September 4, 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                   MR KCH
                                 MASTER NSHA
                                  MRS vDPSG
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Anzani, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity direction under Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. The appellants are Sri Lankan  nationals.   The  first-named  appellant
    left Sri Lanka on his passport and entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student on May 8, 2010. His leave expired  on  March  14,  2011  so  he
    applied om February 18, 2011 to extend his leave as a Tier 4  (General)
    Student and although his application was refused he succeeded on appeal
    and this extended his leave initially until September 2, 2013 and  then
    until February 24, 2015.  On February 23, 2015 he applied for asylum on
    behalf of himself, his wife  and  son.  The  respondent  refused  their
    asylum claim on August 9, 2015.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on August 19, 2015 under Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His  appeal
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  Black  on  December
    20, 2016 and in a decision promulgated on January 16,  2017  the  Judge
    refused their appeals on all grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed this decision on January 30, 2017. Permission to
    appeal was initially refused by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Ford
    on May 4, 2017 but  when  those  grounds  were  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Plimmer on June 29, 2017.

 5. The respondent lodged a Rule 24 response dated July 19, 2017  in  which
    she opposed all grounds of appeal.

 6. The matter came before me on the above date.

    Submissions

 7. Ms Anzani adopted her grounds of appeal and submitted  that  the  Judge
    had erred.

 8. She firstly submitted the Judge had failed to give adequate reasons  to
    explain why she rejected the appellant's claim he had been arrested  or
    that there had been an arrest warrant issued following his  failure  to
    attend court. The appellant had provided evidence  from  two  attorneys
    who examined the court file and commented on  the  verification  report
    relied on by the respondent. The  Judge  provided  no  reasons  why  he
    rejected their evidence. Clearly the existence of  such  documents  was
    relevant to the Judge's consideration of GJ and others (post civil war:
    returnees) [2013] UKUT 319.

 9. She secondly argued the Judge gave no explanation or reason why it  was
    not plausible the appellants were able to leave as claimed.  The  Upper
    Tribunal noted in GJ that there was evidence it was possible  to  leave
    the country even when that person was being actively pursued. Reference
    was also made to MM (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 36 in which  the
    Court of Appeal found the Immigration Judge  had  erred  by  finding  a
    person cannot leave Sri Lanka despite being on a reporting condition.

10. The final ground concerned the Judge's assessment of  the  respondent's
    document verification report. The report had been sent for verification
    to the very people the first-named appellant  claimed  had  issued  the
    document in the first place. This was unfair as  it  should  have  been
    sent to someone independent such as the court.  The  report  failed  to
    show a line of custody for the document.

11. She invited the Tribunal to find an error  in  law  and  to  remit  the
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal.

12. Mr Whitwell adopted the Rule 24 and submitted the Judge made  a  number
    of adverse credibility about the appellant's claim including  the  fact
    the first-named appellant had returned to Sri Lanka on three occasions,
    he had a limited profile with the LTTE,  the  historic  nature  of  the
    allegations and the delay in bringing the claim. These alone were  good
    reasons for rejecting his claim but  additionally  the  respondent  had
    produced  a  verification  report  which  challenged  the   first-named
    appellant's  documents.  The  challenge  brought  today  was   a   mere
    disagreement with the Judge's findings.

13. Mr Whitwell accepted that the Judge  had  erred  in  finding  that  the
    appellant would have been unable to leave the country but he  submitted
    this error was not material because the circumstances of the case  were
    different to those in GJ and because of the adverse findings  made.  Mr
    Whitwell submitted that as the core  claim  was  rejected  it  mattered
    little that he could leave Sri Lanka because he did not form part of  a
    risk group in GJ.

14. With regard to  the  verification  report  Mr  Whitwell  submitted  the
    Judge's findings in paragraph [26] were open to him. There was  nothing
    unusual about names being left out of the report as this protected  the
    people providing the report.

15. I reserved my decision after hearing these submissions.

    FINDINGS

16. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Plimmer.  She
    found the grounds arguable and today  I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives.

17. Three grounds of appeal were  brought.  The  first  ground  centred  on
    material and credibility findings  about  the  first-named  appellant's
    account. This third ground centres  around  the  document  verification
    report and whilst both are different matters they clearly are connected
    as it is the findings on these  issues  that  ultimately  would  decide
    whether the appellant had persuaded the Judge to the lower standard  of
    proof about his case.

18. The Judge summarised the appellant's claim concisely in paragraph  [12]
    of his decision. The respondent's position was  set  out  in  paragraph
    [13] of his decision. The Judge was aware of the relevant case  law  as
    he reminded himself of the law in paragraph [16] of his decision.

19. Between paragraphs [17] and [27] the Judge considered the evidence  and
    set out his reasons for his decision.

20. Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer gave permission to appeal on the basis the
    Judge may have erred firstly with regard to whether it was possible  to
    leave the country when wanted by the authorities and  secondly  on  the
    basis the Judge's findings may not have given sufficient weight to  the
    evidence from the two attorneys.

21. On the first point the respondent accepts that the Judge did err but Mr
    Whitwell argued that the error is not material.  The  Judge  considered
    the appellant's method of departure and whilst I accept the  Judge  was
    wrong to find in paragraph [20] that he would not be able to leave  the
    country I am satisfied that if this was the only error then this  would
    not amount to an error of law because the if the Judge's other findings
    on credibility are sustainable then the appellant would not  be  wanted
    or at risk.

22. It is therefore the Judge's approach to the attorney's evidence and the
    document verification report that will determine whether an  error  was
    made in the decision.

23. The Judge accepted he may have worked in  some  capacity  for  a  media
    company but he found no evidence to support the  appellant's  claim  he
    was interviewed in 2007 or that his employer  presented  the  offending
    news broadcast in  2006  that  mentioned  the  appellant  by  name.  In
    reaching that finding  the  Judge  took  into  account  the  background
    material and the appellant's own immigration history that included  the
    fact he left the country on a student visa in 2007 and he  remained  in
    the United Kingdom until his visa expired in 2015.

24. He considered the material about the television company and coverage of
    the civil war and was not persuaded there was anything that linked  him
    to any report. Having considered the evidence  he  concluded  that  his
    failure to claim asylum in either 2007 or 2010 undermined his claim. If
    what he claimed had truly happened then the Judge found his failure  to
    claim after arriving in 2007 and then when he returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2010 undermined his credibility. He waited  a  further  five
    years after returning in 2010 before claiming asylum. Section 8 of  the
    Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants  etc)  Act  2004  was
    applied by the Judge. The findings made would therefore be open to  the
    Judge unless there was something else that supported his claim.

25. The first-named appellant relies on evidence from  two  attorneys.  The
    content of the letters were considered by the Judge and he gave reasons
    for rejecting both documents. Ms Anzani in her grounds of appeal argued
    that the Judge's approach to this  evidence  fell  below  the  standard
    necessary. The Judge examined the court register and noted one  of  the
    representative's name was not recorded in the register. In  fact  there
    was a representative with a similar  surname  but  that  person  was  a
    female. The Judge criticised the  content  of  that  statement  as  the
    person merely confirmed the documents were genuine and  challenged  the
    reliability of his authenticity. That finding was clearly open  to  the
    Judge as he was tasked with considering all of the evidence and  making
    findings. The second witness produced extracts of the  court  file  and
    like his colleague gave his opinion on the documents. The Judge had the
    verification report - a document challenged by the appellant.

26. The Judge had to  consider  all  that  evidence.  The  fact  names  are
    redacted does not mean the document cannot be  relied  on.  The  report
    like other documentary evidence is evidence that should  be  considered
    in the round and this is what the Judge did. The Judge gave his reasons
    for placing reliance on the said document and he made it clear that  he
    placed reliance on it not simply because it was a  court  document  but
    because of his other findings.

27. In circumstances where there is conflicting evidence the Judge  has  to
    make a finding. In this case he found against the appellant and I agree
    with Mr Whitwell that grounds 1 and 3 are mere disagreements  with  the
    Judge's decision. The Judge considered the evidence and gave a decision
    that was open to him on the facts. There was no error in law on any  of
    the grounds.

    DECISION

28. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a  point  of  law.   I  uphold  the  original
    decision.

Signed                              Date     31.08.2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

No fee award is made because I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     31.08.2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
