
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11301/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th April 2016                   |On 19th April 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                               MOHAMMED ASHRAF
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Murphy of Counsel instructed by Maxwell
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery: Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has appealed against a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Khawar promulgated on 20th May 2015 following a hearing  on  19th
    March 2015.

 2. This appeal comes back before me as  a  resumed  hearing  following  an
    earlier hearing on 26th October 2015.  For the reasons set  out  in  my
    earlier decision, I found an error of law in the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Khawar.

 3. Borrowing from  my  earlier  decision,  I  summarise  and  augment  the
    background.  The appellant is a Pakistani national.  He claims to  have
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 26th June  2005.   On  12th  September
    2006, he was arrested working illegally at a butchers shop in  Brixton.
    He was served with an IS151A as an illegal  entrant.   On  21st  August
    2012 he was again encountered working illegally in a butchers  shop  in
    Brixton and he was again arrested and detained.  On 3rd September 2012,
    Nationwide Solicitors submitted a request for  temporary  admission  on
    his behalf. That request was considered and refused  on  4th  September
    2012.   He again applied for temporary admission on 11th October  2012.
    That request was considered and refused  the  following  day,  on  12th
    October 2012.  On 24th October 2012 the appellant claimed asylum.   The
    claim was refused for the reasons set out in an asylum  decision  dated
    4th December 2014 and it was that decision,  which  gave  rise  to  the
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The appeal was heard on 19th  March  2015,  and  dismissed,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Khawar finding that the appellant was  not  entitled  to
    asylum or humanitarian protection, and that his removal from the United
    Kingdom  would  not  breach  his  human  rights.   The  appellant   was
    subsequently granted permission to appeal that decision.

 5. The Grounds for seeking permission filed by the appellant's solicitors,
    presumably upon the instructions of the appellant, state inter alia:

         "... The Appellant had claimed Asylum on  the  basis  that  he  had
         faced  fictitious  criminal  charges   in   retaliation   for   his
         involvement with student activism while in Pakistan..."

 Error of Law

 6. The  appeal  came  before  me  on  26th  October  2015.  After  hearing
    submissions from both parties I set aside the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  I have recorded in paragraphs [12] to [14] of my  error
    of law decision, the submissions that were advanced on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  In particular, I recorded at paragraph [13], the submission
    made by Mr Parkin:

         "He submits that at paragraphs [18] to [22], the  Judge  considered
         the documents on a mistaken premise because the appellant's case is
         that the FIR's and arrest warrants  arise  from  fabricated  claims
         made against the appellant and it is  therefore  unsurprising  that
         the account of events set out in those documents, is at  odds  with
         the account provided by the appellant, and that the  appellant  had
         not previously mentioned the matters set out in those documents."

 7. I found that the Judge had erred for the reasons  that  I  set  out  at
    paragraphs [17] to [27] of  my  decision.   Insofar  as  the  documents
    relied upon the appellant are concerned, I stated at paragraph [22]  of
    my decision:

         "That leads me to the second of the appellant's grounds.  That  is,
         whether the Judge  erred  in  his  assessment  of  the  appellant's
         evidence relating to the FIR's.  I have to say that I am  far  from
         satisfied that the appellant's case before the First-tier  Tribunal
         was that the FIR's and arrest warrants arise from fabricated claims
         made against the appellant.  It is claimed that the  appellant  had
         claimed asylum on the  basis  that  he  faced  fictitious  criminal
         charges in retaliation for his involvement  with  student  activism
         while in Pakistan.  The documents relied upon by the appellant were
         sent to the respondent under cover of a letter from the appellant's
         representatives dated 18th September 2014.  That  letter  does  not
         refer to  the  documents  as  evidence  that  the  appellant  faces
         fictitious criminal charges in retaliation for his involvement with
         student activism while in Pakistan.  In fact the  letter  fails  to
         provide any information about those documents or  their  provenance
         at all.  The  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal simply assert that the "respondent has failed to take into
         account the appellant's  individual  circumstances  and  failed  to
         appreciate the facts  and  the  documents  available  in  its  true
         context.".

 8. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  with  no  findings
    preserved.  The hearing was adjourned for  a  continuation  hearing  to
    take place so that further evidence could be heard.   Full  details  of
    the application for permission to appeal, the grant  of  permission  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes, and my reasons for finding  an  error
    of law are contained in my previous decision.

Re-making the Decision

The Law

 9. The appellant is entitled to asylum if he is  outside  his  country  of
    nationality and is recognised as a refugee, as defined in regulation  2
    of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 as a person who falls  within  Article
    1A of the 1951 Geneva Convention.  The onus is on him to prove that  he
    has a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reason  (race,
    religion, nationality, membership  of  a  particular  social  group  or
    political opinion), and is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling  to
    avail himself of the protection of the country of his nationality.

10. The appellant is eligible for humanitarian protection  under  paragraph
    339C of the Immigration Rules if he does not qualify as a refugee,  but
    establishes substantial grounds for believing that if  he  was  removed
    from the United Kingdom, he would face a real risk of suffering serious
    harm, and is unable or, owing to such risk, unwilling to avail  herself
    of the protection of the country of return.

11. In relation to Articles 2 and 3 of  the  1950  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (the 1950 Convention) it is for the appellant to establish
    that if removed from the United Kingdom there is a  real  risk  of  him
    being killed, or subjected to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment
    or punishment.

12. The burden of proof is on the appellant  and  can  be  described  as  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood, which is a  lower  standard  than  the
    normal civil standard of the balance of probabilities.  I must look  at
    the circumstances as at the date of hearing.





Documents

13. In re-making this decision I have taken into account  the  respondent's
    bundle of documents with Annexes A-G, the Notice  of  Appeal,  and  the
    bundle of documents  submitted  by  the  appellant  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal comprising of 105 pages.

14. In my Error of Law decision I directed that any further evidence relied
    on by either party is to be filed and served  no  later  than  14  days
    before the next date of hearing.  I also directed that in  relation  to
    any witness whom it is proposed to give oral evidence, there must be  a
    witness statement drawn in sufficient detail to stand  as  evidence-in-
    chief such that there is no need for any further examination-in-chief.

15. No further witness statement was filed by the appellant.   Under  cover
    of a letter dated 8th April 2014, the appellant's  solicitors  sent  to
    the Tribunal a copy  of  an  extract  from  the  Daily  State  Express,
    Faisalabad, together with what  is  described  as  a  translation.   No
    further information or explanation as to the provenance of the document
    provided, is given.

16. When the hearing resumed both representatives indicated that they  were
    ready to proceed.  At the outset of the  hearing,  Mr  Murphy  drew  my
    attention to the extract from the Daily State Express publication.  The
    appellant had the original publication with him at the  hearing  before
    me.  Mr Murphy sought permission to rely upon what he understood to  be
    a one-page letter that the appellant has received  from  Pakistan.   In
    fact, during the course of the hearing before me, the appellant claimed
    that the one-page letter is in fact a translation of what  was  printed
    in the Daily State  Express  publication.    I  shall  return  to  that
    document in due course. For present purposes, I simply record  that  Mr
    Avery did not object to the documents being admitted  and  I  therefore
    allowed  the  documents  to  be  admitted,  notwithstanding  that   the
    documents not been filed and served in accordance with  the  directions
    that I previously made.  A copy of what was initially believed to be  a
    letter from the  appellant's  father,  was  provided  to  each  of  the
    parties' representative.

The Appellant's Claim

17. The appellant's claim for asylum is based on his fear that if  returned
    to Pakistan he would face mistreatment due to  his  political  opinion.
    The appellant's claim as considered by the respondent is set out  in  a
    screening  interview,  a  substantive  asylum  interview  record,   and
    representations made by his solicitors under cover of  a  letter  dated
    18th September 2014.  A summary of the appellant's claim is set out  at
    paragraphs [4] to [9] of Annex A to the respondent's  decision  of  4th
    December 2014:

         "4.  You are Ashraf Mohammed, a Pakistan national, born 19/09/1977.
         You are a Muslim. You last lived in  Pakistan  in  Faisalabad  (SI,
         AIR).

         5.   Whilst in college you became a member  of  the  student  union
         (AIR Q 29). You joined because you were a good speaker and you were
         subsequently chosen to be leader of the student union in your  area
         (AIR Q 29, 39). You stated, that the union was  a  political  party
         and when asked what party, you stated "we supported democracy" (AIR
         Q 28). As leader you spoke against the then president of  Pakistan,
         Pervez Musharraf (AIR Q 26).

         6.   Your problems in Pakistan began when police were instructed to
         stop students in Ghantaghar (AIR Q 54, 56). The police used  sticks
         and starting beating the students (AIR Q 58). There were around 350-
         400 students present and 15-20 police (AIR Q 61-2). Your  head  was
         fractured and you received some stitches (AIR Q 63). Incidents like
         this occurred whenever you protested as long as  Musharraf  was  in
         power (AIR Q 68-9).

         7.   A fight occurred in your village in a year you cannot remember
         (AIR Q 73, 74). You were not present at the time the fight occurred
         (AIR Q 77). Your friends were associated with the PML (N) party and
         they were fighting against members of  president  Musharaf's  party
         (AIR Q 75,76). During the fight members from parties were  murdered
         (AIR Q 73). You were not a member of the PML (N) however  you  were
         associated with your friends (AIR Q 77).

         8.   You left Pakistan with the help of an agent (AIR  Q  80).  You
         travelled through Afghanistan, Iran, Turkey and Greece in  a  lorry
         (AIR Q 80). You left Pakistan in 2005  and  the  journey  took  2.5
         months (AIR Q 82). You were transported to the UK in the back of  a
         lorry from France and arrived around the 26/6/2005 (AIR Q 92, 101).
         You  were  dropped  off  near  Leicester   and   members   of   the
         Pakistani/Indian community helped you (AIR  Q  96,  99).  You  were
         given money in order to help you travel to London and whilst  there
         you got a job in a shop called "Just Fresh" (AIR Q 106-7).

         9.   You claim that you sometimes have chest and back problems  and
         suffer from indigestion (AIR Q 117-8)."

The Refusal

18. The reasons for refusal are also set out in Annex A to the respondent's
    letter dated 4th December 2014.  In summary,  the  respondent  accepted
    that when taken at face value, the reason the appellant has  given  for
    claiming a well founded fear of persecution, could be one that  engages
    the UK's obligations under the 1951 United Nations Convention  relating
    to the Status of Refugees.  The respondent accepted that the  appellant
    is a Pakistani national.

19. It was not accepted that the appellant was beaten  on  account  of  his
    political opinion or that his life is at risk because of his  political
    opinion.  The respondent sets out at paragraphs [36]  to  [45]  of  her
    decision, her reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's  account.   The
    respondent considered that the appellant was vague and evasive  in  his
    responses to questions in respect of matters that were at the heart  of
    his claim for international protection, and that his inability to  give
    answers or answers that were consistent, significantly  undermines  the
    credibility of his claim.

20. It was acknowledged that two arrest warrants had  been  submitted,  but
    the respondent having considered the evidence in the  round,  including
    matters set out in the COIR, did not find that these documents could be
    relied upon.

21. The respondent contended that the appellant had delayed claiming asylum
    for over seven years, and this also adversely affected his credibility.
     The respondent believed that the appellant would be able to return  to
    his home area and would not be at risk.  The respondent noted that  the
    appellant is a healthy, well educated male  who  has  demonstrated  his
    resourcefulness by leaving Pakistan and remaining in the  UK  illegally
    for around nine years.  She noted that he has worked as  a  butcher  in
    the UK, and considered that the appellant could return to his  previous
    home area, or choose to live elsewhere in Pakistan were he to return.

The Oral Evidence

22. At the resumed hearing, the appellant gave evidence with the assistance
    of an interpreter in Urdu.  I established at the outset of the  hearing
    that both the appellant and the interpreter understood each  other  and
    that there were no difficulties in communication.

23. Notwithstanding the failure to comply with my previous  direction  that
    there must be a witness statement drawn in sufficient detail  to  stand
    as evidence-in- chief such that  there  is  no  need  for  any  further
    examination-in-chief, I permitted Mr Murphy to call  evidence-in-chief.
     The appellant's evidence is set out in the record of  proceedings  and
    all of that evidence  has  been  taken  into  account  by  me,  whether
    expressly referred to in this decision or not.

24. The appellant adopted his witness statement dated  25th  February  2015
    that is to be found at pages [51] to [53] of the bundle that was before
    the First-tier Tribunal and which is now  at  Annex  A  of  the  bundle
    before the Upper Tribunal.

25. He stated that he had attended Faisalabad Government  College  and  had
    been the head of the Student Union between 2000 and 2005.

26. He was referred to paragraph 10 on his statement  in  which  he  states
    that he cannot remember the names of any other members of the students'
    union. He told me that at the time of his interview, he was  not  aware
    of the names of other members but he was aware of the names by the time
    that he made his witness statement. Mr Murphy  drew  to  his  attention
    paragraph 10 of his witness statement in which he  says  that  he  "...
    can't now remember the names of any other members of the  Union".    He
    replied that he does know the names of the other Union members  because
    he has read their names in the FIR's that he  has  been  sent.   Beyond
    stating that he does not have a very good  memory,  he  was  unable  to
    explain why, if he did know the names of the Union members, he had been
    unable to  provide  that  information  during  the  substantive  asylum
    interview, or why he had claimed  in  his  witness  statement  that  he
    cannot remember the names of any other members of the Union.

27. He told me that in the police in Pakistan are reluctant to intervene in
    political cases and that he would be targeted anywhere that he lives in
    Pakistan. He stated that he is scared and worried about  his  own  life
    because the police have already obtained arrest warrants for him.    He
    said that he will be unable to live  in  any  other  area  because  the
    police have access to a database  (NADRA)  that  can  be  checked  from
    anywhere.   He stated that people in other areas  do  not  like  people
    that come from another province, and that wherever he goes in Pakistan,
    he will face problems because he will be asked about where he had  come
    from.  He believes that local people will  inform  the  police  of  his
    presence in an area and that the police would then be able to check his
    credentials and find that he has outstanding arrest warrants.

28. The appellant was asked about the matters set out in  the  respondent's
    reasons for refusal letter.   He  stated  that  although  he  had  said
    during the asylum interview that  the  Union  he  led,  belonged  to  a
    political party, the Union is not in fact a  member  of  any  political
    party, and that it was  up  to  individual  members  which  party  they
    support.

29. The appellant was asked about paragraph 43 of  the  refusal  letter  in
    which reference is made to  an  answer  that  he  provided  during  the
    screening interview.  It was pointed out that at 4.2 of  the  screening
    interview, he is said to have claimed  that  he  could  not  return  to
    Pakistan because he is an active member  of  one  of  the  two  parties
    present  in  his  village.   However  at  question  78  of  his  asylum
    interview, when asked whether he was a member of the  PML,  he  replied
    'no'.  He was asked to clarify whether he is a member  of  a  political
    party.  The appellant stated that he is not a member of  any  political
    party but that he supports the  Pakistan  Muslim  League.  He  did  not
    recall having said at the screening interview, that he  was  an  active
    member.

30. The appellant was then asked about the arrest warrants, and why he  had
    replied "no", when asked during  the  screening  interview  if  he  was
    subject to an arrest warrant or wanted by any law enforcement authority
    for an offence.  He confirmed that he had replied "no", but at the same
    time claimed that he had informed the interviewer that FIR's and arrest
    warrants were issued against him in Pakistan and that was the reason he
    was scared for his life.  He could offer no explanation  why  that  had
    not been recorded in the record of the screening interview.

31. At that point, the appellant claimed that the FIR's and arrest warrants
    are genuine and that he is wanted by the authorities  in  Pakistan  for
    his involvement in the two incidents described in  the  documents.   He
    was reminded that up until today, he had claimed  that  the  FIR's  and
    arrest  warrants  arise  from  fabricated  claims  made   against   the
    appellant.  He initially claimed that that was an assumption  that  had
    been put forward by his solicitors, to the respondent.  He was reminded
    that the grounds of appeal  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal had expressly claimed that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had
    considered  the  documents  upon  a  mistaken   premise   because   the
    appellant's case is that the  FIR's  and  arrest  warrants  arise  from
    fabricated claims made against the appellant.   The  appellant  claimed
    that he was not aware that that was what was being said, and if he  had
    been, he would have spoken against it, and would have challenged  that.
     He confirmed that the documents are genuine,  that  he  knows  of  the
    allegations that have been made against him and that  he  was  in  fact
    involved in the incidents described in the FIR's.

32. Mr Murphy then turned to the letter and publication that is now  relied
    upon by the appellant.   The  appellant  stated  that  his  father  has
    disowned him because the police in Pakistan are  harassing  members  of
    his family, including his father and brothers. He claimed that such  an
    announcement, made in a newspaper would stop the police  harassing  the
    family any further. He claimed that the main purpose of the publication
    was to convey a message to the people, that his father no longer has  a
    relationship with him and that his  father  has  disassociated  himself
    from the appellant. The appellant claimed that he was provided with the
    document by a friend of his.   When asked how his friend  had  got  the
    document, he explained that his friend had seen the matter published in
    the newspaper.  His friend had then obtained that document in  Pakistan
    and sent it to him.

33. The appellant was cross-examined by Mr Avery.  In cross-examination the
    appellant confirmed that he  was  aware  of  the  FIR's  when  he  left
    Pakistan.   He claimed that  he  had  not  mentioned  them  during  the
    screening interview because he was not asked about FIR's.  He  accepted
    that he knew at the time, that he was wanted in Pakistan and that there
    were outstanding FIR's and arrest warrants against him.  He  was  asked
    what it is that the appellant is alleged to have  done  in  the  FIR's.
    The appellant stated that he had fired a pistol during a fight  in  the
    college between two groups of students.  He claimed  that  he  had  not
    previously mentioned that he had fired a gun, because he was not asked.

34. The appellant confirmed that the  incident  that  caused  him  to  flee
    Pakistan, was the fight that had occurred in his village. He  confirmed
    that he had not been there at the time.

35. The appellant said that  he  fears  members  of  President  Musharraf's
    party. He  accepted  that  the  party  that  he  supports,  is  now  in
    government but he claims to be scared of revenge attacks because of the
    incident that had occurred in the village. The  appellant  stated  that
    about seven people from the opposing group were killed, and that  makes
    him a target.

36. In order to clarify matters for myself I invited the appellant to  have
    a look at the FIR that is to be found at Page  74  of  the  appellant's
    bundle.  The date and time of the occurrence were read to the appellant
    by the interpreter.  The interpreter also read  to  the  appellant  the
    section  on  the  FIR  setting  out  the  application.   The  appellant
    confirmed that he understood the allegation that was being made against
    him, and he accepted that he had been involved in that incident.

37. I then invited at the appellant to have a look at the FIR that is to be
    found at Page 77 of the appellant's bundle.  Again, the date  and  time
    of the occurrence were  read  to  the  appellant  by  the  interpreter.
    Again, the interpreter also read to the appellant the  section  on  the
    FIR setting out the  application.   The  appellant  confirmed  that  he
    understood the allegation that was being made against him, and again he
    accepted that he had been involved in that incident.

38. I then asked the applicant to explain how he had come  to  receive  the
    FIR's.   He explained that they had been sent to him by a  friend.   He
    had requested them from his friend and his  friend  had  obtained  them
    from the police station. He stated that he and his friend had struggled
    to obtain the documents and that it took  some  time.    The  documents
    have been sent to him by his friend, via post,  some  time  before  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. He believes that  the  envelope
    in which the documents were received may be at home,  but  it  has  not
    been produced in the appellant's bundle.

39. I then asked the appellant about  the  newspaper  publication  and  the
    translation.   The appellant claimed that he had obtained that document
    from a friend who had seen the  newspaper  publication.  The  appellant
    claimed that a document had been issued by his  father,  and  that  was
    published in a  local  newspaper.    The  appellant  claimed  that  the
    document produced before  me,  was  a  translation  of  what  had  been
    published in the newspaper.  I asked the appellant if he could  provide
    any explanation as to why, if the document is simply a  translation  of
    what was published in the newspaper, the translation is  also  endorsed
    with his father's signature. The appellant confirmed that his  father's
    signature does not appear in the  newspaper  publication,  but  claimed
    that the notification had been issued by his father and that is why  it
    contains his signature.  He then said that he had asked his  friend  to
    get the publication translated, and signed by his father before it  was
    sent to him.  He claimed that he could not get his father to send it to
    him directly, because he does not now speak to his father.

40. In re-examination, the appellant confirmed that his friend had spent  a
    lot of time in getting the copies of the FIR's from the police station.
      He was asked to clarify how his friend got the documents and he  said
    that "that is up  to  my  friend  who  knows  the  whole  system".  The
    appellant said that he had simply requested  the  documents.  He  again
    confirmed that the fact that  the  FIR's  and  arrest  warrants  remain
    outstanding, means that he cannot return to Pakistan because the moment
    he goes back, he shall be arrested.

The Respondent's Submissions

41. Mr Avery relied upon the reasons for refusal letter dated 4th  December
    2014 in requesting that the appeal be  dismissed.   He  submitted  that
    despite every opportunity to explain  the  very  vague  nature  of  the
    appellant's claim and the numerous inconsistencies, the  appellant  has
    failed to address the issues.

42. He submits  that  the  appellant  has  failed  to  provide  any  proper
    explanation  for  significant  inconsistencies  in  the  core  of   the
    appellant's account.  He submits that the appellant claimed during  the
    screening interview that he is an active member of a party, and that he
    is not subject to an arrest warrant or wanted by  any  law  enforcement
    authority.  He later claimed that he was not a member of any  political
    party, and there are outstanding FIR's and arrest warrants against him.

43. He also submits that  there  has  been  a  fundamental  change  in  the
    appellant's  account  during  the  resume  hearing  before  me.  Having
    previously claimed that he was unaware of what was alleged against  him
    in the FRI's and arrest warrants, and that those documents  arise  from
    fabricated claims made against the appellant, the appellant now accepts
    that he is aware of the allegations made against him  and  accepts  his
    involvement in those incidents. He submits that there is no explanation
    from the appellant for his previous failure to mention that in 2004  he
    was involved in an incident in which he fired a pistol straight towards
    another student.

44. Mr Avery invites me to find that the appellant has  given  an  entirely
    fabricated account of events to meet his own ends. He  submits  that  I
    should treat all of the documents relied upon  by  the  appellant  with
    extreme caution given that there is no proper  explanation  as  to  how
    those documents have been obtained and come to be in  the  position  of
    the appellant. Mr Avery confirmed that the respondent does  not  accept
    that the copy arrest warrant's and  FIRs  are  genuine  documents.   He
    submits that such account that has been provided of the  documents,  is
    entirely incredible.  He submits that  the  appellant's  reliance  upon
    those documents is simply an attempt to bolster  what  is  otherwise  a
    wholly vague and inconsistent account of events.

The Appellant's Submission

45. Mr Murphy urges me not to make an adverse credibility  finding  against
    the appellant.  He draws my attention  to  the  answers  given  by  the
    appellant at questions 37 and 77 of the asylum  interview  record.   He
    submits that the appellant candidly stated that he  spoke  against  the
    government and organised demonstrations  against  the  government,  and
    that students had supported him.  He had also candidly accepted that he
    had not been at the incident that occurred in his village, between  his
    friends and members of the opposite  party.   Mr  Murphy  submits  that
    those candid answers are not what one might expect from somebody who is
    trying to exaggerate a protection claim.

46. Insofar as the matters set out in the reasons for  refusal  letter  are
    concerned, Mr Murphy submits that the appellant has explained  that  he
    has a poor memory and a very poor recollection of dates in particular.

47. Mr Murphy submits that the appellant is telling  the  truth  and  being
    honest about the FIR's and arrest warrants, and again he  now  candidly
    accepts that he was involved in the incidents that are referred  to  in
    those documents. He submits that I should attach significant weight  to
    the documents before me, and that  the  translation  of  the  newspaper
    article establishes that the appellant's father has  now  disassociated
    himself from the appellant, and made that position publicly clear.   He
    submits that I should find the appellant to be credible,  and  at  risk
    upon return to Pakistan.

48. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

49. I have taken into account all the evidence, both oral  and  documentary
    placed  before  me,  together  with  the  submissions  made   by   both
    representatives.  I have considered the evidence in the round and taken
    into account  the  circumstances  at  the  date  of  hearing.   I  have
    considered this appeal in the light of the provisions of paragraph 339L
    of the Immigration Rules.  I am conscious of the  need  to  take  great
    care before making adverse findings of credibility in asylum cases, and
    am aware of the importance of considering this appeal in the  light  of
    conditions in Pakistan.

50. The respondent rejected the appellant's claim primarily on  credibility
    grounds.  The only part of his  account  which  was  accepted  was  his
    nationality and identity.

51. The core of the appellant's account relates to his activities whilst he
    was a student and an incident that occurred in  his  village  involving
    his friends. That is the  incident  in  which  he  describes  that  his
    friends had a fight with members of  an  opposing  party  during  which
    several people are said to have been murdered. Although  the  applicant
    was not present at that incident, he fears that he will now be targeted
    in revenge attacks.

52. I have carefully considered the appellant's account as contained in the
    screening interview, the record of his asylum interview and his witness
    statements.  I find that there are a number of relevant inconsistencies
    and I do not accept  that  the  appellant  has  been  truthful  in  his
    evidence.  I take into account the appellant's account in interview and
    before me, was given with an  interpreter,  and  there  is  always  the
    possibility of errors if evidence is given through an interpreter.   At
    the outset of the hearing I was careful to ensure  that  the  appellant
    and the interpreter properly understood  each  other,  and  during  the
    hearing neither expressed any concerns. I have had the  opportunity  of
    observing the appellant give evidence before  me,  and  of  seeing  his
    account tested in cross-examination.   Throughout his evidence, both in
    chief and in cross-examination, the appellant was vague and  repeatedly
    gave inconsistent answers such that questions had  to  be  put  to  him
    several times before any sort of coherent answer  was  provided.   Even
    applying the lower standard of proof required, I am not satisfied  that
    the appellant has a well-founded fear of ill treatment  or  persecution
    for a Convention reason.

53. During his screening interview that occurred over seven years after the
    appellant arrived in United Kingdom the appellant claimed (at 4.2) that
    he could not return to Pakistan because there are two parties and  that
    he is an active member of a party.   He claimed that  the  other  party
    have killed a couple of people belonging to the party  that  he  was  a
    member of, and that members of his  party,  have  killed  a  couple  of
    people that were members of the other party.   He claimed (at 5.2) that
    he was  not  subject  to  an  arrest  warrant  or  wanted  by  any  law
    enforcement authority.   However,  during  the  asylum  interview,  the
    appellant claimed that he had not been a member of a  political  party.
    At the hearing before me, the  appellant  claimed  that  he  could  not
    recall having claimed that he was an active member of  a  party  during
    his screening interview.  I reject his explanation.   The appellant can
    have been in no doubt that the respondent had concluded that there  was
    an inconsistency between the answer that he gave during  the  screening
    interview and the answer that he gave during the asylum interview.  The
    respondent's concern about that inconsistency and its impact  upon  the
    assessment of the credibility of the  appellant,  is  set  out  in  her
    decision.   In  his  witness  statement  of  25th  February  2015,  the
    appellant does not claim that his answer at  the  screening  interview,
    was incorrectly recorded.

54. During his asylum interview the appellant could not remember  the  year
    that he first joined at the student union (Q.30), or the year in  which
    he was chosen to be a leader.   In his  witness  statement,  he  claims
    (para 7) that he does not remember exactly when he joined the union  or
    started speaking.  At the hearing before me he claimed that he was head
    of the student union between 2000 and 2005.   Beyond claiming  that  he
    has a poor memory, he offers no explanation as to how he is now able to
    recall the years between which he was the leader of the student  union,
    when he has previously been unable to do so. I find that the  appellant
    has been very vague and evasive as to his evidence in this respect, and
    I reject his account that he  was  a  leader  of  the  students'  union
    between 2000 and 2005.

55. My finding that he was not a leader of the students union between  2000
    and 2005 is reinforced by the very vague answers given by the appellant
    during his interview concerning the affiliation of the  students  union
    to a political party. The appellant claimed during his  interview  that
    the student union was linked to a political party, but when asked which
    party, was only able to say "we supported democracy".  Similarly,  when
    asked during the interview what he did as leader of the Students Union,
    he simply stated that he spoke against  the  government  and  organised
    demonstrations and that students supported him. He was  asked  what  he
    spoke about, and his response was that they asked  Musharraf  to  leave
    the government and install democracy. If the appellant had indeed  been
    the leader of the Students Union, as he claims, he would  plainly  have
    had a greater knowledge of the activities of the  Students  Union,  and
    any political affiliation that it had.  In my judgment  he  would  also
    have had a greater insight into what he spoke about at demonstrations.

56. I find that the appellant was also vague when asked about the incidents
    in which he had encountered  difficulties  during  demonstrations.  The
    appellant was asked during his  asylum  interview  when  he  first  had
    difficulties.   He claimed that it was once  in  Ghantaghar,  but  when
    asked when this took place, he stated he has  "no  idea".   He  claimed
    that there had been a number of incidents but he could not even provide
    a date range between which such incidents occurred.

57. I have  carefully  considered  the  criticisms  that  are  set  out  at
    paragraphs [36] to [43] of the respondent's refusal letter, and  having
    had the opportunity  of  observing  the  appellants  give  evidence,  I
    entirely agree  that  the  appellant  has  throughout  been  vague  and
    evasive, and that his account of his activities in Pakistan  is  wholly
    inconsistent and incredible.

58. I have  considered  the  documentary  evidence  in  the  light  of  the
    principles set out in the decision of Mr. Justice  Collins  in  Tanveer
    Ahmed *[2002] UKIAT 00439.  Mr Justice Collins held that  we  must  not
    judge what is or  is  not  likely  to  happen  in  other  countries  by
    reference to our  perception  of  what  is  normal  within  the  United
    Kingdom. The principle applies as much to documents  as  to  any  other
    form of evidence. In asylum  and  human  rights  cases  it  is  for  an
    individual applicant to show that a document on which he or  she  seeks
    to rely, can be relied on.  I should consider whether the documents are
    documents on which reliance should properly be placed, after looking at
    all the evidence in the round. I have done so.

59. I have carefully considered the two arrest warrants dated  23rd  August
    2004, and 2nd January 2005 and the two FIR's.   There  are  unexplained
    anomalies and I have concerns about  the  documents  such  that  in  my
    judgment, I cannot attach any weight to the documents.

60. The arrest warrant dated 2nd January 2005  (page  63)  is  said  to  be
    issued by a Special Magistrate and requires that the appellant  "should
    be arrested and should be produced  me  before  the  fixed  date  ...".
    Curiously, the 'Next Date' is not identified on the  document.   It  is
    also curious that although the date at the bottom of that  document  is
    2nd January 2005, the top of the  document  states  "Case  No.  930/04,
    dated 18.11.12".  There is no explanation before me as to the  offences
    that the appellant is said to have committed and for which  his  arrest
    is sought.  There is at page 66 of the  appellant's  bundle  a  further
    document that is titled "Prolamation".  The document refers to "case No
    930/04 dated 18.11.04".  Although the case number is the same number as
    that on the arrest warrant at page 63, the date is different.

61. The arrest warrant dated 23rd August 2004  (page  69)  is  said  to  be
    issued by a Special Magistrate and requires that the appellant  "should
    be arrested and should be produced  me  before  the  fixed  date  ...".
    Again, curiously, the 'Next Date' is not identified  on  the  document.
    Again, there is no explanation before me as to the  offences  that  the
    appellant is said to have committed and for which his arrest is sought.
     There is at page 72 of the appellant's bundle a further document  that
    is titled "Proclamation".  The document refers to case No 825/04  dated
    23-08-2004.  That document refers to the arrest warrant at page 69, but
    the  offences  identified  on  the  arrest  warrant  are  U/S  341/148,
    149P.P.C.  At page 72, an additional offence, '16  M.P.O'  is  referred
    to.

62. Prior to the resumed hearing before me, the  appellant  had  maintained
    that the FIR's and the charges against him were  fabrications  produced
    in  retaliation  for  his  involvement  in  opposition  politics.   The
    decision of the  first-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on  20th  May  2015
    states:

         "[18]    ...  when  questioned  during  oral  evidence  as  to  the
         allegations  the  appellant  faces  the  appellant  was  completely
         unaware of any specific allegation made against him. He  was  asked
         on a number of occasions to describe what was alleged  against  him
         ...

         [19] In addition to the Appellants oral evidence which  shows  that
         he was completely unaware of the  allegations  he  allegedly  faces
         from the police in Pakistan, it is evident from  the  AIR  and  his
         witness statements that at no point has he ever  suggested  he  was
         involved in firing any pistol ..."

63. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal, settled no doubt upon  the
    instructions of the appellant expressly state, at paragraph  [4],  that
    ".. it is hardly inconsistent that the appellant denied having fired  a
    pistol at another person -  his case is precisely that he was  involved
    in no such thing..".    At the hearing before  me,  the  appellant  was
    carefully taken to each  of  the  two  FIR's.   He  confirmed  that  he
    understood the allegation that was being made against him in each,  and
    he accepted that he had been involved in the incidents.  The  appellant
    stated in his evidence before me that he had fired a  pistol  during  a
    fight in the college between two groups of students, as set out in  the
    FIR of 18th November 2004.  He  claimed  that  he  had  not  previously
    mentioned that he had fired a gun, because he was not asked.

64. I do not accept that the appellant has been truthful in  his  evidence.
    His evidence before me as to the incidents that he was involved in, and
    that are referred to in the FIR's is in direct contrast to the evidence
    on this point that he had given to the First-tier Tribunal  previously.
    I reject the appellant's claim before me, that he was  not  aware  that
    his case was previously that he was facing fictitious criminal  charges
    in retaliation for his previous activities in Pakistan and  if  he  had
    been aware that that was the case being advanced, he would have  spoken
    against it, and would have challenged that.

65. I do not find it plausible or  credible  that  the  appellant's  friend
    obtained copies of the FIR's and arrest warrants in the  way  that  has
    been claimed by the appellant.  There is no credible explanation before
    me as to how the appellant's friend came to be in possession  of  those
    documents.  It is also incredible that the appellant would claim in his
    asylum screening interview  that  he  was  not  subject  to  an  arrest
    warrant, if in fact he was.  In my judgment what he said at the  asylum
    screening interview, at a time when his reasons for fearing  return  to
    Pakistan must have been uppermost in his mind, is  more  likely  to  to
    true.

66. I have also considered very carefully the translation of the  newspaper
    publication that is now relied upon by the  appellant.    Although  the
    document produced to the Tribunal purports to be a true  copy  of  what
    was published in the Daily State Express, Faisalabad on 23rd June 2015,
    it is curious that  the  translation  in  fact  contains  the  original
    signature of the appellant's father, with whom the appellant claims  he
    has no contact.  The appellant was unable to provide  any  satisfactory
    explanation for that anomaly.  It is also to be noted that although the
    publication is dated 23rd June 2015, there has been no previous mention
    of that publication by the appellant up until the days leading  to  the
    resumed hearing.  It is not entirely clear who it  is  that  translated
    the document and how the appellant's father's signature comes to appear
    on that document.  It is to be noted that the document is  attested  to
    be a true copy by Naveed Ahmad Gill.  It is not clear what it is a true
    copy of.  The appellant provided me with the original translation  that
    has the original of his  father's  signature,  endorsed  upon  it.   It
    cannot therefore be a true copy of the translation.  If it  is  a  true
    copy of the publication, it is curious that the  certification  appears
    on the translation rather than on a copy of the  publication.   In  any
    event, I note that Mr Naveed Ahmad Gill is the same person that is said
    to have been responsible for the translations  of  the  earlier  arrest
    warrants and FIR's, relied upon by the appellant.

67. I have  considered  whether  the  documents  now  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant are documents on which reliance should  properly  be  placed,
    after looking at all the evidence in the round.  Having done so, I find
    that I can attach no weight to the FIR's, arrest warrants or indeed the
    newspaper publication.

68. I find that the appellant's account has been fabricated and  cannot  be
    relied upon, and I find that the appellant could safely return  to  his
    home area, where his family continue to live.

69. If,  as  the  appellant  now  accepts,  the  FIR's  genuinely  set  out
    allegations made against him, in  respect  of  incidents  that  he  was
    involved in, in my judgment the appellant's fear is one of  prosecution
    rather than persecution.

70. Insofar as the appellant fears that he may be targeted  by  individuals
    in Pakistan, I have  considered  whether  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
    protection, I have considered AW (sufficiency of  protection)  Pakistan
    [2011] UKUT 31 (IAC), and set out below paragraph 34;

         "34. The starting point in assessing whether the Appellant would be
             given sufficient protection if  returned  to  Pakistan  is  to
             consider whether there  is  systemic  insufficiency  of  state
             protection.  In relation to Pakistan,  having  regard  to  the
             case of AH and also to the case of  KA  and  Others  (Domestic
             Violence - Risk on Return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216  (IAC),
             it cannot be said that such a general insufficiency  of  state
             protection has been established.  Neither party submitted that
             there was, nor do we find, that the background evidence before
             us demonstrates such an insufficiency."

71. I do not find that the issue of internal relocation arises.  My finding
    is that the appellant could return to his home area where he would have
    family support, and  where  there  is  sufficiency  of  protection.   I
    conclude that the appellant has not established that  he  would  be  at
    risk if returned to Pakistan, and therefore the claim  for  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection fails for the reasons  given  above.   For  the
    same reasons I find that there is no risk of a breach of Articles 2  or
    3 of the 1950 Convention.

72. This is not a case where there was a challenge to the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds and an appeal on Article 8  grounds  was  not  pursued  at  the
    hearing before me. However, for the avoidance of any doubt, I find that
    the appellant has no family in the United Kingdom and therefore Article
    8 family life is not engaged. The only private life referred to by  the
    appellant is that private life which  he  has  established  during  his
    unlawful presence in the UK.

73. The legitimate aim set out in Article 8(2) must now also be read in the
    light of s117B  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  and
    particularly sub-paragraph (1) which  holds  that  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls is in the  public  interest.    S117B(4)
    provides that I must attach little weight to a private life  formed  in
    the UK whilst the appellant has been in  the  UK  unlawfully.   On  any
    view, in my judgement the removal of the appellant from the UK does not
    result in a disproportionate interference with the applicant's right to
    a private life.





Notice of Decision

74. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and was set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision  as
    follows.

          a. I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

          b. The appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

          c. I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

75. No anonymity direction is applied for, and none is made.


Signed   Date


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD

As I have set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  dismissed
the appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


