
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11842/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 3 January 2017                  |On 6 January 2017                  |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                             HUSSRY GUL URYAKHEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Sills counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The  Appellant  was  born  on1  January  1992  and  is  a  national  of
    Afghanistan.

 3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as  they  were
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge F Meyler promulgated on 10 May 2016 which dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  18
    August 2015 to dismiss the Appellants asylum and human rights claim.

 5. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

    (a)    It was not accepted that he  Appellants  father  went  away  and
         fought for the Taliban and encouraged local villagers to join him.

    (b)    It was not accepted that  the  villagers  took  revenge  on  the
         Appellant by beating him.

    (c)    The Appellants credibility was  undermined  by  his  failure  to
         claim asylum in a safe country en route to the UK.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Meyler  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge found:

      a)  He  found  that  his  account  of   events   was   undermined   by
         inconsistencies and discrepancies and concluded he was not at  risk
         from the Taliban on return to Afghanistan.

      b) He found that even if he was at risk in his  local  area  he  could
         relocate to Kabul.

      c) He accepted that  the  Appellant  was  suffering  from  depression,
         anxiety and PTSD but found that there was  available  treatment  in
         Afghanistan and that the Appellant would have better emotional  and
         social support from his mother and uncle in contrast to the  social
         isolation he feels in the UK.

      d) He considered the factors set out in paragraph 353B.

      e) He took into account the statutory public interest factors set  out
         in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
         (the 2002 Act)

 7. Grounds of  appeal  were  lodged  arguing  that  the  Judge  failed  to
    adequately consider paragraph 353B and failed to apply paragraph 276ADE
     of the Rules .

 8. On 10 June 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne  gave  permission  to
    appeal on both grounds.

 9. There was a Rule 24 notice dated 22 June 2016  arguing  that  paragraph
    353B did not apply as this was not a fresh claim; that while the  Judge
    made no specific reference to paragraph 276ADE it was  clear  from  his
    finding at paragraph 55 that he had addressed the relevant issues.

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Sills  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a) He conceded that Ground 1 was misconceived as paragraph  353B  only
         applies to fresh claims and therefore  he  would  not  pursue  that
         ground.

      b) The Judge had only considered the Appellants mental health problems
         in relation to Article 3  and  8  and  had  not  considered  it  in
         relation to paragraph 276ADE.

      c) He relied on the skeleton argument that was before the  court  that
         the Appellants mental health problems would result in  there  being
         very significant obstacles to his  reintegration  into  society  in
         Afghanistan and the Judges  reference  to  there  not  being  'very
         serious obstacles' was not enough.

      d) There was evidence of health, humanitarian and  societal  treatment
         of those with mental health problems which taken together with  his
         length of absence from  Afghanistan  would  have  impacted  on  his
         ability to integrate.

      e) Paragraph 276ADE was crucial  and  had  this  been  considered  the
         decision could have gone the other way.

11. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Bates submitted that:

      a) The decision in question was extremely detailed about  the  medical
         aspect of the claim and he concluded that there would not  be  very
         serious  obstacles  to  the  Appellants   integration   back   into
         Afghanistan as he would be with his family. Spoke the language.

      b) The Judge found that it was social isolation in  the  UK  that  had
         caiused his mental health problems.

      c) The pertinent issue the Judge was required  to  consider  were  the
         statutory pubic interest factors set out in section 117B though  he
         clearly  referenced  paragraph  276ADE  in  paragraph  36  of   the
         decision.

      d) It was unclear whether there was  any  evidence  of  discriminatory
         treatment of those with mental health problems  placed  before  the
         Judge but the Judge would nevertheless have been entitled  to  take
         into account the support he would receive from his family.

      e) This is simply a disagreement with the conclusions reached.

12. In reply Mr Sills on behalf of the Appellant submitted  that  paragraph
    36 only looked at the Appellants mental health problems as part of  his
    medical claim: it was not a holistic assessment.

The Law

13.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. Unless an Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have  taken  no  account  of  evidence  that  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration judge concludes that the story told is untrue. If  a  point
    of evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is
    a failure to take into account a material consideration.

Finding on Material Error

15. Having heard those submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

16. I am satisfied that the grounds of  appeal  and  indeed  the  grant  of
    permission in this case were misconceived. Mr Sills  properly  conceded
    before me that while he argued  the  applicability  of  paragraph  353B
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge the Judge was wrong to consider it
    at all as 353B applies only applies to fresh claims and this  case  was
    not a fresh claim.

17. In relation to Mr Sills argument that paragraph 276ADE was 'crucial' in
    this case as the Appellant met the requirements (paragraph 29  skeleton
    argument) I remind myself that this was a decision dated 18 August 2015
    and therefore the Appellant's appeal is pursuant to Section  82(1)  (b)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ('the  2002  Act')
    which provides that a person may  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  where  the
    Secretary of State has decided to refuse an  asylum  and  human  rights
    claim. S84 of the Act provides that an appeal under s82(1)(b)  must  be
    brought on the ground that a decision is unlawful under  section  6  of
    the Human Rights Act 1998. There was no right  of  appeal  against  the
    decision of  the  Respondent  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE.

18. The Judge was therefore required to consider the  refusal  of  a  human
    rights claim made under Article 3 and 8 which  was  what  he  did.  The
    Judge in a very detailed and balanced decision therefore considered the
    mental health claim made by the Appellant at paragraphs 34-36. He found
    on the basis of the rather old medical  reports  before  him  that  the
    Appellant had since 2014 suffered from depression, anxiety and PTSD for
    which there was treatment available in Afghanistan. He found, against a
    background of  the  Doctors  findings  about  his  feelings  of  social
    isolation arising no  doubt  out  of  his  accommodation  problems  and
    inability to speak any  English,  that  the  Appellant  would  be  less
    socially isolated in Afghanistan as he could return to his  mother  and
    uncle and be surrounded by those who spoke  the  same  language  as  he
    does. He found that the Appellant would receive  emotional  and  social
    support from his immediate family and wider extended family.

19. He was arguably entitled to consider Article 8 through the prism of the
    Rules and therefore consider whether the Appellant could have  met  any
    of the requirements of the  Rules  given  that  they  are  intended  to
    reflect the Government's and Parliament's view of how, as a  matter  of
    public policy, the balance  should  be  struck  between  the  right  to
    respect for private and family life. Such a  consideration  would  have
    been a factor that he was entitled to  give  whatever  weight  he  felt
    appropriate but it was not necessarily determinative.  I  am  satisfied
    that the Judge did consider the human rights claim through the prism of
    the Rules when he  concluded  on  the  basis  that  his  mental  health
    problems, in so far as they arose out of  social  isolation,  would  be
    assisted by the return to his family and a society where he  spoke  the
    language in paragraph 36 and that there would therefore  not  be  'very
    serious obstacles' to his integration if returned to Afghanistan. While
    this was not the version of paragraph 276ADE that applied at  the  time
    of the decision, criticism of his language  is  harsh  given  that  the
    Judge may have been misled by Mr  Sills  use  of  these  words  from  a
    previous version of the Rules in his final submissions and his skeleton
    argument. Before me of course Mr Sills used the correct version of  the
    Rules that applied at the  time  of  the  decision,  'very  significant
    obstacles' which if anything is a higher hurdle to meet. I am satisfied
    it was open to him to conclude that given his findings he did not  meet
    that hurdle.

20. While not specifically referring to societal treatment  of  those  with
    mental health problems I note that there was  no  evidence  before  the
    Judge that the Appellant suffered from depression prior to his  arrival
    in the UK in 2008 and the medical evidence before the  Judge  suggested
    that this arose in 2014 to a large extent out of his feelings of social
    isolation which are referred to by  both  the  Appellants  GP  and  the
    Psychotherapist. It was therefore  clear  to  me  that  the  Judge  was
    factoring in that the Appellants circumstances would be ameliorated  by
    returning to a supportive family environment.

21. Finally, of course this case was essentially a private life  appeal  as
    the Appellant has  no  family  life  in  the  UK.  Notwithstanding  the
    argument that Judges should consider Article 8 through the prism of the
    Rules which includes paragraph 276ADE, statute in the form  of  section
    117B (5) states 'Little weight  should  be  given  to  a  private  life
    established by a person at a time when the person's immigration  status
    is precarious.' Quite properly the Judge concluded that  little  weight
    was to be given to the Appellants private life, such as it was,  as  it
    was established at a time when his status was precarious.

22. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

23. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

24. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                                              Date
5.1.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
