
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11050/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 September 2015                 |On 10 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                      Mr Yureshkanth THILLAINADARASASA
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Pascoe, counsel instructed by Vasuki solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                             DECISION & REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, of Tamil ethnicity, born  on
23 October 1988. He arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  22  May  2012  and
claimed asylum at the port. The basis of his  claim  is  that  his  brother,
Kishanth became involved in the LTTE in 2008 and he  was  recruited  at  the
end of that year. He was arrested  by  the  Sri  Lankan  army  in  2009  and
detained,  interrogated  and  tortured  until  he  managed  to  escape.  His
application for asylum was refused  on  28  November  2014  and  his  appeal
against this decision came before a panel  comprising  First  Tier  Tribunal
Judges Denson & Feeney on 16 March 2015. In a determination dated  30  March
2015 the appeal was dismissed, essentially on the  basis  that,  whilst  the
panel at [41] accepted that the Appellant  had  some  level  of  involvement
with the LTTE, they did not find the Appellant's evidence  to  be  credible.
There was before the panel a  medical  report  from  Professor  Lingham,  in
respect of the Appellant's scarring and a psychiatric report from Dr  Dhumad
but the panel placed little weight on these reports  because  they  did  not
accept the Appellant's account as credible.

2.    An application for permission to appeal was  made  on  14  April  2015
inter alia on the basis that the panel erred  in  their  assessment  of  the
Appellant's credibility, in particular  making  adverse  findings  prior  to
considering the medical evidence and  failed  to  consider  the  Appellant's
poor mental state and vulnerability when assessing  inconsistencies  in  his
accounts given at different times.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by
First Tier Tribunal Judge Simpson on 24 April 2015, with  reference  to  the
decision by the Upper Tribunal in JL (medical reports -  credibility)  China
[2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC). The Respondent filed a rule 24 response  on  6  May
2015 placing reliance on the decision in HH  (medical  evidence;  effect  of
Mibanga) Ethiopia [2005] UKAIT 00164 at [21].

3.    At the hearing before me, Ms Pascoe relied on the  grounds  of  appeal
and submitted that the Judge erred materially in law in failing to  consider
the medical reports prior to  assessing  the  Appellant's  credibility.  She
acknowledged the Respondent's rule 24 response but noted that  HH  pre-dated
JL and the clear starting point of  the  determination  is  the  credibility
finding at [28]  and  there  was  only  scant  acknowledgment  of  Professor
Lingham's report at [33]. Ms Pascoe submitted that the panel's  findings  in
this respect go behind the intention of the  Istanbul  protocol.  Whilst  it
may be a question of weight to be attached to expert evidence in  this  case
the medical reports have been dismissed out of hand.  In  response,  Ms  Pal
acknowledged that it would have been helpful if the First Tier Tribunal  had
taken account of both medical reports by experts.  They  did  not  but  this
does not mean they formed adverse credibility findings  without  considering
the reports. She drew my attention to [33] where reference  is  made  to  Dr
Lingham's report. She submitted that  it  was  possible  the  Appellant  had
scars inflicted deliberately. She submitted that there is reference  to  the
Appellant's  mental  health  condition  at  [37]-[38]  and  this  has   been
considered in context of Dr Dhumad and that there was no material  error  of
law.

4.    I find that there is a material error of law in the  decision  of  the
First Tier Tribunal. At [33]  the  panel  acknowledge  the  report  from  Dr
Lingham and record that: "the scars on the appellant have been found  to  be
diagnostic and typical of scars caused by heat/burning." They noted that  Dr
Lingham could not say whether theses injuries were  caused  deliberately  to
mislead and when on to find: "Taking into  account  our  findings  regarding
the appellant's credibility ... we do not accept as credible that the  scars
arising from burns from a metal rod are as a result of  his  experiences  of
torture in Sri Lanka as claimed." And at [34] in respect  of  the  burns  Dr
Lingham found to be consistent with being burnt on the chest with  cigarette
butts the panel held: "given our findings of fact regarding the  appellant's
credibility we do not accept as credible that the  cigarette  burn  occurred
as a result of torture received as claimed in Sri Lanka." It is  clear  from
the panel's findings that they  considered  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's
credibility first and then relied  on  their  findings  in  this  regard  to
disregard the reports by the medical experts. As the  Court  of  Appeal  and
Upper Tribunal  have  consistently  found,  most  recently  in  JL  (medical
reports - credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC) [31]-[32]  this  is  an
erroneous approach. Whilst a Judge engaged in a  fact  finding  exercise  is
not obliged to accept the findings of a  medical  expert,  it  is  incumbent
upon the fact finder: (i)  to  assess  the  credibility  of  an  Appellant's
account in light of all the evidence, including expert evidence and (ii)  to
provide clear and adequate reasons if that evidence is  not  accepted.  This
approach was not taken by the Judges engaged in  determining  this  case  at
first instance and thus they erred materially in law.

5.    The parties agreed that  the  appropriate  course  would  be  for  the
appeal to be remitted for a de novo hearing before a  single  Judge  of  the
First Tier Tribunal, other than Judge Denson or Judge Feeney.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

10 September 2015

