




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11372/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th September 2016                        |On 14th October 2016          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    M A T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharif (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Eritrea (claimed), and her date
    of birth is given as 21st January 1990.  She appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Respondent, taken on  12th  August
    2015 against rejection of her asylum claim, and she claims that the  UK
    would be in breach of its international obligations under  the  Refugee
    Convention and the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  under  this
    decision.

 2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Asjad
    (promulgated 9th May 2016), who concluded that the Appellant is not  an
    Eritrean national as claimed, but an Ethiopian national, and is  not  a
    refugee, as she has no personal knowledge about Eritrea and appears  to
    have rehearsed and memorised what knowledge she does have (at paragraph
    27).

 3. Permission to appeal was granted on 3rd June 2016 on the basis that  it
    is now well established that  when  the  Respondent  asserts  that  the
    Appellant's nationality is other than that claimed, the burden of proof
    rests with her to demonstrate that on a balance of  probabilities,  and
    there was nothing in the decision to show that the  judge  had  applied
    that standard.

 4. At the hearing before me on 15th September 2016, Mr Sharif relied  upon
    his latest skeleton argument in the  bundle.   He  made  the  following
    submissions.

 5. First, the judge had failed to assess the nationality of the  Appellant
    in the light of the Eritrean Nationality Proclamation which stated that
    any person born to a father or mother of an Eritrean origin in  Eritrea
    or abroad is considered to  be  an  Eritrean  national  by  birth  (see
    Article 2(2)).

 6. Second, in MA (Disputed nationality) Ethiopia CG [2008] UKAIT 00032, it
    was held it was held that, in any  case  of  disputed  nationality  the
    first question to be considered should  be:  "Is  the  person  de  jure
    national of the country concerned?"  This question is to be answered by
    examining whether the person in question satisfied the nationality  law
    requirements of his or her country.  It may be relevant to examine  the
    evidence of what the authorities in the Appellant's country  of  origin
    had done in respect of his or her nationality.  In  this  respect,  the
    judge had failed to consider whether the Appellant would be  considered
    a de jure national of Eritrea or not.

 7. Third, the judge made a  material  error  of  law  in  considering  the
    Appellant's purported birth certificate in isolation because under  the
    principles set out in Tanveer Ahmed this document had to be  considered
    in the context of all the other evidence in the round.

 8. Fourth, the judge appeared to have accepted that the  Appellant  had  a
    limited understanding of Tigrinya being spoken (paragraph 28)  but  the
    judge also accepted that the Appellant had some knowledge about Eritrea
    (paragraph 29).   This  meant  that  the  judge  had  given  inadequate
    reasoning for not accepting that the Appellant was an Eritrean national
    as claimed.  The judge also gave inadequate reasoning in respect of the
    conclusion that the Appellant was not a Pentecostal  Christian  because
    the Appellant was able to answer some questions that were  relevant  to
    Christianity (paragraph 33).  Her reasoning was  also  inadequate  with
    respect to the evidence given by [MA] who had explained  that  she  had
    seen the Appellant in Assab, Eritrea, but the judge said that he  could
    only attach limited weight to  this  evidence  (paragraph  35)  without
    explaining what that limited weight would  be  in  the  light  of  such
    important testimony.

 9. Fifth, the judge failed to consider the risk  on  return  as  a  failed
    asylum seeker that the Appellant would be subject to in the light of MO
    (Illegal exit - risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 190.  The  judge
    did not give a reason as to why it was considered  that  the  Appellant
    comes within one the "very limited exceptions" who is not at risk.

10. Sixth, the judge failed to apply the correct standard of proof, because
    the judge found that the Appellant was an Ethiopian national and not an
    Eritrean national (at paragraph 37) but in  the  case  of  Jamila  Omar
    Hamza [2002] UKIAT 05185 it was decided that if the judge is to make  a
    decision on nationality of the Appellant then "he  must  bear  in  mind
    that it is going to make a positive finding against the Appellant, then
    he must do so not on the asylum standard,  but  on  a  higher  standard
    which would be the balance of probabilities".  The judge had failed  to
    do so.

11. For her part, Ms  Aboni  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response  of  the
    Respondent Home Office and submitted as follows.  First, the judge  had
    properly directed himself at paragraph 3 and  confirmed  that  all  the
    evidence and submissions were taken into  account.   Whilst  the  judge
    noted that the birth certificate was  viewed  in  isolation,  it  would
    appear to relate to its internal flaws namely that the  date  of  birth
    was inconsistent with the Appellant's claim and the fact that the  date
    of registration was 4th January 2016.  Second, in the  alternative,  if
    the judge has  erred  it  was  clearly  not  material  given  the  very
    significant and well reasoned adverse credibility findings against  the
    Appellant at paragraph 28 onwards.  These are not affected by any error
    of law.  Third, the judge analysed  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    witness and accorded it little weight because there was no evidence  to
    underpin the witness's account of her successful asylum claim.  It  was
    open to the judge to conclude that friendship was a like reason for her
    support.  With respect to the language of  Tigrinya,  this  was  spoken
    widely and the judge considered this (at paragraph 28) and  noted  that
    this Appellant still did not speak Tigrinya.  Reference was made to the
    fact that the Appellant had textbook knowledge of matters that could be
    learnt by heart but did not know where the ocean was, which  she  would
    have known from her childhood.  The point about the Appellant not being
    able to show that she is a Pentecostal Christian was important  because
    Christians per se are not persecuted and  only  Pentecostal  Christians
    are, and the Appellant was unable to satisfy the judge in this respect.

My Consideration of the Appeal

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons are  those
    given in the grant of  permission,  namely,  that  the  Respondent  has
    asserted that an Appellant's nationality is other than  that  which  is
    claimed,  but  the  burden  in  this  respect  falls  squarely  on  the
    Respondent Secretary of State, and there is nothing in the decision  to
    show that the judge has applied that standard.  This  is  important  in
    this case because the Appellant did have  some  knowledge  of  Eritrea.
    Moreover, the evidence of [MA] was that the Appellant had been seen  by
    her in Eritrea.  In  addition,  the  Appellant  did  display  "textbook
    knowledge" of some aspects of Eritrea.  It may  well  be  that  another
    judge considering this appeal may well still come to the same  decision
    but it is important that the correct  guidelines  are  applied.   I  am
    satisfied on the basis of the submissions made by Mr Sharif  that  they
    were not applied in this case.

13. In considering whether I should remake this decision I have had  regard
    to the findings of the original judge, the evidence before him, and the
    submission that I have heard today.  I am satisfied that this is a case
    where under Practice Statement 7.2 this is an  appropriate  case  where
    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity  for  the  party's
    case to be put to  and  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (see
    7.2(a)).  Accordingly, this appeal is to be remitted back to the First-
    tier Tribunal, to be heard by a judge other than Judge Asjad.

Notice of Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.

15. I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is remitted back to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by a judge other than Judge Asjad.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th October 2016



