
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11338/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 May 2016                               |On 19 May 2016                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                                     M M
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr Paramjorthy of Counsel instructed by KQ
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes dated 19 April 2016.    The
    appeal relates  to  a  decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid
    promulgated on 11 March 2016.  The Judge had dismissed the  Appellant's
    appeal in respect of the Appellant's claim for asylum.

2.    Following the grant of permission to appeal, the Respondent  served  a
    Rule 24 Reply dated 28 April  2016  in  which  it  was  said  that  the
    Respondent did not oppose the Appellant's application. It was said that
    the Judge's decision was deficient in a number of respects.

3.      Having considered the decision and the position of the  parties,  it
    is quite clear that both parties agree that the decision of  the  Judge
    has to be set aside.  They are right to do so.

4.    Both parties also agree that the matter ought to  be  reheard  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal. As there has to be a rehearing then  that  is  the
    appropriate course.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal  Judge  involved  the  making  of  a
material error of law and is set aside. None of the findings stand.

The Appellant's appeal shall be reheard at the First Tier Tribunal.

An anonymity direction  is  continued  because  the  Appellant  has  claimed
asylum.





Signed                                       Date: 16 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


