
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and   Asylum   Chamber)                       Appeal   Number:
AA/11450/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House, London                            Decision  &  Reasons
Promulgated
On the  1st  April  2016                                              On  20
April 2016
Before:
                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL MCGINTY
Between:
                                  MRS N.N.
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Bandegani (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Ms Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Spicer promulgated on the 13th November 2015, in  which
      he dismissed the Appellant's appeal on  asylum  grounds,  humanitarian
      protection grounds and on human rights grounds.

   2. Permission to appeal against that decision has been granted by  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen on the 31st January  2016,  on  the  basis
      that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  erred  in
      applying the wrong standard of  proof,  in  applying  the  balance  of
      probabilities when making findings of  fact  relating  to  the  asylum
      appeal.  He also granted  permission  to  appeal  in  respect  of  the
      remainder of the Grounds of Appeal, which  are  set  out  within  that
      document.  As they are a matter of record, they are  not  repeated  in
      full here, given the concessions which were  made  by  Ms  Everett  on
      behalf of the Respondent, which means that I do not need  to  consider
      the other Grounds of Appeal in this case.

   3. Although within the Rule 24 reply it was argued  that  the  Judge  had
      directed himself appropriately and had applied the correct standard of
      proof when making his findings and that any reference to the  "balance
      of probabilities" was an erroneous slip of the pen, and  the  findings
      were adequate and sustainable, in her oral submissions  on  behalf  of
      the Respondent, Ms Everett conceded that upon  closer  examination  of
      the decision, it was apparent that the Judge  had  applied  the  wrong
      standard of proof when making findings of fact.  She conceded that the
      Judge had applied the balance of probabilities when making findings of
      fact and that the this was a material  error  of  law  such  that  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Spicer should be set  aside  and
      the case remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing before
      any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Spicer.

   4. Given that it was agreed between the parties that as the findings went
      to the issue of  credibility  as  a  whole,  and  that  therefore  the
      entirety of the decision of Judge Spicer should be set aside not  only
      in respect of asylum, but also in respect of  his  findings  on  human
      rights as well, consequent upon those initial findings.

   5. Mr Bandegani agreed the Judge did not then need to consider the  other
      Grounds of Appeal, the Respondent having  considered  there  to  be  a
      material error of law.







   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   6. In the case of PS (Sri Lanka)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2008] EWCA Civ 1213, the Court of  Appeal  said  that  the
      single test of whether a fear of persecution or ill treatment was well
      founded was whether on the evidence there  was  a  real  risk  of  its
      occurrence or reoccurrence.  In the previous case of R v Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department ex parte Sivakumaran [1998] AC  958  the
      Court of Appeal said that a well-founded fear of persecution  required
      the establishment of what was described by Lord Keith of Kinkel  as  a
      "reasonable degree of likelihood" and by Lord  Goff  as  "a  real  and
      substantial risk".

   7. As was therefore agreed between the parties, the correct  standard  of
      proof  to  be  applied  in  asylum  claims  is  not  the  balance   of
      probabilities, but is the lower  standard  of  proof.   As  was  quite
      properly conceded by Ms Everett on behalf of  the  Respondent,  it  is
      clear when reading the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Spicer
      that although she reminded herself at [95]  of  the  low  standard  of
      proof that applied in asylum cases,  namely  a  reasonable  degree  of
      likelihood, when she actually made her findings of fact  at  [98]  she
      specifically stated that she "made the following findings of  fact  on
      the balance of probabilities".   She  went  on  to  make  findings  at
      paragraph 98(ix) that "Accordingly, I find it  more  likely  than  not
      that there are other family members in Bangladesh who will be able  to
      support the Appellant", and she made findings at  paragraph  100(viii)
      regarding the Appellant's age on again "the balance of  probabilities"
      and regarding her identity as being Aftaban, Siftan or  Aftafon  Bibi,
      again on the "balance of probabilities".

   8.  As Ms Everett therefore properly conceded, it is clear that the Judge
      has approached the findings of fact in this case  on  the  balance  of
      probabilities, and considered the asylum claim on that basis.  As  was
      properly conceded by Ms Everett on behalf of the Respondent, the Judge
      has therefore made a material error  of  law  in  applying  the  wrong
      standard of proof when considering the asylum claim put forward by the
      Appellant, such that the entirety of  the  decision  of  Judge  Spicer
      should be set aside, as was conceded by both parties, given  that  the
      findings  go  to  the  issue  of  credibility  as  a  whole  and   the
      circumstances of the Appellant, and the matter should be remitted back
      to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing before any Judge  other  than
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Spicer.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Spicer  does  contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing  before
any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Spicer,
as a rehearing de novo.

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her  family.   This  order  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
order could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Signed

[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper  Tribunal  McGinty                           Dated
3rd April 2016
