
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11708/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                   |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 4th July 2016                                |On 28th July 2016          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                    [K T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah of Counsel instructed by A & P
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


Background

 1. In a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal permission  was  granted
    to appeal against the decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  J
    Robertson in which she dismissed the appeal on all grounds against  the
    decision of the respondent,  taken  on  13th  August  2015,  to  refuse
    asylum, humanitarian and human rights protection to the  appellant,  an
    adult citizen of Sri Lanka of Tamil ethnicity.

 2. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt  thought  it  arguable
    that the judge had erred by failing  to  take  into  consideration  the
    potentially material factors set out in  paragraph  5  of  the  grounds
    before the Upper Tribunal, bearing in mind  that  large  parts  of  the
    appellant's claim to have been severely mistreated in the past  by  the
    authorities had been accepted.

 3. The five factors identified in the grounds are as follows:

      i) The appellant's brother was murdered by the army  on  6th  December
         2012.  The army had occupied his house, made  enquiries  about  the
         LTTE which the brother was unable to answer and then ran him  down.



     ii) When the appellant was detained he was tortured  in  front  of  his
         wife and she too was beaten.

    iii) The appellant's brother-in-law was tortured and killed by the army.

     iv) In 2001 another brother-in-law was abducted and tortured.

      v)  Currently  the  appellant's  home  is  occupied  by   paramilitary
         personnel.

 4. The grounds argued that the omissions were material because the attacks
    on various members of the appellant's family showed that the  appellant
    had an arguable case of risk as a perceived member of an  LTTE  family.
    The fact that his home had been occupied by paramilitaries was evidence
    of that and would cause further  and  current  risk  if  the  appellant
    demanded his land back, as was his right. It is also  argued  that  the
    additional factors showed that the appellant was in the risk categories
    indentified in GJ and Others (Post-civil war; returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

 5. The respondent  issued  a  response  under  Rule  24  to  the  grounds,
    contending that the comprehensive determination  of  the  judge  showed
    that she had considered the material evidence accepting the appellant's
    claim to have been detained and  mistreated  and  to  have  transported
    supplies to the LTTE for many years.  However, the judge  was  entitled
    to conclude that the appellant did not come into the risk categories in
    GJ.

The Hearing and Submissions

 6. Ms Jegarajah confirmed that the appellant relied upon  the  grounds  of
    application put to the Upper Tribunal.  However,  she  pointed  out  an
    error in the grounds at paragraph  2(i)  indicating  that  an  accepted
    finding was that the appellant's sister had been killed  by  the  army.
    This should have indicated that it was the appellant's brother who  had
    been killed.  She then drew  my  attention  to  answers  given  by  the
    appellant in his record of interview and  statement  of  11th  December
    2015 identifying the risk factors which, it is  argued,  had  not  been
    considered by the judge.  In particular, she emphasised the failure  to
    take into consideration that, in 2012, the appellant's brother had been
    detained and killed and two  of  his  wife's  brothers  had  also  been
    killed.   The  appellant's  own  home  had  also   been   occupied   by
    paramilitary.  In  respect  of  the  latter  she  emphasised  that  the
    appellant, if returned, would be  required  to  live  at  that  address
    (paragraph 348 of GJ) and so this would add to his problems.

 7. Mr Bates accepted that the judge had made no reference to the murder of
    the brother but argued that she  was  not  obliged  to  consider  every
    matter.  The judge had correctly identified the risk category which was
    limited to those perceived to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka
    because of having a significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil
    separatism.  He thought that the appellant's past history, found to  be
    credible, was largely irrelevant to risk and the death of  the  brother
    in 2012 was not material to those events.

 8. He made reference to paragraph 348 of GJ concerning the requirement for
    the appellant to reside at his identity card address.  He  pointed  out
    that such a requirement and the possibility of internal  relocation  to
    Colombo only applied to those with whom there was an  adverse  interest
    and so was, in any event, no help to the appellant in  that  situation.
    He contended that the judge had correctly identified the relevant  risk
    category pointing out that, when the brother was killed  in  2012,  the
    appellant was living in the United Kingdom so could not be regarded  as
    a current activist.  The appellant had taken no steps to  either  raise
    his profile or involvement in Tamil  separatism  since  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom.  The evidence of the journalist, Mr Prabhakaran, before
    the First-tier Judge, did not show any subsequent  separatist  activity
    by the appellant.  The judge had been right to consider the core of the
    appellant's account and so was entitled to dismiss the  asylum  appeal.
    The judge's consideration of Article 8 issues  also  did  not  show  an
    error.

 9. Ms Jegarajah concluded her submissions by informing  me  that,  in  GJ,
    UNHCR guidance  was  incorporated  in  paragraph  290,  giving  a  risk
    category involving persons with family links or close  relationship  to
    persons still involved in Tamil separatism.  She  emphasised  that  the
    death of the appellant's brother showed post-conflict interest  in  the
    appellant's family such as  to  bring  him  within  the  risk  category
    identified in paragraph 7(a) of the head note  to  GJ.   She  submitted
    that the death of  the  appellant's  brother  and  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's home was currently occupied by paramilitary personnel would
    put the appellant at risk on return.

Conclusions

10. After I had considered the matter for a few moments I  announced  that,
    although I regarded the determination of the  First-tier  Judge  to  be
    generally comprehensive and cogently reasoned, her failure to  consider
    the two risk categories  emphasised  by  Ms  Jegarajah  amounted  to  a
    material error on a point of law.

11. Ms Jegarajah further submitted that, in that case, the appeal should be
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal for fresh findings on those  issues
    and risk on return, generally.

12. The determination does not show that the judge gave  any  consideration
    to the claimed risk factors relating to the appellant's brother's death
    and the occupation of  the  appellant's  home  by  paramilitary  before
    reaching the conclusion that the appellant would not be perceived to be
    a threat as he did not have a significant role  in  relation  to  post-
    conflict Tamil separatism.  The skeleton argument before the First-tier
    Tribunal made specific reference to the issue of  the  brother's  death
    (paragraph 13) in the context of the risk categories set out in GJ.  It
    is also  evident  that  the  occupation  of  the  appellant's  home  by
    paramilitary personnel is  covered  in  the  appellant's  responses  to
    questions recorded on pages 31 and 32 of the Asylum  Interview  Record.
    The appellant explained that  the  pro-government  militant  group  was
    occupying his house and the appellant's attempt to sell the  house  was
    blocked because of that.

13. The factors identified required consideration by the judge in  relation
    to both their credibility and whether or not  it  would  be  reasonably
    likely that the appellant, on return,  would  be  regarded  as  someone
    perceived to be involved in post-conflict Tamil separatism particularly
    because of the claimed post-conflict activities of his brother.  If the
    judge had considered these matters it might still have been open to her
    to dismiss the appeal but any reasons for dismissing those factors  are
    not self-evident.  The judge's failure to identify and give reasons for
    rejecting or accepting those factors therefore amounts to an error on a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside and re-made.

14. As it will be necessary for the Tribunal to make fresh findings of fact
    in relation to the matters identified above and  to  consider  risk  on
    return in  that  context  it  is  appropriate,  having  regard  to  the
    provisions of paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statements for the Tribunal
    made by the Senior President on 25th September 2012,  that  the  matter
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity  direction  nor  did  I
consider one appropriate before the Upper Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

15. The appeal will be heard afresh before the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
    at Birmingham on a date to be specified by the Resident Judge.

16. A Tamil interpreter will be required for the hearing which is estimated
    to take three hours.

17. Representatives should submit a consolidated bundle of documents to  be
    relied upon at the remitted hearing at least fourteen days  before  the
    date of that hearing.

18. The remitted appeal should not be heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal J Robertson.






Signed                              Date 28th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
