
[pic]
IAC-HX-MC/12-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11075/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20 May 2015                           |On 13 July 2015                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge conway


                                   Between

                             Ms KARINE GRIGORYAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Laughton
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Armenia  born  in  1974.   She  appealed
    against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 28  November  2014
    to refuse her leave to remain.  She was refused asylum.

 2. The basis of her claim is that she  fears  persecution  in  Armenia  by
    members  of  an  organised  criminal  gang.   Her  father,  a  criminal
    investigator in the Ministry of Internal Affairs, had been instrumental
    in the arrest and conviction of the gang members  in  2000.   Following
    their release in 2011 they sought to take  revenge  on  her  and  other
    family members because of her father.  She was threatened and attacked.
     Her father was granted asylum in the UK in 2000.

 3. The Respondent for various reasons given in paragraphs [18  to  24]  of
    the refusal letter did not believe that she was persecuted on the basis
    of arrests her father made  in  2000.   Further,  the  Respondent  took
    against her credibility delay in the making of her claim  and  that  it
    was made only after arrest.  Also, that she  had  passed  through  safe
    countries en route to the UK.  The Respondent  in  addition  considered
    that there would be sufficiency of protection from the non-state actors
    and that she could internally relocate.

 4. She appealed.

 5. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 11 March 2015 Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Majid dismissed the appeal.

 6. In a brief determination the judge's findings are in a single paragraph
    as follows:

         "11(a)   The Respondent has persuaded me  of  the  fact  that  this
                claim is misconceived.   I  do  accept  that,  as  a  police
                officer, the father had a  valid  claim;  his  assertion  of
                persecution was accepted in November 2000 and the Appellant,
                a long time after his asylum claim was successful, is trying
                to make these factors relevant to her personal claim.

           (b)    I cannot overlook  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  after
                entering the UK on 1 November 2013 did not claim asylum. For
                her to say that the "persecution" only became  an  operative
                factor when she was arrested by the police  for  shoplifting
                cannot be accepted as a credible fact.

           (c)    The evidence before me leads me to the inference that the
                Appellant would have left claiming asylum even  longer  were
                she not arrested on 5 April 2014."

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by a  judge
    on 10 April 2015.

 8. At the error of law hearing before me Ms Laughton  essentially  adopted
    the grounds.

 9. In summary, the judge failed to engage with  the  Appellant's  account,
    ignored material information including that of the  Appellant's  sister
    in law  whose  account  was  very  similar.  Further,  the  Appellant's
    reasoning was inadequate and there was effectively no reference to  the
    Appellant's case.  In addition, he appeared to be mistaken  as  to  the
    nature of the Appellant's case.  He had  also  not  had  regard  to  an
    expert's report.

10. Mr Tarlow agreed.

11. I agreed also.  The judge's determination  is  utterly  deficient.   He
    only considered two aspects of the Appellant's  claim  in  deciding  to
    dismiss her appeal: the length of time since her father's claim and the
    fact that she did not claim asylum on entering the UK.

12. The judge entirely failed to engage with the Appellant's account, which
    included oral evidence and statements from  family  members,  and  make
    material findings on it.  Such included her claim that she lost her job
    because of her father; that she received threatening phone calls  which
    made specific reference to her father; that her brother  was  targeted;
    that she was raped during which her attackers  made  reference  to  her
    father; that the car that was used to kidnap her brother was  the  same
    that targeted her.

13. The judge also failed to give any consideration to potentially relevant
    evidence in particular the fact the Appellant's sister-in-law's  asylum
    claim  was accepted  in  2014  on  similar  grounds  to  those  of  the
    Appellant.

14. Moreover, he gave no consideration  to  an  expert  country  report  by
    Robert Chenciner which was before him.

15. The consideration of the Appellant's case was almost non  existent.  In
    failing to make reference to any of the  factors  which  the  Appellant
    raised in support of her claim and in effectively  failing  to  provide
    any  reasoning  to  support  his  rejection  of  her  claim  the  judge
    materially erred.

16. Moreover, the judge appeared to be mistaken as to  the  nature  of  the
    Appellant's case. He stated that her father as  a  police  officer  had
    become a target of persecution by the authorities having  been  accused
    of helping criminals. In fact her claim  is  that  he  was  a  criminal
    investigator (rather than a police officer) persecuted  by  a  criminal
    gang after helping the authorities bring them to justice. Her  fear  is
    from the gang in revenge for the actions  of  her  father.  Such  error
    infects his conclusion that 'reference to the father's  persecution  is
    misleading.' [2] It was an error of law for the judge to  misunderstand
    the basis of the claim.

17. By consent the decision was set aside to be remade.

18. Decision

    The decision of the First tier Tribunal includes the making of an error
    on a point of law. The decision is set aside.  The nature or extent  of
    judicial fact finding which is necessary in order for the  decision  in
    the appeal to be remade is such that it is  appropriate  to  remit  the
    case to the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with  Practise  Statement
    paragraph 7.2 to be heard  afresh  by  that  Tribunal.    None  of  the
    findings (in so far as any were made) stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

