
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11790/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th October 2016                 |On 15th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           Mr SAVINDER SINGH DAHL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Faryl, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born  on  1st  January  1975.
    Dependent on the  Appellant's  appeal  are  the  claims  of  his  three
    dependants, being his wife and his two children who  were  respectively
    aged 11 and 8.  The Appellant claims to have left Afghanistan  on  28th
    June 2014 travelling to Pakistan by car where he stayed  for  two  days
    prior to travelling to an unknown country by air.  He thereafter stayed
    in the unknown country  for  two  nights  before  travelling  by  lorry
    arriving in the UK on 10th July 2014 whereupon he  immediately  claimed
    asylum.

 2. The Appellant's claim for asylum is based upon a fear that if  returned
    to Afghanistan he and his family would not be  safe  because  they  are
    Sikhs.  The Appellant's application was refused by Notice of Refusal of
    the Secretary of State dated 10th December 2014.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Herwald sitting at Manchester on 2nd March  2015.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on  6th  March  2015  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 4. On 20th March 2015 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal.
     Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox on  1st  April
    2015.  On 15th April 2015 the  Secretary  of  State  responded  to  the
    Grounds of Appeal noting that the judge accepted that  members  of  the
    Appellant's family had disappeared and  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    attacked but however that it was entirely open to the judge to conclude
    that the Appellant could not demonstrate that the action taken  against
    him was because he was a Sikh.  The Rule 24 response contended that  it
    was open to the judge to reject the claimed causal nexus and  concluded
    that the Appellant had not established a  real  risk  on  return.   The
    Secretary of State contends that the mere fact that other children that
    the Appellant is aware of apparently disappeared did not establish that
    there was a real risk to Sikhs and Hindus and that the  judge  was  not
    bound by the authority of DSG which unlike SL is not a country guidance
    authority, and the fact that the judge chose not to depart from SL  was
    a conclusion that was open to him.

 5. The appeal first came before me on 3rd May 2016.  At that  hearing  the
    Appellant was represented by Counsel, Ms Faryl was  extremely  familiar
    with the appeal having appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and  was
    also the author of the Grounds of Appeal.  The Respondent  appeared  by
    her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Harrison.

 6. I was satisfied that there were material errors of law in the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The country guidance authority which
    should have been applied  was  not  available  before  him  and  I  was
    satisfied that the judge's reasons not departing from the  guidance  in
    SL was inadequate particularly bearing in mind that in DSG the Tribunal
    found there was clear justification to do so due in large part  due  to
    the dwindling numbers of Sikhs and Hindus remaining in Afghanistan  and
    had gone on to find the Tribunal's figures  in  SL  were  significantly
    wrong.  I was satisfied that that  in  itself  constituted  a  material
    error of law.

 7. Further this case was made more complex by the fact that the judge  has
    failed to make any Section 55 findings with regard to the best interest
    assessment in respect of the two minor children.

 8. In such circumstances when looking at this case in the  round  and  the
    fact that the judge has not considered the most recent country guidance
    authority of TG I was satisfied that the correct approach was  to  find
    that there was a material error of law and to set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  However the issues are ones of law  and
    can be  dealt  with  by  way  of  submission  rather  than  fact.   The
    credibility of the Appellant's testimony  is  not  challenged  and  the
    findings of fact do stand.  In such circumstances I directed  the  case
    remain within the Upper Tribunal reserved  to  myself  and  I  set  out
    directions for the further hearing of this matter.

 9. It was on that basis that the appeal comes back before me.   The  legal
    representatives remain the same which makes the conduct of this hearing
    considerably more straightforward.

10. In giving directions I found that the findings of fact and  credibility
    were to stand, and that there were two outstanding issues, namely:

      i) whether in the light of the country guidance authority  of  TG  and
         Others (CG) [2015] UKUT  00595  the  Appellant  had  satisfied  the
         Tribunal for a Convention reason he and his family face a real risk
         of persecution if returned to Afghanistan; and

     ii) to enable the Tribunal to consider the best interests of the  minor
         children pursuant to the guidance given by statute and case law.

    I also directed that the matter be  addressed  by  way  of  submissions
    only, and that there be leave to  either  party  to  file  any  further
    objective evidence upon which they intend to rely at least  seven  days
    prior to the restored hearing.

Submissions/Discussion

11. Mr Harrison and Ms Faryl both indicate there was no  further  objective
    evidence they wish me to consider.  Mr Harrison relies on the Notice of
    Refusal of 10th December 2014.  He  takes  me  to  that  document.   He
    points out that it is accepted that the Appellant is an Afghan national
    of the Sikh religion from Kabul.  However he submits that the  rest  of
    the submissions made by the Appellant are not accepted by the Secretary
    of State and the Secretary of State contends that some aspects  of  the
    Appellant's case are not credible.

12.  Ms  Faryl  points  out  that  discussion  with  regard  to  issues  of
    credibility are irrelevant and that Judge  Herwald  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's father and daughter had disappeared and  that  the  correct
    approach for a starting point is to consider the Grounds of  Appeal  of
    20th March 2015 which  are  adopted  by  Judge  Cox  in  his  grant  of
    permission dated 1st  April  2015.   She  submits  that  there  are  no
    credibility issues and that it is in fact accepted that the Appellant's
    father and daughter had disappeared and  that  the  Appellant  and  his
    family have been attacked.  On that basis she  relies  on  the  country
    guidance given previously in SL and Others (Afghanistan) CG  (Returning
    Sikhs and Hindus)  [2005]  UKIAT  00137.   She  submits  that  that  is
    authority for  stating  that  so  far  as  the  Refugee  Convention  is
    concerned, it is not necessary that any risk on return  by  a  Sikh  or
    Hindu to Afghanistan is solely by  reason  of  ethnicity  or  religious
    opinion but that it will suffice if a Convention reason  forms  a  real
    part of the reason why there may be a real risk  of  persecution.   She
    points out that at paragraph 14 of Judge Herwald's  decision  he  noted
    that the Appellant had not  been  cross-examined  with  regard  to  the
    attack upon him and therefore his contention must stand as a Convention
    reason.  She points out that the Appellant has been targeted because he
    was a Sikh and that it was due to the failure of the Secretary of State
    to cross-examine on facts that the Appellant specifically relied  upon.
    The judge seemingly was unable to make a causal link that the Appellant
    had suffered persecution.  She contends that the conclusion reached  by
    Judge Herwald at paragraph 19 of his decision  that  the  ill-treatment
    suffered was not of sufficient  severity  to  cross  the  threshold  of
    persecution is completely irrational and  begs  the  question  of  what
    actually  amounts  to  persecution.   She  relies  on  the   up-to-date
    authorities, firstly DSG and Others (Afghan Sikhs: departure  from  CG)
    Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00148 referring me specifically  to  paragraphs
    11 and 22 of that determination which highlight the very limited number
    of Sikhs  that  remain  in  Afghanistan.   Secondly,  she  goes  on  to
    emphasise that the most recent authority  of  TG  and  Others  was  not
    available to the First-tier Judge and that it does  make  a  difference
    and that you have to give due consideration to the cumulative effect of
    the treatment suffered.

13. She points out that this is a family with two children with nowhere  to
    go and no family in Afghanistan.  She emphasises that  the  authorities
    show that it is increasingly difficult for Sikhs to obtain  employment.
    Consequently, there is a  vicious  circle  that  Sikhs  are  unable  to
    establish themselves and because of the harassment they face  they  are
    unable to stay in places of their choosing whilst they try to establish
    themselves.  She submits that the Appellant comes within this  category
    and that following the authorities the appeal should be allowed.

14. Secondly she points out the Immigration Judge  has  failed  to  address
    Section 55 of the 2009 Act.  She submits that this is material  because
    of country guidance and the reference therein to  access  to  education
    for children and the shortage of adequate  facilities  in  Afghanistan.
    She submits that this makes relocation on return to be an  unreasonable
    option.  She asked me to allow the appeal.

15. Mr Harrison in brief further submission comments that  he  wonders  how
    past persecution has  created  a  valid  reason  to  presume  that  the
    Appellant's own safety may be jeopardised  and  whether  the  treatment
    that has been suffered by adults would be meted out  to  children.   He
    does acknowledge that if there is a risk then  it  is  appropriate  for
    Section 55 to be considered.

Findings

16. With due respect to both advocates they both, to a certain extent, have
    failed to concentrate their submissions on the points in principle that
    were for consideration.  This was a rehearing  based  entirely  on  two
    issues as set out in the directions and set  out  above.   Findings  of
    fact and credibility were, and continue, to stand.  The principal issue
    was whether or not, in the light of TG and Others,  the  Appellant  had
    satisfied the Tribunal that for a Convention reason he and  his  family
    faced a real risk of persecution if returned to Afghanistan.  This case
    emphasises that a consideration of whether an individual  of  the  Sikh
    and Hindu community is at real  risk  of  persecution  upon  return  to
    Afghanistan is fact sensitive and sets out relevant circumstances  that
    must be considered.  Further also it  noted  that  whilst  there  is  a
    willingness at government  level  to  provide  protection,  it  is  not
    established on the evidence that at local level the police are willing,
    even if able, to provide the necessary level of protection required  in
    Refugee Convention/Qualification Directive terms to  those  members  of
    the  Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  who  experience  serious  harm   or
    harassment amounting to persecution.  Further, whether it is reasonable
    to expect a member of the Sikh or Hindu  community  to  relocate  again
    remains fact sensitive.  It is noted that Sikhs and  Hindu  communities
    are declining in number and that those without access to an independent
    income are unlikely to  be  able  to  reasonably  relocate  because  of
    depleted support mechanisms.

17. It is thus necessary to go back and look at  the  facts  found  in  the
    light of this by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  It was  accepted  that
    the Appellant's father was missing, although there was no finding  made
    that he was deceased.  It was accepted that  the  Appellant's  daughter
    had  disappeared.   Further,  the  attack  on  the  Appellant  was  not
    inconsistent with his other evidence and that he  was  found  to  be  a
    credible  witness  and  it  was  inappropriate  to  discount  any  fear
    expounded by both him and his wife about life in Afghanistan for Sikhs.



18. Applying that criteria to the current case law, which to a considerable
    extent emphasises issues raised in DSG and Others, it is appropriate to
    look at  the  cumulative  effect  of  the  treatment  suffered  by  the
    Appellant.  I am satisfied that this is an Appellant with two  children
    without  employment  in  Afghanistan  and  effectively   with   nowhere
    specifically to return to and no family to return to.   He  is  someone
    who would find it increasingly difficult to obtain employment.   It  is
    extremely unlikely considering his financial circumstances that he will
    have the ability to access  basic  accommodation  and  in  his  factual
    circumstances relocation would be extremely difficult.

19. Further, giving due consideration to Section 55 of the  2009  Act.   Ms
    Faryl was correct to make reference for findings made in  TG  that  the
    general evidence indicate there have been occasions of Hindus and  Sikh
    families not sending their children to school in Afghanistan especially
    as a  result  of  the  fear,  harassment  and  ill-treatment  which  is
    corroborated by the evidence.  I am satisfied,  having  considered  the
    evidence as it was previously  considered  by  Judge  Herwald  and  the
    recent submissions, that there is a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  and
    harassment to a child on return which would impact  upon  the  children
    (born respectively in 2005 and 2008) receiving a proper education.

20. Considering all the issues I am consequently satisfied  that  following
    TG and DSG the Appellant and his family are likely to  be  at  risk  of
    persecution on return to Afghanistan and consequently  I  am  satisfied
    that the Appellant's claim succeeds on asylum and human rights grounds.





Notice of Decision

I re-make the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal on  both  asylum  and
on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

