
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/11061/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28th September 2016                    |On 10th October 2016              |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                     DB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran (born 1st January 1991)  and  is  of
    Kurdish ethnicity.  He  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of a First-tier Tribunal dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's refusal to grant him asylum  on  account  of  his  Kurdish
    ethnicity.

 2. The Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal, initially came
    before the FtT sitting at North Shields.  That Tribunal considered  the
    evidence,  but   made   findings   comprehensively   disbelieving   the
    Appellant's reasons for leaving  Iran  and  his  reasons  for  claiming
    asylum.  So far as this Tribunal is concerned,  those  findings  stand;
    they have not been challenged.

 3. The issues prompting the onward appeal to  this  Tribunal  arose  as  a
    result of a claim that the FtT did not adequately engage with  credible
    fresh evidence which was adduced at the hearing  before  it  and  which
    sought to establish that there was a risk of interrogation or arrest to
    all returning asylum  seekers  as  distinct  from  a  simple  screening
    process where those who have no political profile will be released.  An
    issue arose on a claim that the FtT had arguably conflated a  screening
    interview which the Appellant would be subject to on return,  with  the
    risk of arrest.  In addition the FtT's finding on whether the Appellant
    had left Iran illegally was equivocal.  I record for  the  purposes  of
    this decision, I am satisfied that  the  Appellant  left  Iran  without
    documentation and therefore falls to  be  treated  as  someone  exiting
    illegally.

 4. This matter first came before me on 13th June 2016 as an error  of  law
    hearing.  At that hearing, I found  that  the  FtT  had  erred  in  its
    decision, set aside the  decision  and  adjourned  the  hearing  for  a
    resumed hearing to take place in the Upper Tribunal.

 5. One reason for the adjournment  was  information  that  a  new  country
    guidance decision on Iran was  expected  imminently.  The  hearing  had
    already taken place in the UT in  May  2016.   It  was  agreed  by  the
    representatives that the CG decision could cast further  light  on  the
    question of illegal  exits  from  Iran.  In  this  instance  it  seemed
    sensible to direct that there be a  short  adjournment  to  await  that
    decision.  The decision SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker)
    Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC) is now before me.

 6. I attach as Annex A to the present decision my error  of  law  decision
    dated 13th June 2016.

Resumed Hearing

 7. The resumed hearing came before me at Bradford  UT  on  28th  September
    2016.  Mr Hussain appeared for the Appellant and Mrs Pettersen for  the
    Respondent. both attended.  Both representatives had appeared before me
    at the hearing on 13th June 2016. The Appellant  did  not  attend.   Mr
    Hussain could offer no explanation for the Appellant's  non-attendance.
    His instructions were that the Appellant would attend.   However  there
    was some suggestion contained in the papers, that the Appellant who had
    attended at a hearing before this Tribunal on 18th August 2016, was now
    changing the basis of his claim to asylum. Mr Hussain  was  content  to
    proceed by way of submissions. In any event as there was no explanation
    for the Appellant's non-attendance I saw no reason not to proceed  with
    the matter.

 8. The country guidance case of SSH and HR was handed  up  to  me  by  Mrs
    Pettersen.  Mr  Hussain  confirmed  he   was   aware   of   it.    Both
    representatives made submissions.

 9. Mr Hussain referred once more to the risk  that  it  was  claimed,  the
    Appellant would face upon return  to  Iran.  As  a  starting  point  he
    referred to much of the documentation which he said updates  that  used
    as the backdrop for the CG case of SB (risk on return -  illegal  exit)
    Iran [2009] UKAIT 00053.  He  referred  to  the  Amnesty  International
    Report February 2012 quoting a report issued by a Swiss refugee  agency
    stating that a retired judge had informed them  that  returning  asylum
    seekers are placed in detention for several days until the  police  had
    verified that they had not engaged in any political  activities,  after
    which they are released.  Mr Hussain then referred to the  Respondent's
    Country of Information Service Report  (January  2013)  itself  quoting
    from the above Amnesty report.

10. He then referred to the Respondent's Operational  Guidance  Note  which
    found that detention facilities in Iran are harsh and potentially  life
    threatening and likely to reach Article 3 threshold.

11. He relied further upon a report from Dr Joffe who had been  invited  to
    comment on SSH and HR (not for the present appeal but for another one).
     He drew upon that to say  that  the  situation  for  Kurdish  refugees
    returning to Iran is that they face an increased  risk  of  persecution
    simply because of  their  Kurdish  ethnicity.   He  submitted  that  Dr
    Joffe's report opines that  several  factors  had  led  to  intensified
    repression of Kurds and that Kurds generally  were  treated  with  more
    discrimination than other minority group Iranians for reasons connected
    with the situation in Kurdistan.  In these circumstances  coupled  with
    the Respondent's own guidance  note  concerning  prison  conditions  in
    Iran, the Appellant's case ought to be allowed.

12. Mrs Pettersen on behalf of the Respondent referred extensively  to  SSH
    and HR.  She reminded me that one reason for adjourning this matter  on
    13th June 2016 was to gain guidance on illegal exits  from  Iran.   She
    submitted that SSH and HR neatly encapsulates and deals with  the  same
    issues raised before me in the course of this hearing.   In  fact,  the
    issues raised by Mr Hussain are almost  a  mirror  image  of  the  ones
    raised in the CG case.  She submitted that the report from Dr Joffe can
    amount to no more than a commentary on the case. It was not in evidence
    before the Tribunal.  The Tribunal in SSH and HR had the benefit  of  a
    report from Dr Khaki and I was entitled to draw upon that report in the
    same way as the panel sitting on the CG case.

Consideration and Findings

13. The difficulty for Mr Hussain as I see it, stems back to the fact  that
    there are clear findings (unchallenged) that the Appellant's core claim
    to asylum has been found to be a complete fabrication.  It follows from
    this that he has no political profile in Iran, albeit he is of  Kurdish
    ethnicity.  Equally there was no evidence that he  had  undertaken  any
    activities in the UK which would cause him to be  of  interest  to  the
    Iranian authorities on return.

14. Mr Hussain's argument is that the Appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity and
    in the  context  of  the  materials  submitted  (including  Dr  Joffe's
    commentary), the "raised" profile of a Kurdish failed asylum seeker  is
    sufficient to establish a risk of  the  Appellant  being  perceived  as
    having engaged in political acts against Iran.  Following on from that,
    the Appellant would, it is claimed, be detained and  any  detention  in
    the harsh and potentially life threatening conditions of prisons there,
    will have the potential to engage Article 3.  I find  that  I  disagree
    with Mr Hussain's submissions.

15. First on the basis of the Appellant being a  national  of  Iran,  I  am
    satisfied that having left Iran illegally, the Appellant would be  able
    to access a laissez passer. I rely on Dr Khaki's report in SSH  and  HR
    for this. I accept that following Dr Khaki's  evidence,  the  Appellant
    would have to reveal he left Iran illegally and this would lead to  the
    Iranian authorities carrying out checks on the Appellant concerning the
    kind of activities he had been involved in whilst out of Iran.  In fact
    in the Appellant's case there are none of note.  It has never been part
    of the Appellant's claim that he was seeking asylum on the  pretext  of
    supporting the opposition to the current regime. In any event his claim
    has been found  not  credible.  Further  SSH  and  HR  dealt  with  the
    situation of failed asylum returnees of Kurdish ethnicity.

16. Secondly it is accepted by the Respondent that a returnee such  as  the
    Appellant will be questioned by the authorities.  It is the Appellant's
    claim that it is this which places him at risk of prosecution/detention
    and consequential ill-treatment.  Mr Hussain refers in his  submissions
    to several documents but I note that  those  same  documents  were  the
    subject of an extensive review in SSH and HR.  As Mrs  Pettersen  said,
    the Tribunal in that case found at [23] that in effect the  profile  of
    an Appellant is the key question.  Reviewing  the  evidence  before  it
    they said at [23]

         "This has to be seen, as with all these pieces of evidence, in  the
         context of the evidence overall.  In our view the evidence does not
         establish that a failed asylum seeker who has left  Iran  illegally
         would  be  subjected  on  return  to  a  period  of  detention  for
         questioning such that there is  a  real  risk  of  Article  3  ill-
         treatment.  The evidence in our view shows no more than  that  they
         will be questioned, and that if there are any  particular  concerns
         arising from their previous activities either in  Iran  or  in  the
         United Kingdom or whichever country they are  returned  from,  then
         there would  be  a  risk  of  further  questioning,  detention  and
         potential ill-treatment."

         "......if they cooperated and accepted that they left illegally and
         claimed asylum abroad then  there  would  be  no  reason  for  ill-
         treatment, and questioning would be  for  a  fairly  brief  period.
         That seems to us to sum up the position well, and as a  consequence
         we conclude that a person with no history other than that of  being
         a failed asylum seeker who had exited illegally and  who  could  be
         expected to tell the truth when questioned would not  face  a  real
         risk of ill-treatment during  the  period  of  questioning  at  the
         airport."

17. Finally Mr Hussain drew on the report from Dr  Joffe  (albeit  prepared
    for another appeal).  Dr Joffe's report included a  commentary  on  SSH
    and HR. Dr Joffe opined that he was in disagreement with  the  findings
    of the above case in so far as they  related  to  Iranians  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity.  He cited tensions running high  through  Iranian  Kurdistan
    and sets out specific examples of repression  against  Kurds  who  have
    been punished for crimes against God. He names the militant group  PJAK
    as the main cause for repression. He then draws upon this to opine that
    any Kurd simply on account of his  ethnicity  must  anticipate  serious
    risk   of   official   discrimination/    persecution.    However    in
    contradistinction to this, SSH and HR points out that no examples  have
    been provided of ill-treatment of returnees with  no  relevant  adverse
    factors; although ethnicity might  be  an  exacerbating  factor  for  a
    returnee otherwise of interest. As I set out  above  the  Appellant  in
    this case has no profile of note.

18. For the above reasons the Appellant's claim to asylum is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law and it  is
hereby set aside.  I remake the decision.  The  appeal  of  DB  against  the
Respondent's refusal to grant him asylum is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     08 October 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts


ANNEX A

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11061/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th June 2016                             |                              |
|                                              |...........................   |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     upper tribunal deputy judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                    Mr DB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereafter should directly or indirectly identify  the  original  Appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others,  all  parties.   Any  failure  to
comply  with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to  a  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant DB is a citizen of Iran (born 1st January 1991) and is of
    Kurdish ethnicity.  He entered the UK on 17th March  2015  and  claimed
    asylum on arrival.  By  a  decision  issued  on  28th  July  2015,  the
    Respondent refused his asylum application on the grounds that  she  did
    not accept the Appellant's story of why he left his home  country.   In
    addition the Respondent  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    national of Iran.

 2. In summary, the Appellant's claim is he was a married man in Iran  with
    one child.  He claimed to have worked  as  an  alcohol  smuggler.   His
    wife's family  did  not  approve  of  his  relationship  with  her  and
    consequently they harassed, assaulted and even shot  him.   His  wife's
    family he said was linked to the security services and  in  furtherance
    of their dislike of him, planted drugs in his home with the purpose  of
    framing him as a drug dealer.  He was warned by his wife not to  return
    home and consequently, he came to the UK and claimed asylum.

 3. The Appellant appealed the  Respondent's  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at North Shields.  In a decision  promulgated  on  11th  March
    2016, that Tribunal considered the Appellant's appeal and firstly  made
    a clear finding that the Appellant is an Iranian  national,  albeit  of
    Kurdish ethnicity.  However so far as the core of the Appellant's story
    was concerned,  including  the  reasons  why  he  left  Iran,  the  FtT
    comprehensively disbelieved the claim. It made clear findings  on  that
    issue. The question then arose  whether  there  was  any  risk  to  the
    Appellant on return as a failed asylum seeker.

 4. The FtT dismissed the Appellant's appeal, following the current country
    guidance case of SB (risk on return - illegal  exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]
    UKAIT 00053. Fresh evidence has been placed before the FtT.  Whilst  it
    is correct that the FtT did engage with fresh evidence which  had  been
    adduced to establish a risk of interrogation or arrest to all returning
    asylum seekers, nevertheless it concluded that the background  evidence
    did not suggest that this Appellant would be at real risk of  treatment
    which would be persecutory or  which  would  breach  his  rights  under
    Article 3 of the ECHR.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal,  which  was  granted  on  a
    renewed application before the Upper  Tribunal.   The  grounds  seeking
    permission centred on the Appellant being at risk on return because  of
    current credible evidence showing that post-SB, failed  asylum  seekers
    including those who exited illegally, are  at  risk  on  return.   This
    evidence included the Respondent's own Operational Guidance Note  which
    confirmed that prison conditions in Iran breach Article 3 ECHR, Country
    of  Information  Report,  together  with  other  background  documents,
    including one from Amnesty International.

 6. The grant of permission is set out below:

              "It is arguable that the judge did not adequately engage  with
             the fresh evidence which was adduced to establish  a  risk  of
             interrogation (amounting to  persecution)  or  arrest  to  all
             returning asylum seekers as distinct from a  simple  screening
             process where those who have  no  political  profile  will  be
             released. It is arguable  that  at  [26]  the  judge  arguably
             conflated a screening interview with the risk of arrest.

              All the grounds are arguable. The credibility findings are not
             challenged. (The judge rejected the appellant's claim to be at
             risk on return as a result of falling victim of a drugs  plant
             or from his wife's family).  I  also  note  that  the  judge's
             finding in relation to whether  the  appellant  actually  left
             Iran illegally is arguably equivocal (see [23])."

    Thus the matter comes before me to determine whether the FtT's decision
    contains an error of law requiring it to be set aside and remade.

Error of Law, Hearing/Consideration

 7. I am satisfied that the FtT's decision does disclose an error of law. I
    announced my decision to the parties at the hearing and I now  give  my
    reasons for so finding.

 8. The application before me makes it clear that the claimed risk  to  the
    Appellant is that he would come to the attention of the authorities  as
    a failed asylum seeker and as someone who has exited Iran illegally.

 9. The credibility findings of the FtT, in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    account on the substance of his claim  are  not  challenged.   What  is
    challenged is the judge's equivocation at [23] on whether the Appellant
    left Iran illegally.  What the judge says there is as follows

         "Having dismissed the Appellant's evidence concerning the risk from
         his wife's family, there is no good reason why I should accept that
         he did leave the country illegally.  However, he did  say  that  he
         left Iran without documents, and so I have considered what, if any,
         risk he would face on return on that basis".

10. I find that the judge has erred in his failure to make a clear  finding
    on whether the Appellant exited Iran illegally, either with or  without
    documents.  Having failed to make such a  finding,  has  then  led  the
    judge into error in his approach to risk on return.

11. I find that the judge has failed to consider the  evidence  before  him
    which confirmed that detention in Iran could result from  the  fact  of
    being a returning asylum seeker.

12. I find that there is a clear error of law in  failing  to  engage  with
    relevant evidence, particularly where  it  has  been  argued  that  the
    current country guidance information is out of date.

13. I find therefore that the decision must be set aside in so far  as  the
    question of whether or not the Appellant would be at risk on return  as
    a failed asylum seeker and/or  someone  who  left  Iran  illegally,  is
    concerned.  I see no reason to set  aside  the  FtT's  conclusions  and
    credibility findings on the Appellant's account outlining  the  reasons
    why he claimed he left Iran. Those findings are  preserved  because  as
    the judge observed at [23]  the  Appellant's  account  was  a  complete
    fabrication to give foundation to an asylum claim. The judge gave clear
    unchallenged reasons for those findings.

14. After announcing my decision to the parties, it was  canvassed  at  the
    hearing whether it would be appropriate to dispose of  this  matter  by
    remitting it to the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Hussain informed me that a
    new country guidance decision on Iran, was expected shortly,  following
    a hearing in the Upper Tribunal in May 2016.  Part of that  case  would
    deal with  illegal  exits  from  Iran.  Both  representatives  were  in
    agreement that it would be sensible to await that decision.

15. On reflection therefore, although I was minded to return this matter to
    the First-tier Tribunal, I consider that the appropriate course now  is
    that this appeal remain in the Upper  Tribunal  for  that  Tribunal  to
    decide whether the Appellant exited illegally and would be at  risk  on
    return to Iran in any event.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT is hereby set aside for  legal  error.   The  matter
will remain in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  a  resumed  hearing  before  that
Tribunal,  listing  at  the  direction  of  the  Principal  Resident  Judge.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     21 June 2016


Upper Tribunal  Deputy Judge Roberts

