
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/11437/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         | Decision & Reasons           |
|On 29 July 2015                              |Promulgated                   |
|                                             |On 28 September 2015          |
|                                             |                              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                                     HR
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bijan Hoshi, Counsel, instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant  is  a  young
    asylum seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 4 December 2014 refusing to grant him leave
    to remain and to remove him to Iran.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born in  1986.  He  claims  that  he
    participated in a demonstration in Iran on 14 June 2013,  was  detained
    and tortured in Ghezel Hesar prison. He was released on a  bribe  after
    about five weeks. He was facing very serious charges and fled  Iran  to
    Turkey, eventually arriving by air in the UK. A medical report from  Dr
    Sally Wood dated 29 April 2014 noted 11 scars and found that the wheals
    were diagnostic of being whipped or beaten and were  highly  consistent
    with being whipped with an electrical cord or  rope  that  was  doubled
    back on itself. There were alternative possible explanations  for  such
    injuries including self-flagellation or lashing as a punishment.

The Appeal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Columbus House on 1 April 2015. The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's account was not credible and that given the judge's view of
    the appellant's credibility it was not accepted that  the  wheals  were
    caused by torture. The possibility that he had commissioned somebody to
    administer the injuries so  as  to  support  his  claim  could  not  be
    discounted.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on 27 April 2015 on the basis
    that the judge erred in assessing the evidence of  Dr  Wood,  erred  in
    treatment of the appellant's mental  health  difficulties  and  made  a
    series of materially unreasonable findings based solely on the inherent
    probability of the appellant's account.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Judge Ford on 8 May 2015
    on the basis that it was arguable that the judge  only  considered  the
    report of Dr Wood after making adverse credibility findings against the
    appellant, may have erred in not  making  adequate  allowance  for  the
    appellant's mental health difficulties and may have  erred  in  finding
    that the account was inherently improbable  without  having  sufficient
    regard to the background evidence, society, mores and customs of  Iran.
    All grounds were therefore arguable.

 7. In a rule 24 response dated 18  May  2015,  the  respondent  sought  to
    uphold the judge's decision  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  properly
    assessed the evidence taking  the  medical  report  into  account.  The
    grounds were a mere disagreement with the findings.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me.





Discussion

 9. Both sides made detailed submissions on all three grounds of appeal.  I
    have only found it necessary to determine the first ground of appeal. I
    accept Mr Richards' submission that the judge referred to  the  medical
    report of Dr Wood  as  a  "starting  point"  at  paragraph  59  of  the
    decision. However, I find  that  was  a  matter  of  form  rather  than
    substance because the next reference to  the  medical  evidence  is  at
    paragraph 75, after the judge had made a series of adverse  credibility
    findings at paragraph 61-74. The judge rejected the evidence of Dr Wood
    at paragraphs 78-79 of the decision because of the previous  conclusion
    that the appellant was not credible. That was not a balanced assessment
    of the medical evidence as part of overall credibility.

10. I accept Mr Hoshi's submission that the judge has fallen  foul  of  the
    principle in SA (Somalia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  1302  by  failing  to
    consider the medical evidence corroborative of torture as part  of  the
    whole package of evidence going to  the  question  of  credibility  and
    effectively  treated  the  medical  evidence  as  an  "add-on"  to   be
    considered after a decision on credibility  had  been  reached  on  the
    basis of the appellant's  evidence.  Thus,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the  making  of  an
    error of law and its decision cannot stand.

Decision

11. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if  IG  set  aside  the  judge's  decision.  Bearing  in  mind
    paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider
    that an appropriate course of action. I find  that  the  error  of  law
    infects the decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de
    novo with all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

12. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.




Signed   [pic]                      Date 26 September 2015


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

