

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number
AA/11154/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Centre City Tower
Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 12th July 2017
    On 2nd August 2017


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                            GURMEET SINGH KHURANA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr M Trevelyan (Counsel, instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Ms H Aboni (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa who allowed the Appellant's appeal in a
   decision promulgated on the 23rd of January 2017. The Judge had accepted
   that the Appellant was a national of Afghanistan and his account of his
   treatment there and went on to find that the Appellant's wife was also a
   national of Afghanistan and not of India as the Secretary of State
   maintained, accordingly the couple could not live in India and were
   entitled to refugee status in the UK.

2. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
   in grounds of the 27th of January 2017 which challenged the Judge's
   approach to the findings made in respect of the Appellant's wife's
   nationality. It was argued that the Judge had simply accepted the
   Appellant's assertion that his wife was not entitled to Indian
   nationality without giving reasons with reliance placed on passages cited
   from MA (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ. Permission was granted by First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Pedro on the 25th of April 2017.

3. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal the parties made submissions in
   line with their respective positions, these are recorded in the Record of
   Proceedings. Mr Trevelyan argued that the situation in the case of MA
   (Ethiopia) was different from that which obtained in this appeal there
   being a difference between the ability to return and whether it was
   person's actual nationality.

4. The background which was not in dispute was the Appellant's wife and her
   parents had travelled too the UK in December 2006 in Indian passports
   with visit visa that had been issued in Delhi. They had been granted
   temporary admission for enquiries to be made of the British High
   Commission in Delhi but left the UK on their return tickets at the start
   of 2007. A minute sheet from the Respondent dated the 24th of July 2014
   contained a reference to the Appellant stating his wife had been to the
   UK but with an agent and knew nothing as she was only 16.

5. Further evidence was that the Appellant and his wife had married in
   Afghanistan in April 2014 and that they had not had contact with her
   parents since shortly after the wedding. The Appellant's wife's uncle had
   made a witness statement detailing his coming from Afghanistan and being
   granted refugee status and then British Citizenship.

6. The Judge's findings are set out from paragraph 34 onwards where the
   Judge stated "I have taken into consideration of the evidence in the
   round, including findings that I made in the Appellant's father's appeal.
   I find that the Appellant is an Afghan national." In relation to the
   nationality of the Appellant's wife the Judge's findings in paragraph 37
   amount to "Having taken account of the evidence I accept that her genuine
   name is Manmeet Kaur..." and went on to accept she was from Afghanistan.

7. Put directly the findings made are bald and unreasoned. A passport is a
   document that proves itself and unless is shown to have been issued
   without authority is evidence of its contents including the nationality
   of the person holding it. The date of birth given on the Appellant's
   wife's passport of August 1986 would have made her 20 when she arrived in
   the UK and as the family was being investigated it does not appear that
   her age was questioned. Even if she was 16, and so not an adult, she was
   not so young that she would have been unaware of what was going on.
   Holding a passport giving her age as 20 she could legitimately have been
   questioned by Immigration Officers on her own which would raise how she
   would have handled that.

8. There are other features that the Judge did not address such as the
   difference in the accounts of the Appellant and his wife such as about
   who she came with. There is also the return of the family to India, if
   they came to the UK because Afghanistan was too dangerous for them it is
   difficult to see why with all the arrangements that would have been made
   asylum was not claimed by them at that time.

9. The Judge's unreasoned acceptance of the evidence in this case cannot
   stand. There were a number of issues to be addressed and resolved but
   were simply not considered in the decision. I note that the acceptance of
   the core of the Appellant's account has not been challenged by the
   Respondent and accordingly that part of the decision remains undisturbed.
   However the findings in relation to the Appellant's wife's nationality
   are flawed to the extent that they are set aside.


10. This issue requires further evidence and a detailed consideration of
   the position, legally and factually. In the circumstances I am take the
   view that it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal
   for the issue to be ventilated fully. It is not to be heard by Judge
   Gurung-Thapa.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

The decision is set aside in part in relation to the nationality of the
Appellant's wife and the ability of the Appellant and his wife to live
lawfully in India.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In remitting the case to be reheard in part I make no fee award which
remains an issue for the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 1st August 2017



