
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11569/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th September 2015                       |On 22nd September 2015        |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    d r k
                    (anonymity direction Previously Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Francis, instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Henry, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT


 1. The Appellant before me was the Secretary of State, the  Respondent  in
    the case before the First-tier Tribunal and the Respondent before me is
    the Appellant in the proceedings below.  I shall refer to  the  parties
    as they were known  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  order  to  avoid
    confusion.

 2. The Respondent appeals with permission a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Judge Onoufriou in which the judge  allowed  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Respondent's refusal of asylum, the decision of  the
    Respondent being dated 20th November 2014.

 3. The grounds of challenge as they were substantively  argued  before  me
    are that the judge failed to appreciate that there  were  issues  about
    the documents provided by the Appellant that went to their reliability.



 4. The respondent asserts that this is an error  because  the  matter  was
    live before the First-tier Tribunal because there  were  two  different
    translations of one of the documents.  The Respondent  took  the  point
    that the fact of having two different  translations  was  of  itself  a
    matter which went to the Appellant's credibility, and  accordingly  the
    judge needed to make a clear finding in respect of that matter.

 5. I am satisfied reading the decision that the judge has dealt  with  the
    issue  appropriately  at  paragraph  32.   The  judge  records  in  the
    decision, as reflected in the Record  of  Proceedings,  that  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer on the day acknowledged  that  there  was  no
    issue as to the authenticity of the documents.  The  judge  finds  that
    the documentation provided is not inconsistent, as had been  argued  by
    the Respondent in the reasons for refusal, with the  Appellant's  claim
    concerning his  position  as  Vice  President  in  the  organisation  [
    ]. An organisation the Appellant established in his country of  origin.
    The  judge  explains  that  the  document  confirming  the  Appellant's
    position as a staff member and manager refers to  [          ],  not  [
              ], and so is not undermining as the Respondent states in  the
    Reasons for refusal letter.

 6. The judge fully understood the case as it was being argued  before  him
    on the day and has reached conclusions which were open to  him  on  the
    evidence and he did not place the importance on this piece of  evidence
    that the Respondent sought to place  upon  it,  and  he  has  explained
    perfectly adequately why he took that different  view.   In  short  the
    mistranslation point fell away in the context of the  reasoning.  There
    is no merit in the suggestion made in  the  ground  that  an  error  in
    translation of the document is sufficient to  establish  perversity  in
    what is a rounded and cogent credibility finding.

 7. The Respondent takes issue with the judge's statement, paragraph 30 and
    31,  to the point that he states he is satisfied that the Appellant  is
    a Doctor,  and that his circumstances as such, are  that  he  would  be
    unlikely to contrive an asylum claim in order to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  That paragraph reads as more of a comment than a finding. The
    details of why the judge found the Appellant to be a  credible  witness
    are set out at some length, to the point that even if his understanding
    that the Appellant might easily have been able to come  to  the  United
    Kingdom in some work capacity was wrong, it does not infect his overall
    conclusions  in  respect  of  the  credibility  of  the  core  of   the
    Appellant's  account,  which  that  is  quite  firmly  based   on   the
    documentary and other evidence that the Judge has referred to.

 8. The Section 8 point raised in the grounds was not relied  upon  in  the
    hearing today but in any  event  I  take  the  view  that  the  judge's
    reasoning in accepting the Appellant's explanations for his late  claim
    are adequate, and properly set out at paragraph 34.

 9. It follows for all of the reasons that I have set out above that I find
    that the First-tier Tribunal have not materially  erred  and  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier tribunal reveals no material error of law  so
that the decision allowing the appeal stands.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

It has previously been found appropriate  that  the  Appellant  be  afforded
anonymity. Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  their  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge



