
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11438/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th August 2015                             |On 19th August 2015        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                     W M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr D Krushner (Counsel)
For the Respondents:    Mr L Tarlow (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of State   with  regard  to  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge L K Gibbs) promulgated on 1st  May  2015  by  which  it
    allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse her asylum claim and remove her to Zimbabwe.

 2. Although the Appellant before the Upper Tribunal is  the  Secretary  of
    State, for the sake of clarity and continuity I shall continue to refer
    to WM as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent  in
    this determination.

 3. The Judge allowed the appeal on asylum grounds.  The Appellant had come
    to the UK to attend a funeral and overstayed, she claimed  because  she
    received threats by phone and text from Zanu PF in Zimbabwe. The First-
    tier Tribunal accepted her claim  to  be  a  person  with  a  political
    profile, who as a musician had performed at political rallies, is  well
    known and identifiable.  The Judge also  accepted  that  she  had  been
    targeted by Zanu PF while in Zimbabwe and in  the  UK.   She  was  also
    satisfied that in her absence her family and home  had  been  targeted.
    She is from Harare.

 4. The first ground argues that the Judge failed to engage with the Letter
    of Refusal. However a reading of the Letter of Refusal makes clear,  as
    the Judge pointed out in paragraph 18 of his Decision and Reasons,  the
    Respondent rejected her claim  on  the  basis  that  her  evidence  was
    inconsistent with country background information rather  than  internal
    inconsistencies.

 5.  The  Judge  gave  reasons  for  finding  that  her  claims  were   not
    inconsistent with the background country information and thus, she  did
    engage with the Letter of Refusal.

 6. Furthermore at paragraph 21 the Judge noted that the Secretary of State
    criticised the  Appellant  for  failing  to  provide  evidence  of  the
    threatening texts.  That evidence was before the Judge in the  form  of
    transcribed texts and the phone itself on which the texts  were  shown.
    She had also produced numerous documents corroborating her claim  which
    were unchallenged by the Secretary of State.

 7. Accordingly, I find that the  Judge  did  engage  with  the  Letter  of
    Refusal and was entitled to accept the Appellant's  evidence,  for  the
    reasons she gave, and to find that she was a person  with  a  political
    profile who had been targeted both in Zimbabwe and  the  UK  and  whose
    claims fitted into what is known about Zimbabwe.

 8. Mr Tarlow argued that the Judge had not  dealt  with  the  question  of
    internal relocation.  The Secretary of State argued in  the  Letter  of
    Refusal that the Appellant could relocate safely to Bulawayo.

 9. However, at paragraph 25 and 26 of the Decision and Reasons  the  Judge
    did so.  She quoted from CM (EM country guidance; disclosure)  Zimbabwe
    CG [2013] UKUT 00059 (IAC) and I note that paragraph (7)  of  the  head
    note to CM states that the issue of what is a  person's  home  for  the
    purposes of internal relocation is to be decided as a  matter  of  fact
    and is not necessarily to be determined by reference  to  the  place  a
    person from Zimbabwe regards as his or her rural homeland. As a general
    matter, it is unlikely that  a  person  with  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in a major urban centre such as Harare will have  a  viable
    internal  relocation  alternative  to  a  rural  area  in  the  Eastern
    provinces. Relocation  to  Matabeleland  (including  Bulawayo)  may  be
    negated by discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.  In  this  case
    the Appellant was found to have a well founded fear of  persecution  in
    Harare and is Shona.

10. The Judge did thus deal adequately with internal relocation and did  so
    in accordance with country guidance.

11. While the Decision and Reasons is succinct, it deals  with  the  issues
    and reached reasoned conclusions.  Based on the  limited  challenge  to
    credibility by the Secretary of State there was  no  need  for  further
    findings.

12. The Decision and Reasons of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a
    material error of law and the Secretary of State's appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.

13.  The First-tier Tribunal having made an anonymity  direction  I  see  no
    reason not to continue it.


Signed                              Date 14th August 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


Direction regarding anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 14th August 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



