
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11051/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2016                   |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                     S A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brown of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application  for  asylum  or
         ancillary protection on 3 December 2013. His  appeal  against  that
         decision  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Parker
         following a hearing on 4 March 2014. That decision was set aside by
         Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson following a hearing on 1 October  2014.
         No findings were preserved and the matter was remitted de novo. The
         remitted appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pirrota
         ("the Judge") following a hearing on 8 June 2015. This is an appeal
         against that decision.

      2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the
         Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise,  no  report  of  these
         proceedings or any form of publication thereof  shall  directly  or
         indirectly identify  the  Appellant.  This  direction  applies  to,
         amongst others, all  parties.  Any  failure  to  comply  with  this
         direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings. I do so
         in order to avoid a likelihood  of  serious  harm  arising  to  the
         Appellant from the contents of his protection claim.

The grant of permission

      3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes granted permission  to  appeal  (7
         July 2015) on the ground that;

             "There is a clear tension between the contents of paragraph 29
             and 30 on the one hand  which  reject  outright  the  evidence
             relied upon, and those paragraphs which  preceded  them  which
             appear to contain  a  series  of  findings  that  accept  that
             evidence."

Respondent's position

      4. The Respondent asserted in her reply (16 July 2015) in essence that
         the Judge was entitled to accept some parts of the evidence but not
         others. Mr Mills relied on the rule 24 notice.

The Judges findings

      5. The Judge found as follows;

             "[21]      ...  I  conclude  that  there  are  no  significant
             discrepancies, inconsistencies or other anomalies which  would
             suggest that he  should  not  be  relied  upon  to  the  lower
             standard of proof required  of  an  Appellant.  Therefore  his
             account is more likely than not to be truthful  and  reliable,
             and his history concerning the demands by her family that  the
             Appellant marry his widowed sister-in-law is credible ...

             [22]      The Appellant's account of refusing  to  marry  her,
             she also being unwilling, is credible, given the disparity  of
             ages and their mutual disinclination, but he had already taken
             on the financial responsibility  of  the  widow  and  orphans,
             which he did not wish to shirk. It is credible  that  she  may
             have been forced to marry against her will a person of her own
             family's choosing, as her children have been cast out of their
             home to fend for themselves,  whereas  they  would  reasonably
             have been expected to remain with their mother as they are yet
             young adolescents she had married within the family. I am  not
             satisfied ... that ... he would be at  risk  of  any  untoward
             behaviour or persecution by her family if he returned  because
             there is no absolute cultural obligation on the man  to  marry
             the widow, only that she did not live unmarried  with  a  man,
             and now she has married,  normality  is  restored.  I  am  not
             satisfied  ...  that  the  objective  country  evidence  shows
             retribution carried  out  against  unwilling  bridegrooms,  no
             incidents of revenge are recited in the objective evidence  in
             these circumstances.

             [23]      I am not satisfied ... that ill feeling towards  the
             Appellant would place him at risk of ill-treatment, given that
             she continued to live for 9 months in the  same  household  as
             the Appellant after her husband's death. Even if  threats  and
             violence had been used to  try  to  force  him  to  marry,  he
             avoided  this  fate  for  several  months   and   I   am   not
             satisfied...that the family would seek him out for revenge.  I
             am not satisfied ... that a dispute centred on  the  ownership
             of land the Appellant would have inherited from his father and
             brother would engage the Refugee Convention ...,  even  if  he
             believed he was at risk of being killed to prevent his  claim,
             or that he could not access local civil justice to reclaim the
             property. I am not satisfied ... that the family would try  to
             defeat his claim or that of his nephews, as they  have  turned
             them out rather than keep them  close  and  under  control  to
             prevent them  scheming  to  obtain  the  land  ...  I  am  not
             satisfied that the authorities would not allow  the  Appellant
             protection or access to justice.

             [24]      I am not satisfied ... that there is  any  political
             element in the personalities involved, that any member of  the
             family was a high ranking official or had any influence in the
             government, even if the  Appellant  were  taken  to  a  Police
             station under duress for persuasion to marry the widow.

             [25]       The  Appellant's  claim  that  his  brother's   two
             business partners killed his brother and then tried to extract
             money from the Appellant, for a purported debt which he  could
             not pay, has been consistent and credible...As  the  Appellant
             only needed to complain about the former partners, it  is  not
             credible that he could not have lodged complaints against them
             as he claimed to have done in relation to his brother's death.

             ...

             [28]      I am not satisfied ... that he has suffered the ill-
             treatment  claimed  or  has  Post  Traumatic  Stress  Disorder
             because  of  the  paucity  of  credible,  cogent  or  reliable
             evidence to reach even the minimal standards  required  of  an
             Appellant.

             [29]      I am not satisfied ... that the documentary evidence
             is reliable or cogent. I conclude that the accounts have  been
             embellished and the documentary evidence is not  reliable.  It
             is not credible that persons demanding the debt would not take
             a valuable asset such as his house  instead  if  he  protested
             that he had no money but that they would permit  him  to  live
             there for 9 months after his brother's death without trying to
             dispossess him by force if need be.

             [30]      I am not satisfied ... that the events related  took
             place, and if they did that they do not amount to  persecution
             ... The Appellant would be able to relocate ..."

Discussion

      6. There are positive findings in [21]  regarding  his  account  being
         "more likely than not  to  be  truthful  and  reliable",  [22]  "of
         refusing to marry her, she also being unwilling" and that "she  may
         have been forced to marry against her  will",  and  [25]  that  the
         "claim that his brother's two business partners killed his  brother
         and then tried to extract money from the Appellant, for a purported
         debt which he could not pay, has  been  consistent  and  credible".
         These are entirely at odds with the negative  findings  [29]  "that
         the accounts have been embellished" and [30] it not being  accepted
         "that the events related took place".

      7. In my judgement, as set out in the grounds  seeking  permission  to
         appeal, this is not just a case of a Judge accepting some parts  of
         the evidence but rejecting others as argued in the rule 24  notice,
         but of  the  Judge  making  core  and  general  findings  that  are
         diametrically opposed. The Appellant is entitled  to  know  why  he
         lost, and, given these diametrically opposed findings, he does not.

      8. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge made a  material  error  of
         law. I set the decision aside and preserve no findings.

      9. Both representatives agreed that in those  circumstances  I  should
         remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo  hearing.
         In light of that fact that this is  the  second  remittal  and  the
         third time the First-tier Tribunal will have considered  the  case,
         it may be helpful if the case was heard by a  Designated  Judge  if
         available. The time  estimate  is  3  hours  and  a  Dari  speaking
         interpreter is required.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    The matter shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo
    hearing before a Judge other than Judge Parker and Judge Pirotta.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
12 January 2016
