
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA118342015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On  22nd June 2017                     |On 27 June 2017                     |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                              MR MBUNGU KINDUDI
                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Tettey, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge  Hillis,  promulgated  on
   the 14th December 2016, to dismiss the appeal on international protection
   grounds against the appellant's removal as  an  illegal  entrant  to  the
   United Kingdom.

2. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)  who
   was born on the 12th December 1973. His case was (and no doubt still  is)
   that, on the 30th December 2013, he  attended  with  others  at  a  group
   welcome of Paul Joseph Mukungubilia - a self-proclaimed prophet who  goes
   by the name of 'Gideon' - at Kinshasa airport. However,  this  supposedly
   peaceful event ended in a violent attempted coup  against  government  in
   which the appellant did not participate but was nevertheless subsequently
   arrested by the authorities. Fortunately for the appellant, a  friend  of
   his brother took pity upon him and arranged for his release.

3. Judge Hillis did not believe the appellant's  account.  His  reasons  for
   not doing so included the  fact  that  the  appellant's  credibility  was
   damaged by his use of a false passport in order  to  gain  entry  to  the
   United Kingdom [paragraph 16], the fact that he admitted that part of his
   reason for coming to the UK was in order to  receive  treatment  for  his
   diabetes [paragraph 21],  and  that  no  credible  explanation  had  been
   provided for how the appellant had been able to secure a copy of what  he
   claimed to be a warrant for his own arrest [paragraph  22].  Although  he
   did not abandon his criticism of these reasons, Mr Petty conceded that it
   was not perhaps the strongest part of his overarching argument  that  the
   judge had not given sufficiently clear reasons for his decision. I am  in
   any event satisfied that those particular reasons were  both  sustainable
   and reasonably open to the judge on the evidence that was before  him.  I
   therefore pass on to consider the other reasons that he gave,  which  are
   arguably more problematic.

4. At paragraph 18, the judge said this -

        "It is clear from the objective background before  me  in  both  the
        Refusal Letter and the AB [appellant's bundle] that the  Appellant's
        account of the event he claims to have been involved in, namely,  an
        intended peaceful welcome of  Gideon  on  his  arrival  at  Kinshasa
        airport is inconsistent with the known  objective  material  in  the
        media reports."

   It is right to observe that the judge was not assisted by the  fact  that
   two of the three "media reports" in  the  appellant's  bundle  (those  at
   pages 16 and 17) were apparently concerned with  events  of  an  entirely
   separate incident - one that had occurred nearly three years'  later,  on
   the 19th September 2016 - to those in which the appellant was claiming to
   have been involved on the 13th  December  2013.  However,  the  confusion
   arising from inclusion of irrelevant material in the  appellant's  bundle
   of documents rendered it all the more important  that  the  judge  should
   identify, (a) the media reports to which he was referring,  and  (b)  the
   precise respect(s) in which the appellant's account was inconsistent with
   them.

5. Paragraph 19 of the decision is equally vague  concerning  the  existence
   of supposed discrepancies between the appellant's account and the  "known
   media reports".  Indeed,  it  is  arguably  even  more  problematic  than
   paragraph 18, given that it (a) is difficult to follow (it  is  for  this
   reason that I have added words in square brackets in  the  hope  that  it
   renders it more readily intelligible), and (b) appears to  be  predicated
   upon claims that the appellant did not in fact make. It reads as  follows
   -

        "The Appellant's claim that he was [not?] arrested  at  the  airport
        [because?] it would have been difficult for the security  forces  to
        arrest  them  as  there  were  so  many  members   of   the   Church
        (approximately 20) at the airport to welcome Gideon is  inconsistent
        with the known media reports that many demonstrators/terrorists were
        killed. It is clearly not  credible  that  the  Appellant,  in  that
        situation, would be ignored by the security forces as he  sought  to
        leave the airport whilst gunshots were being heard."

6. Mr Tettey's main point was that the Appellant had never said  that  there
   were only 20 people at the event; merely that he had attended with around
   20 others in a minibus. However, I am by no means clear that this was the
   point that Judge Hillis was seeking to make. It  may  well  be  that  the
   first sentence of this paragraph was intended to make the point that  the
   media reports suggested that the security forces were  shooting  suspects
   on sight rather than arresting them. However, I  cannot  with  confidence
   say what it was that the judge intended to convey because  his  reasoning
   is simply unclear. Moreover, neither myself nor the representatives  were
   able to identify the point at which the appellant had suggested that  (a)
   the security forces would (for whatever reason) have  had  difficulty  in
   arresting him at the airport, or (b) that he was "ignored"  as  he  left.
   Such opaqueness of reasoning may again have been avoided if the judge had
   identified (i) the media report(s) to which he was referring, and (b) the
   particular respect(s) in which the appellant's account of events differed
   from them.

7. Finally, at paragraph 20, Judge Hillis said this -

        "I conclude that the Appellant's claim that he was released  by  the
        security forces because he was recognised as the brother of Mbunghui
        Ndombasi is inconsistent with the objective  media  reports  of  the
        treatment of the demonstrators/terrorists."

   This reasoning is again unclear. At a stretch, it might be interpreted to
   mean that the media reports did not admit to the possibility of  suspects
   being released at the request of friends or relatives. If  so,  it  would
   have been better state this expressly. Once again, the lack of clarity in
   this reasoning could have been avoided if the judge  had  identified  (a)
   the media report(s) to which he was referring,  and  (b)  the  particular
   respect(s) in which the appellant's account of events differed from them.

8. I have therefore concluded that the overall reasoning of  the  judge  was
   insufficiently clear for the appellant to understand why he had lost  his
   appeal  and  that  his  decision  should  therefore  be  set  aside.   In
   considering how best to proceed in re-making the decision in this appeal,
   I bear in mind that I  have  found  that  some  parts  of  Judge  Hillis'
   decisions  are  both  intelligible  and  sustainable  on   the   evidence
   (paragraph 3, above). I have nevertheless  concluded,  on  balance,  that
   none of his findings should stand. It will therefore be a matter for  the
   judge who remakes the decision to decide whether to adopt those parts  of
   Judge Hillis' reasoning that were clear and sustainable and, if so,  what
   weight to attach to them when considering the evidence as  a  whole.  The
   representatives therefore agreed that the appropriate course was to remit
   this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

Notice of Decision

9. The appeal is allowed and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
   dismiss the appeal is set aside.

10. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, sitting at  Bradford,
   for complete re-hearing before any judge other than Judge Hillis.

11. Any further directions concerning the  re-hearing  of  this  appeal  are
   reserved to the Acting Resident Judge at Bradford.

Anonymity is not directed





Signed                              Date: 23rd June 2017


Judge Kelly

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



