
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11635/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 November 2016                   |On 11 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     f b
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M McGarvey of McGarvey Immigration & Asylum
                    Practitioners Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.  The direction  is
    imposed in the interest  of  the  appellant  and  her  daughter.   This
    direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to Contempt  of  Court
    proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone who was born on 3 May  1979.
    She arrived in the United Kingdom on 5 May 2007.  On 4 April 2013,  the
    appellant claimed asylum.  The basis of her claim was (and is) that she
    has undergone female genital mutilation (FGM) and  that  on  return  to
    Sierra Leone she fears that her daughter ("J") would be subject to  FGM
    and also that she (the appellant) would be forced to work as a 'Sowei',
    which is the member of the Bondo society which undertake  circumcision,
    as her aunt is currently the Sowei in her home village.

 3. On 11 December 2014, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights.   On  that
    date, the Secretary of  State  also  made  a  decision  to  remove  the
    appellant as an overstayer under s.10 of the Asylum and Immigration Act
    1999.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 9 December 2015, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  R  E
    Barrowclough) dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 5. Although the judge made an  adverse  credibility  finding  against  the
    appellant, he accepted that she could not return to her home village as
    her daughter, J was at risk of FGM because the appellant's aunt was the
    local Sowei.

 6. Judge Barrowclough, however, found that the appellant could safely  and
    reasonably relocate to Freetown.  The  judge  was  not  satisfied  that
    there was a real risk that the appellant would be forced  to  become  a
    Sowei or that her daughter, J would be subject to FGM there.   Further,
    the judge found that it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
    appellant to relocate to Freetown with her daughter.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    total of seven grounds.  On 12 January 2016,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Pullig) granted  the  appellant  permission  to  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 8. On 19 January 2016, the Secretary of State filed  a  rule  24  response
    seeking  to  uphold  the  judge's  adverse  credibility   finding   and
    conclusion that the appellant could safely and reasonably  relocate  to
    Freetown.

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Appellant's Grounds

10. The appellant was granted permission on the seven grounds  set  out  in
    her application for permission to appeal.  Those grounds are,  to  some
    extent, overlapping but may be summarised as follows:

    (1)  The judge was wrong to  attach  "little  if  any  weight"  to  the
         appellant's evidence and to find her not to be credible.

    (2)  The judge applied an incorrect standard of proof  when  he  stated
         that the appellant must establish there is a "real and  significant
         risk" that her daughter, J would be the victim of FGM in  Freetown.



    (3)   The  judge  wrongly  required  the  appellant's  evidence  to  be
         corroborated when he said at paragraph 17 of his  determination  "I
         am inclined not to accept anything she says  as  being  true,  save
         where it is unimpeachably corroborated".

    (4)  The judge failed properly to consider the expert  evidence  of  Dr
         Harrell-Bond.

    (5)  The judge wrongly applied the case of FB (Lone Women) Sierra Leone
         [2008] UKAIT 00090.

    (6)  The judge failed to consider  fully  the  available  evidence,  in
         particular in citing  from  the  Home  Office,  Country  of  Origin
         Information Response dated 30 September 2015.

    (7)  The judge wrongly failed to consider the appellant's  claim  under
         Art 8 which was raised in the grounds of appeal.

Discussion

11. Although the judge found the appellant  not  to  be  credible,  he  did
    accept that her aunt was a practising Sowei in  her  home  village  and
    that the appellant's daughter, J would be at risk of FGM if she and the
    appellant returned there (see para 18 of the determination).

12. At para 18, the judge identified what he described as the  "real  issue
    for determination" as being:

         "Whether  it  has  been  established  that  it  is  unfair   and/or
         unreasonable for them to be returned to any part of  Sierra  Leone,
         either because the appellant will be forced into the role of Sowei,
         or because there is a real  and  significant  risk  that  [J]  will
         become a victim of FGM."

13. Central to the appellant's claim was the expert report  of  Dr  Barbara
    Harrell-Bond dated 31 August 2015.  Dr Harrell-Bond's report is, as the
    judge described, a lengthy document.  In addition to her initial report
    (at pages 60-128 of the appellant's bundle),  there  is  a  twenty-page
    addendum report dated 24 November 2015.  Both reports are, it  is  fair
    to say, supportive of the appellant's claim  both  as  to  its  factual
    veracity but also as to the risk to her  and  her  daughter  in  Sierra
    Leone.  Dr Harrell-Bond is of the opinion that the appellant could  not
    safely and reasonably return to Freetown where she would be at risk  of
    being initiated as a Sowei and her daughter, J  would  be  at  risk  of
    being forced to undergo FGM.  Dr  Harrell-Bond  expresses  the  opinion
    that the  appellant  is  uneducated,  illiterate  and  has  never  been
    gainfully employed and, as a consequence, in the absence of a family or
    network of friends would be forced to live "a life of destitution  upon
    her return to Freetown".  Dr Harrell-Bond expresses  the  opinion  that
    the Bondo societies were becoming "more common not less powerful".

14.  Dr  Harrell-Bond's  report  is,  however,   somewhat   unusual.    The
    appellant's representative at the First-tier Tribunal accepted that  it
    was "unorthodox".  Not only does the report set out, in the usual  way,
    country background information together with the  expert's  opinion  of
    what, if any, risk there would be to the  individual,  Dr  Harrell-Bond
    also engaged in some investigative work.  In particular, she engaged  a
    student ("LS") to undertake visits  to  the  appellant's  claimed  home
    village and  report  back.   She  did  so  confirming  the  appellant's
    account, in particular that she had an aunt who was the Sowei.

15. In his determination, the judge identified a number of issues  with  Dr
    Harrell-Bond's report which led him, ultimately, to give little  or  no
    weight  to  it.   The  judge's  reasons  are  at  paras  20-24  of  his
    determination as follows:

         "20.     The first thing to be said about Dr Harrell-Bond's work is
             that it is immensely long.  It runs in  total  to  112  pages,
             including appendices, of  which  21  pages  are  the  Doctor's
             'expert witness statement' (as she terms it),  while  many  of
             the appendices contain her work as well, or at least extensive
             comment from her; quite apart from the  additional  'Addendum'
             of 21 pages prepared by her in November 2015, which is annexed
             to  Ms  Morgan's  skeleton  argument.   Secondly,  it  is  not
             entirely clear whether it is in fact a witness statement or an
             expert report.  On the one hand, there is the  usual  expert's
             attestation clause (at page 18 in  the  'subjective'  bundle),
             reciting her duty to the court rather than a party, with which
             she believes she has complied.  Additionally, Dr  Harrell-Bond
             is a retired academic, rather than anyone personally  involved
             in  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  and  her  evidence  is
             essentially opinion evidence, based upon what the Appellant or
             others have told her or upon her own knowledge and experience.
              On the other hand, Dr Harrell-Bond has undertaken a number of
             steps, including commissioning one if not more field trips  in
             Sierra Leone and  contacting  interviewing  and  corresponding
             with a large  number  of  people,  whether  potential  helpful
             sources  or  authorities  in  the  field  or  friends  of  the
             Appellant, which fall outside the usual ambit of an expert and
             are more akin  to  conducting  an  investigation.   Since  the
             Doctor did not come to the appeal hearing (I don't believe she
             was asked to attend), it was not possible to  try  to  resolve
             these matters in oral evidence.  That is perhaps  unfortunate,
             since the status or nature of Dr Harrell-Bond's involvement in
             the  appeal  is  important,  and  goes  beyond  mere  semantic
             differences  between  a  witness  statement  and  an  expert's
             report.

         21.  What Ms Jefferies highlighted in her closing submissions,  and
             what concerns  me,  are  problems  with  the  methodology  and
             approach adopted.  For example, some of the  most  significant
             opinions and conclusions Dr Harrell-Bond comes  to  depend  on
             the reports prepared by a young student in Sierra Leone called
             LS, who was commissioned by the Doctor and undertook two field
             trips to the  Appellant's  village  in  August  2015,  meeting
             amongst others the Appellant's elder children  and  her  aunt.
             The resulting reports, which are heavily  relied  upon  by  Ms
             Morgan in her skeleton argument, are in the subjective  bundle
             at pages 52 to 54.  We are not told of LS's qualifications  or
             fitness to undertake  this  task,  whether  she  had  previous
             experience of similar  undertakings,  and  how  and  when  she
             recorded and transcribed what she did  and  the  conversations
             that took place.  That  is  at  least  potentially  important,
             since in the middle paragraph on page 53, a recorded statement
             from the Appellant's aunt is quoted,  which  was  subsequently
             interpreted  (by  Dr  Harrell-Bond)  as  a   threat   by   the
             Appellant's aunt that the Appellant must become  a  Sowei,  or
             apparently face serious violence; albeit there is  nothing  in
             the report to indicate that  the  Appellant's  aunt  was  then
             still operating  as  a  practising  Sowei.   As  Ms  Jefferies
             pointed out, there is no means whereby the Tribunal can assess
             or weigh that evidence - it either has to be taken on trust or
             rejected.   Additionally  I  note  that  LS  states  that  her
             mother's maiden name is [B], and that a  Ms  FS  is  given  as
             godmother  of  the  Appellant's  daughter   J   (D8   in   the
             Respondent's  bundle).   Without  necessarily  impugning  LS's
             work, there are obvious potential links between  her  and  the
             Appellant, but we are  not  told  whether  or  not  she  is  a
             relation or otherwise known to  the  Appellant,  which  is  of
             obvious  potential  significance.   This  is  only  one  of  a
             considerable number of instances where the Tribunal  is  asked
             to  accept  the  bona  fides  and  the  views  or  accounts  -
             inevitably hearsay - of third parties, with little if anything
             provided to enable it to assess that material.

         22.  Secondly, the statements and opinions of others  contacted  by
             Dr Harrell-Bond are unsupported, in the sense of the  relevant
             emails or letters being disclosed; and once again the Tribunal
             is asked to accept them without further  ado  or  enquiry.   A
             good example is the footnote at page 24,  where  a  number  of
             third parties views of the  significance  of  the  Appellant's
             tattoos are quoted (albeit incompletely in one instance)  with
             approval.  Since the tattoos might  indicate  the  Appellant's
             fitness as a future Sowei, that  is  obviously  a  significant
             issue; but as before, there is no means to assess  the  weight
             of this hearsay evidence.

         23.  Of perhaps even greater concern, it seems that Dr Harrell-Bond
             may have fallen into the trap of espousing and championing the
             Appellant's case, rather than just assisting the Tribunal with
             a detached expert opinion.  On page 27, she states:  'All  the
             evidence that I have gathered demonstrates that the  Appellant
             applied  for  asylum  the  moment  she  learned   about   it's
             provision, and willingly  registered  herself  with  the  Home
             Office.  This followed  what  can  only  be  described  as  an
             incredibly long period of intense suffering and insecurity  by
             an illiterate woman who could only communicate  in  Krio  with
             those random Sierra Leoneans whom  she  chanced  to  encounter
             ...".  With respect to Dr Harrell-Bond, that has not  in  fact
             been demonstrated, in my view; and in any event  is  a  matter
             for the Tribunal, rather than her.  On the following page, she
             continues: 'Some four months  later,  due  to  accusations  of
             having an affair with A, she  is  rendered  homeless  and  her
             period of wandering begins.  This  period  becomes  even  more
             poignant when one considers that at about this same time  (the
             Appellant learns that EL has died)'.  Also on  that  page,  an
             email from a  friend  of  the  Appellant's  about  their  time
             together  is   quoted   approvingly   and   put   forward   as
             corroboration of the Appellant's account, without the document
             being disclosed.

         24.  From  the  history  of  her  qualifications,  Dr  Harrell-Bond
             founded and directed the  Refugee  Studies  Centre  at  Oxford
             University from 1982 to 1996, when she retired.   Since  then,
             she has  undertaken  further  research  and  work  in  refugee
             studies, both in the UK and abroad, as she sets  out  at  page
             17.  She is an Honorary Fellow  of  Lady  Margaret  Hall,  has
             received  numerous  awards,  particularly  in  the  field   of
             anthropology, and in 2005 an  OBE  for  her  contributions  to
             refugee studies.  Distinguished though she undoubtedly  is,  I
             have  not,  I'm  afraid,  found  her  statement   helpful   in
             determining  the  issue  of  whether  the  Appellant  and  her
             daughter can be returned safely to any part of  Sierra  Leone.
             That is for the reasons already set out, and I have  to  agree
             with  Ms  Jefferies'  criticisms  of   partiality,   lack   of
             objectivity, and an excessive unsupported  reliance  on  third
             parties.  In addition, it seems to me that a good deal of  the
             reported research and other studies Dr Harrell-Bond  cites  is
             by  no  means  recent,  and  possibly  outdated;  and   having
             helpfully included the Upper Tribunal determination of  FB  in
             her appendices, it is slightly surprising that it is  only  in
             the recent Addendum that she comments on that determination at
             length and, in effect, submits that it should not be followed,
             once again more in the role of an advocate than  in  providing
             assistance  to  the  Tribunal.   All  this,  in  my  judgment,
             significantly devalues  and  undermines  her  evidence  as  an
             expert witness.  Finally, particularly since  Dr  Harrell-Bond
             has given expert evidence in the past, it is not  unreasonable
             to expect  to  see  the  email  apparently  received  from  Dr
             Fanthorpe, an expert witness in FB, in its entirety."

16. There are, in my judgment, a number of difficulties  with  the  judge's
    approach to this report.

17. First, I accept that the judge  was  entitled  to  draw  a  distinction
    between the "expert" evidence  offered  in  the  two  reports  and  the
    factual evidence given in the report, in particular as a result of  the
    enquiries of LS.  Only the former was expert evidence.  The latter  was
    factual evidence relayed by the expert (but not based on her expertise)
    from, for example, the  investigations  carried  out  on  the  expert's
    behalf by LS.  Of course, experts frequently gain first-hand experience
    of the country conditions of the country in respect of which  they  are
    an expert.  That, together with other  objective  background  evidence,
    usually forms  the  basis  for  their  expert  opinion.   The  evidence
    obtained, for example, by LS did not fall into that category as it  was
    evidence specific to the appellant's claim and was,  therefore,  to  be
    assessed, not as expert evidence or opinion, but as primary evidence.

18. However, I do not agree with the judge's view that, having  taken  this
    somewhat unusual course, Dr Harrell-Bond's expert  evidence  was  as  a
    whole  to  be  discounted.   At  para  23,  the  judge  'cherry  picks'
    statements made by Dr Harrell-Bond  which  the  judge  relies  upon  as
    demonstrating that  the  expert  was  "espousing  and  championing  the
    appellant's case" rather than providing a detached and expert  opinion.
    Even if those passages could be said, in  themselves,  to  be  of  such
    character, reading Dr Harrell-Bond's two expert reports as a whole,  it
    is clear to me that she remains on the  objective  side  of  the  line,
    consistent with her obligations as an expert, rather  than  descending,
    in effect, to be an advocate for the  appellant.   Likewise,  the  fact
    that  Dr  Harrell-Bond,  rather  unusually,  sent   a   researcher   to
    investigate the background to the appellant's claim, does not in itself
    properly lead to the conclusion that the  whole  of  Dr  Harrell-Bond's
    "expert" opinion should be disregarded.  As the  judge  points  out  in
    para 24, Dr Harrell-Bond is clearly an expert in  the  relevant  field.
    Her reports engage with her  own  background  knowledge  and  those  of
    others in assessing, for example, the risk to  the  appellant  and  her
    daughter in Freetown together with the  issue  of  whether  they  could
    reasonably relocate there.

19. Secondly, the judge's criticism in para 21 of  his  determination  that
    postulates that there may be a relationship between LS, the  researcher
    acting on behalf of Dr Harrell-Bond, and the appellant's family had  no
    evidential foundation.  It is based upon LS  identifying  her  mother's
    maiden name as the same as the appellant's and that a person  with  the
    same surname as LS being the godmother  of  the  appellant's  daughter.
    This does not appear to be an issue  which  the  judge  raised  at  the
    hearing.  There is no evidence whether the names were common or unusual
    in Sierra Leone  and  so  could  suggest  a  conflict  of  interest  or
    potential bias by LS in carrying out her research.  It was not,  in  my
    judgment, a point that the  judge  could  validly  take  without  first
    raising it with the parties and there being some  evidence  that  would
    justify a reasonable inference that it was not  coincidental  that  the
    individuals had the same surnames.

20. Thirdly, in para 20, the judge, whilst recognising the importance of Dr
    Harrell-Bond's evidence, expresses regret that she was  not  called  to
    give evidence and to resolve (if possible) some of the issues which the
    judge saw in relation to her reports.   Again,  it  was  not  suggested
    before me that this was a point raised by the judge at the hearing.  It
    is relatively unusual for an expert to be called to give oral  evidence
    outside of the context of a country guidance case.  It does occur  from
    time-to-time but, without notice that either the  respondent  or  judge
    considers that it would assist to have an expert  give  oral  evidence,
    invariably the expert will not attend to do so.  Here, in my  judgment,
    it was wrong for the judge,  in  effect,  to  look  adversely  upon  Dr
    Harrell-Bond's evidence on the basis that she had not  been  called  to
    give oral evidence.

21. For these reasons,  in  my  judgment,  the  judge  failed  properly  to
    consider Dr Harrell-Bond's two substantial reports  supportive  of  the
    appellant's claim.  I do not intend to suggest that the judge was bound
    to accept what was said in the expert report or, of course,  to  accept
    the primary evidence relayed through the report from LS.  Although,  it
    is, perhaps, noteworthy that the judge accepted  that  the  appellant's
    aunt was the Sowei in her village.  What I do say, however, is that the
    judge was not entitled to give  it  no  weight  on  the  basis  of  the
    reasons, which I  have  set  out  above  as  being  unsustainable,  and
    contained in paras 20-24 of his determination.

22. Dr Harrell-Bond's report was highly relevant to the issues of the  risk
    in, and reasonableness of return to,  Freetown;  in  other  words,  the
    issue of internal relocation. In  that  regard,  the  judge  based  his
    decision upon the case of FB.  That case  is  not  a  country  guidance
    decision and dates back to 2008.   Both  parties  put  more  up-to-date
    material before the judge, including the Home Office, Country of Origin
    Information Response dated 30 September 2015.  That cites a  number  of
    documents in response to the question being posed of whether  a  single
    mother from Freetown who was opposed to FGM would be  able  to  protect
    her  young  daughter  from  that  practice.   The  document  offers  no
    conclusions but was cited with approval by the  judge  in  para  26  as
    supporting his finding.  Of course, in doing so he had effectively  put
    to one side Dr Harrell-Bond's report.  He specifically referred  to  it
    in para 26 as one from which he did not derive "any great  assistance".
    In fact, it is clear that the judge derived no assistance from it.   In
    my  judgment,  the  risk  to   the   appellant's   daughter   and   the
    reasonableness of return to Freetown required a proper consideration of
    Dr Harrell-Bond's reports and required the judge to engage  with  those
    reports when considering the case of FB and its application by  analogy
    to the appellant and her daughter's circumstances.

23. In the light of my conclusion concerning the  judge's  mistreatment  of
    the expert reports of Dr Harrell-Bond, it is not necessary to deal with
    the remaining grounds challenging the judge's adverse decision  on  the
    appellant's asylum and humanitarian protection claim.   Some  of  those
    grounds appear to have little merit when the Judge's  determination  is
    read as a whole (Ground 2 - applied the wrong standard of proof; Ground
    3 - improperly required corroboration  of  the  appellant's  evidence).
    However, I need express no concluded view because the  judge's  failure
    properly to consider Dr Harrell-Bond's reports (and FB in  the  context
    of those reports) means that his decision to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    international protection claim involved the making of a material  error
    of law and must be set aside.  The error taints  the  entirety  of  the
    judge's adverse findings, including his  adverse  credibility  finding.
    There are obvious difficulties, which  the  judge  identified,  in  the
    appellant establishing her credibility but any finding in  that  regard
    should take into account, more fully than the judge does,  Dr  Harrell-
    Bond's reports.

24. That then leaves the judge's finding, in  the  appellant's  favour,  in
    para 18 that her daughter, J is at risk of FGM in her home  area  where
    the appellant's aunt is a  practising  Sowei.   The  judge  made  those
    positive findings despite his otherwise adverse view of  the  appellant
    and Dr  Harrell-Bond's  reports.   I  see  no  reason  to  deprive  the
    appellant of those positive findings.

25.  Consequently,  the  outstanding  issue  as  regards  the   appellant's
    international protection claim is whether she can safely and reasonably
    internally relocate to Freetown.

26. In relation to that, it is likely that the appellant's  credibility  as
    well as a detailed consideration of the background evidence and  expert
    reports will be crucial.  Given the extent of  the  evidence  and  fact
    finding required,  despite  Mr  McGarvey's  request  that  this  appeal
    remains in the Upper Tribunal to be remade, I  am  satisfied  that  the
    appropriate disposal of the appeal is to remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to decide the issue of internal relocation, in  the  light  of
    the preserved positive finding about risk in her home area, based  upon
    all the evidence.

27. In addition, the appellant did raise Art 8 in  her  grounds  of  appeal
    although there does not appear to have been any reliance upon Art 8  at
    the hearing.  That, of course, forms the substance of ground 7  of  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal.  In view of the fact that the appeal  is
    to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, the issue of Art  8  remains
    open if the appellant seeks to  rely  upon  it  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Decision

28. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal involved the making of a material error of  law.
    The decision is set aside.

29. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
    judge other than Judge R E Barrowclough.  The decision is to be  remade
    on the basis set out above in paras 23-28.




                                 Signed




                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                                 Date:
