
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/11621/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 November 2016                  |On 10 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

                           THE HON. LORD MATTHEWS
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     kn
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. J. Butterworth, Counsel instructed by Jein
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z. Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Garro, promulgated on 22 August  2016,  in  which  she
    refused the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.


 2. We make an anonymity direction, continuing that made in the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "Having accepted the majority of the appellant's  claim  including  his
    account of being detained in Sri Lanka, it is arguable that the  First-
    tier Tribunal's findings on likely continued interest/prospective  risk
    are inconsistent with the background evidence."


 4. We heard submissions  from  both  representatives  following  which  we
    announced that we found that the decision  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law, and that full reasons would follow.


Error of law decision

 5. In paragraph 40 of the decision the judge accepts  that  the  Appellant
    suffers from PTSD. At paragraph 41 she states: "Taking into account his
    likely mental state at the time of his interview, I do  not  find  that
    his credibility is undermined by any inconsistencies noted  during  his
    interview".


 6. In paragraph 44 she states:


    "Having considered the objective evidence, I find the appellant's claim
    that he was forcibly recruited by the LTTE during the civil war and was
    some 4 years later, detained and tortured,  is  externally  consistent,
    and is in  fact  supported  by  the  background  evidence  in  material
    respects."


 7. In paragraph 48 the judge accepts the expert opinion of the Appellant's
    scars.  She  finds  that  Dr.  Martin's  report  "adds  weight  to  the
    appellant's claim that he was detained and was  physically  abused  and
    tortured during his detention."  She also accepts  that  the  Appellant
    was released on payment of a bribe (paragraph 49).


 8. There was no challenge by the Respondent to  the  judge's  findings  of
    fact in the appeal before us.  We find that the detention  and  torture
    of the Appellant took place in 2013, four years after the  end  of  the
    civil war in Sri Lanka.


 9. Paragraph 7(a) of the headnote  to  GJ  and  Others  (post  civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) states:


    "The current categories of persons  at  real  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in detention or otherwise,
    are:  (a)     Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
    the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or  are
    perceived to have a significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil
    separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal of  hostilities  within
    Sri Lanka."


 10. We were referred to paragraph 20 of  Haci  Demirkaya [1999]  EWCA  Civ
     1654.  This quotes from MacDonalds Immigration Law and Practice:


    "Past persecution substantially supports the  well-foundedness  of  the
    fear in the absence of a significant change of circumstances".


    It also quotes Professor Hathaway, The Law of Refugee Status, page 88:


    "Where  evidence  of  past  maltreatment   exists,   however,   it   is
    unquestionably an excellent indicator of the fate  that  may  await  an
    applicant upon return to her home. Unless there has been a major change
    of circumstances within that country that makes prospective persecution
    unlikely,  past  experience  under  a  particular  regime   should   be
    considered probative of future risk...


    In sum, evidence of individualised  past  persecution  is  generally  a
    sufficient, though not a mandatory, means of  establishing  prospective
    risk."


11. In paragraph 22 of Demirkaya it states:


    "In my judgment, if it is the opinion of the Tribunal  that  there  has
    been such a significant change that the appellant is no longer at risk,
    it is incumbent upon them to explain why this is so.  In the absence of
    such explanation and reasoning, it seems to me there may be a real risk
    that someone who, because of his suspected association  with  the  PKK,
    was subjected to such appalling treatment before he fled  the  country,
    will suffer more than transient ill-treatment on arrival at the airport
    and in the day or so thereafter that he  is  detained.  Accordingly,  I
    have come to the conclusion that the Tribunal's  conclusion  cannot  be
    sustained.


12. The First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellant had been detained  and
    tortured in Sri Lanka in 2013.  Following the case  of  Demirkaya,  the
    judge  was  then  required  to  point  to  a  significant   change   of
    circumstances which would indicate that the Appellant would  no  longer
    be at risk.  Failing this, his past detention  and  torture  should  be
    considered probative of his future risk.


13. In paragraph 68 the judge states:


    "The appellant will be returning to a Sri Lanka different to the one he
    left.  There is a new government in Sri  Lanka  and  according  to  the
    objective evidence, the situation in Sri Lanka is much improved."


14. However, there is no reference to any of the objective  evidence  which
    has led the judge to the conclusion that the situation in Sri Lanka  is
    much  improved.   Earlier  in  the  decision  she   quotes   from   the
    Respondent's guidance, the "Country Report: Sri Lanka: Tamil Separatism
    - July 2016".  (It was established at the hearing before  us  that  the
    correct date is August 2016.)  She quotes paragraphs 6.1.2,  6.1.3  and
    6.1.8.  However, we find that this evidence does not indicate that  the
    situation in Sri Lanka is "much  improved".   Paragraph  6.1.2  of  the
    Respondent's guidance quotes the Freedom House Report, Freedom  in  the
    World 2015 - Sri Lanka, 19 June 2015, which states:


    "Former LTTE fighters and their social circles  face  special  scrutiny
    and  are  repeatedly  questioned   by   authorities,   infiltrated   by
    intelligence personnel, and encouraged to inform on  their  associates.
    Security forces have engaged in abusive practices, including  arbitrary
    arrest, extrajudicial execution, forced disappearance, custodial  rape,
    torture,  and  prolonged  detention  without  trial,   all   of   which
    disproportionately affect Tamils."


15. It is not clear to what objective evidence the judge  is  referring  in
    paragraph 68, but if this is the  evidence,  it  does  not  lead  to  a
    conclusion that the situation is much improved, or that there has  been
    a significant change in circumstances.  Further, as  submitted  by  Mr.
    Butterworth,  the  judge  selectively  quoted  from  the   Respondent's
    guidance.  For example, she did not  refer  to  paragraph  6.1.4  which
    quotes from the Human Rights Watch Annual Report 2016.  This states:


    "However, the government took no significant measures to  end  impunity
    for security force abuse, including police use of torture.  At time  of
    writing  the  government  also  had  not  yet  repealed  the  draconian
    Prevention of Terrorism Act  (PTA)  despite  promises  to  do  so,  and
    continued to detain people under  it.   Following  a  sustained  hunger
    strike by an estimated 200 PTA detainees  the  government  in  November
    released some on bail, sent others for rehabilitation  and  pledged  to
    charge and try the rest."


16. We were also referred to paragraph 6.6.3 of the Respondent's  guidance.
    This quotes from the International  Truth  and  Justice  Project  which
    states:


    "On paper the plan looks impressive but the reality on  the  ground  in
    the former conflict areas tells a very different story.   Human  rights
    violations  by  the  security  forces  continue  with  impunity  and  a
    predatory climate against Tamils prevails.  Tamils with  tenuous  links
    to the LTTE or low-level cadres continue  to  be  targeted  along  with
    their families.  Victims and  witnesses  rightfully  fear  that  coming
    forward will endanger their lives and those of their families."


17. We find that the evidence does not show that  the  situation  is  "much
    improved" in Sri Lanka, nor that there has been a significant change of
    circumstances demonstrated for the purposes of Demirkaya.  There is  no
    evidence of the absence of a risk that the Appellant will  be  tortured
    again, bearing in mind that the  judge  has  accepted  the  Appellant's
    evidence of his past persecution.  The background evidence, either that
    cited by the judge, or that which was before her but to which she  does
    not refer, does not indicate a situation in Sri Lanka  which  is  "much
    improved".  On the contrary, it indicates that torture is  still  being
    practised by the security forces and  that  there  is  still  arbitrary
    arrest and prolonged detention of Tamils in Sri Lanka.


18. We find that, given that the judge found that the  Appellant  had  been
    detained and tortured in 2013, after the end of the civil war, she  had
    to show that there had been a significant change of circumstances which
    made his prospective persecution unlikely.  The judge has found no such
    change,  and  indeed  the  only  evidence  cited  by  her,   from   the
    Respondent's own guidance, points to a situation where torture is still
    prevalent in  Sri  Lanka.   We  found  this  failure  to  identify  any
    significant change in circumstances in Sri Lanka to be a material error
    of law.


19. Further, we find that the judge erred in law by failing to  follow  the
    country guidance case of GJ.  In paragraph 50 the  judge  states  that,
    although she accepts the Appellant was detained, she finds that  as  he
    "was never charged with any offence, never went to court, and  was  not
    released on bail, he is unlikely to be placed on any kind of record  or
    data base and the authorities would have no interest in him beyond  his
    detention."


20. In paragraph 51, she states:


    "I conclude from this evidence that if  the  authorities  had  continue
    [sic] to have an interest in the  appellant  he  would  not  have  been
    released without any conditions.  I find from  the  objective  evidence
    that if the Sri Lankan authorities has [sic] a continuing  interest  in
    any person, then those persons are charged and is unlikely to have been
    released even on payment of a bribe."


21. We were referred to paragraphs 146 and 275 of GJ.   In  paragraph  275,
    with reference to Mr. Anton Punethanayagam's evidence, it states:


    "[...] where his evidence concerns the criminal processes in Sri Lanka,
    we consider that it is useful and reliable.  We take particular account
    of his view that the seriousness of any charges against  an  individual
    are not determinative of whether a bribe can be paid, and  that  it  is
    possible to leave through the airport  even  when  a  person  is  being
    actively sought."


22. In paragraph 146(27), setting out  Mr.  Punethanayagam's  evidence,  it
    states:


    "The bribery is very common in the IDP camps as well as  the  detention
    centres from which even known LTTE leaders have managed  to  escape  on
    payment of bribes.  Hence it cannot be argued that only people  of  low
    interest to the authorities are able to secure their release through  a
    bribe. In my opinion, it is plausible that the  detainee  was  released
    following the payment of  a  bribe,  even  if  of  significant  adverse
    interest to the authorities. It is unlikely that the person who accepts
    the bribe would  access  the  detainee's  record  and  change  them  as
    released or no longer wanted.   Hence  such  cases  would  normally  be
    recorded as escaped from detention  in  the  database  of  the  Police.
    Subsequently an absconder action will be commenced and  the  detainee's
    details would be passed to the National Intelligence Bureau."


23. It was accepted by Ms Ahmad that the judge's finding  in  paragraph  51
    was inconsistent with the finding in GJ that  the  seriousness  of  any
    charge against an individual is not determinative of whether or  not  a
    bribe could be paid.  We find that the judge erred when she stated that
    the Appellant would not have been released without  any  conditions  if
    the authorities had continued to have an interest in him.  We find that
    the same applies to the  judge's  finding  in  paragraph  50  that  the
    Appellant would not be on any database as having escaped.  GJ  accepted
    the evidence of the expert that any person who was released on  payment
    of a bribe would be likely recorded as having escaped and placed  on  a
    database.


24. Following on from these findings, in paragraph 52 the judge states that
    she does not accept that the Sri Lankan authorities have been harassing
    the Appellant's wife.


    "Based on my finding that the appellant was of no further  interest  to
    the authorities following his release, I do not  accept  that  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities would  have  the  appellant's  wife  signing  on  or
    continuously harassing her and his daughter  about  the  appellant.   I
    therefore do not accept the  appellant's  evidence  on  this  point  as
    credible."


    In paragraph 62 she again refers to the fact that there is no  interest
    in the Appellant's family and concludes that the Appellant's name would
    not be on a watch list.


25. The judge's finding that the authorities would have no interest in  the
    Appellant's family is based on her findings in  paragraphs  50  and  51
    that the Appellant was of  no  further  interest  to  the  authorities.
    However, we have found above that the judge was not  entitled  to  make
    these findings as they run contrary to the findings  in  GJ.   Further,
    the judge states that she does not accept the Appellant's  evidence  on
    this point as credible.  However, there had been  no  previous  adverse
    credibility findings  against  the  Appellant,  and  it  was  only  the
    Appellant's evidence that his wife had been harassed.  No  reasons  are
    given for not finding the Appellant credible on this point,  except  by
    reference to GJ, which we have found above was not correctly followed.


26. We find that the decision involves the making of a  material  error  of
    law in the judge's  failure  to  demonstrate  that  there  had  been  a
    significant change in circumstances in Sri Lanka such  as  to  indicate
    that the Appellant's prospective persecution was unlikely.  Further  we
    find that the judge erred in law in her failure to correctly apply  the
    case of GJ in relation to the continuing interest of the authorities in
    the Appellant following his release on payment of a bribe.


Re-making


27. It was agreed at the hearing that  we  could  proceed  to  re-make  the
    decision on the basis of the evidence before us, given that  there  was
    no dispute about the facts.


 28.      Paragraph 7(a) of the headnote  to  GJ  states  that  one  of  the
     categories of persons at real risk are "individuals  who  are,  or  are
     perceived to be, a threat to the integrity of Sri  Lanka  as  a  single
     state because they are, or are perceived to have a significant role  in
     relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a
     renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka."


29. We find that the Appellant was arrested, detained and tortured  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities in 2013.  We find that he was  arrested  because
    he was perceived to want to establish the LTTE again.  We were referred
    to Q153 of his asylum interview where, in response to the question "Why
    were you arrested?", he replied "They told me you are in  the  LTTE....
    and said I want to establish  the  LTTE  again".   There  has  been  no
    challenge to the Appellant's credibility.  The judge in the  First-tier
    Tribunal found that inconsistencies in his account  did  not  undermine
    his overall credibility, given his diagnosis of PTSD (paragraph 41).


30. We find that  the  Appellant  was  released  on  payment  of  a  bribe.
    Following the case of GJ, we find that this is not determinative of any
    interest which the authorities might have had in him.  We find that the
    Appellant's family have been harassed by the authorities in  Sri  Lanka
    who are looking for the Appellant.


31. We therefore  find  that  the  Appellant  was  arrested,  detained  and
    tortured in 2013 because of his previous involvement with the LTTE, and
    that he was accused by the authorities of trying to establish the  LTTE
    again.  We find that he was released on payment of a bribe.   Following
    the evidence of the expert in GJ we find that his name is likely to  be
    on a database as having escaped from detention.  We attach no weight to
    the fact that he was not charged with any offence.  We  find  that  the
    authorities are still interested in him because he is perceived to want
    to start the LTTE again.


32. We find that the background evidence provided including, significantly,
    that from the Respondent herself in the form of the Country Information
    and Guidance, Sri Lanka: Tamil separatism: August 2016, indicates  that
    the situation in Sri Lanka has  not  significantly  changed.   In  this
    regard we were referred to paragraphs 6.1.2, 6.1.4  and  6.6.3  of  the
    guidance, as set out above.


33. We were further referred to paragraph  6.6.8,  which  quotes  from  the
    International Truth and Justice Project Report.  This states:


    "During interrogation by the Sri Lankan security forces several victims
    were falsely accused of working to restart the  LTTE  or  bringing  the
    country into disrepute by talking about what happened in  the  war  and
    its aftermath... "


34. It is an established principle of  asylum  law  that  past  persecution
    provides a serious indication of a well-founded  fear  of  persecution.
    This is made clear in Demirkaya which states that only when  there  has
    been a significant change of  circumstances  should  it  be  considered
    unlikely that past experience is probative of  future  risk.   We  find
    that there is no evidence of  such  a  change.   The  evidence  of  the
    Respondent shows that anyone who is perceived as having been engaged in
    post-conflict Tamil separatism is likely to  be  arrested  and  falsely
    accused of such involvement.


35. We find, taking into account all of the evidence,  that  the  Appellant
    falls within the category of persons at risk set out in paragraph  7(a)
    of the headnote to GJ.  Accordingly we  find  that  the  Appellant  has
    shown that there is a real risk that  he  will  suffer  persecution  on
    return to Sri Lanka, and his appeal succeeds on asylum grounds.


Decision


36. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and we set it aside.


37. We re-make the decision  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 10 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

