
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number AA/11289/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 July 2016                                |On 6 October 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          The Hon MR JUSTICE WARBY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                  EYOB [W]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A Burrett.

For the Respondent: Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS



   1. The appellant was born on 24 April 1996. He has therefore just reached
      20 years of age. His case is that he is  from  campo  Sudan  Assab  in
      Eritrea, but moved to Ethiopia at a young age. He claims to have  left
      Ethiopia for Sudan 2 years after that, from  whence  he  travelled  to
      Greece, where he remained for some years.  He arrived  in  the  UK  in
      August 2012, at the age of 16, and applied for asylum. That claim  was
      refused, but he was granted temporary leave to remain. His application
      for further leave to remain due to a risk of  persecution  in  Eritrea
      was refused by the respondent on 8 July 2015. The  Appellant  appealed
      to the First Tier Tribunal.   By a  determination  promulgated  on  29
      April 2016 FTT  Judge  Khan  dismissed  that  appeal.   The  applicant
      appealed against the decision of Judge  Khan,  by  permission  of  FTT
      Judge Lambert.

                                   Issues

   2. The main ground of appeal was that the FTTJ (1) failed  adequately  to
      consider expert evidence relevant to  the  issue  of  the  applicant's
      nationality, which is said to be the "core" issue.  Other  grounds  of
      appeal, some of which are inter-related with the  first  ground,  were
      that the Judge (2) failed to  give  the  appellant,  an  unaccompanied
      minor at the time he arrived, the benefit of any doubt  in  accordance
      with KS (benefit of the doubt) [2014] UKUT 552 (IAC);  (3)  considered
      credibility from his own viewpoint rather than that of the appellant's
      culture; and (4) failed to give any or any adequate  reasons  for  his
      finding that the appellant was not at risk of persecution.

                               Our conclusions

   3. At the conclusion of the hearing we announced our conclusion that  the
      FTTJ had erred in law. After argument, we  directed  that  the  matter
      should be remitted for re-hearing before an FTT Judge.  We had  found,
      for the reasons we give below, that the first  ground  of  appeal  was
      made out. In those circumstances is  not  necessary  for  us  to  make
      findings on the other grounds of appeal.

                                   Reasons

   4. To set the issue in its context, it  is  necessary  to  fill  in  some
      further key background facts. The appellant applied  for  asylum  upon
      his arrival in the UK, and attended an AIU appointment on 7  September
      2012, having already completed  a  pre-appointment  questionnaire.  He
      made a detailed statement regarding his claim on 4 October  2012,  and
      attended a substantive interview on 14 May 2013.

   5. The appellant's claim for asylum was based on a  fear  of  persecution
      due to three factors: (i) his alleged Pentecostal  Christian  beliefs;
      (ii) being considerd a draft evader;  and  (ii)  having  left  Eritrea
      illegally.  The issue of his true nationality was certainly important.
      After he made his application for further  leave  to  remain,  he  was
      asked by the respondent to take place in a direct  analysis  interview
      conducted by Verified AB. This took place on 29 January 2015.

   6. The expert report of Verified AB, dated 3 February 2015, contained the
      following passages of particular relevance to this appeal.

   1) In the section headed "Assessment  -  claimed  linguistic  community",
      this was said:-







         "3.1. Hypothesis

         The hypothesis is that the person belongs to an Amharic  linguistic
         community that occurs in Assab, Eritrea.

         3.2. The linguistic community

         Amharic has a limited number of  distinctive  dialects.   The  most
         important ones are the dialect of Addis Ababa ...  The  dialect  of
         Addis Ababa is the prestige variety (Hudson.1997.p457)

         Amharic is, according the analyst, spoken in Assab,  although  this
         city is not situated within the core  area  of  Amharic,  which  is
         located entirely within the borders of Ethiopia.  In Sudan  Amharic
         is not an indigenous language.  Assab is chosen as the  hypothesis,
         although the person only spent his first 7-10 years there."

   2) In the "Analysis" section, under "3.3.1 General Comments", the  report
      said:

         "The interviewee speaks  Amharic  at  native  level.  No  signs  of
         imitation, such as hesitation or inconsistency, have been  observed
         in the person's speech."

   3) In the Analysis section, under 3.3.2. Phonology, there as a series  of
      findings that the  appellant  uses  various  language  forms  in  ways
      "consistent with Addis Ababa dialect".

   4) Under "Other comments" at 3.3.6 the report said:

         "The  interviewee  was,  according  to  the   analyst,   not   very
         cooperative, which has limited the number of features and  examples
         in the report.  During the first part of the  interview  he  showed
         evidence of manipulating his speech, consisting in trying to  speak
         Amharic with a Tigrinya accent."

   5) In Section 3.4, headed "Results", the report said this:

         "The hypothesis is that the person belongs to an Amharic linguistic
         community that occurs in Assab, Eritrea.

         The language use of the  person  is  consistent  with  Addis  Ababa
         dialect of Amharic.  This dialect, according to  the  analyst,  can
         occur in Assab as well.  The  interviewee  was,  according  to  the
         analyst, not very cooperative, which  has  limited  the  number  of
         features and  examples  in  the  report,  calling  for  a  cautious
         assessment.

         To the extent given below, the subject's speech in  the  sample  is
         consistent with the hypothesis about linguistic community ...




         ...

         + 2.     The language analysis clearly suggests  that  the  results
             obtained  most  likely  are  consistent  with  the  linguistic
             community as stated in the hypothesis."

   7. The Home Office later stated in correspondence that the results of the
      AB analysis "provide evidence that you may not be  Eritrean".  In  the
      refusal letter of  8  July  2015  the  respondent  said  that  it  was
      determined  from  the  language  analysis  findings  of  AB,  and  the
      objective information that the  appellant's  demographics  were  "more
      likely to be that  of  an  Ethiopian  citizen  and  that  is  why  you
      manipulated your speech to be that of a Tigrayan accent."

The appeal hearing and the FTTJ's conclusions

   8. The appellant gave oral evidence, including assertions that he  feared
      torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in Eritrea  if
      he returned there.  He was cross-examined, in part  on  the  basis  of
      what were said to be inconsistent answers  given  in  interview.   The
      appellant was represented by Mr Burrett, who appeared again for him on
      this appeal. The AB Report was in evidence, and its  significance  was
      debated between the parties. Mr Burrett  placed  reliance  on  the  AB
      Report, and in particular the Results section. His submission was that
      this section was supportive of his client's case.

   9. The key features of the FTTJ's conclusions can be summarised  in  this
      way:

   1) The appellant was not a credible or consistent witness

   2) He was not Eritrean. He was Ethiopian

   3) He was not a Pentecostal Christian.

   4) Pentecostal Christians do not face any problems in Ethiopia

   5) He had not been previously persecuted in Eritrea and was not  at  risk
      of persecution if returned. He was  not  at  real  risk  of  treatment
      contrary to arts 2 and 3 of the Convention. He would not face any real
      risk of suffering harm if returned to his country of origin.

   6) The appellant was an economic migrant not a refugee.

   7) The whole of his time in the UK had been spent in the  knowledge  that
      he had no right to settle.

  10. It is plain that  the  FTTJ  took  a  strongly  adverse  view  of  the
      appellant's credibility. At [43], stating his overall  conclusions  on
      the appeal, he said: "I find that the appellant has made up his  claim
      for asylum, fabricating the whole evidence and  therefore  is  not  at
      real risk of facing treatment contrary to Articles 2 and 3 of ECHR."

The Grounds of Appeal

  11.  No  issue  is  taken  with  the  FTTJ's  summary  of  the  applicable
      principles, which is set  out  in  paragraphs  [12]  to  [15]  of  the
      Determination. The appeal turns on criticisms of his reasoning in  the
      central section of the Determination, under the heading  "Findings  of
      Credibility".  In this section at paragraph [34] the FTTJ said this:

         "The core of the appellant's case is  that  his  father  had  taken
         another wife who did  not  get  on  with  him  and  his  uncle  had
         converted him to the Pentecostal faith which he could not  practice
         in Eritrea.  He spent a number of years in Ethiopia  and  then  his
         uncle arranged for him to go to Greece,  where  he  spent  5  to  6
         years.  He was put in a refugee camp with other Ethiopians, he  was
         beaten in Greece.  Because he was young, other Eritreans put  money
         together to send him to France, from there he took a lorry  to  the
         UK where he  was  arrested  exiting  it.   I  have  considered  the
         appellant's evidence in light of his age,  in  particular  when  he
         entered the UK."

  12. At paras [35] and [36] of the Determination the FTTJ made adverse
      credibility findings based on the appellant's testimony before him,
      and inconsistent statements. At [37] the Judge said this:

         "The appellant states  even  though  his  father  was  an  Eritrean
         national, he spoke to him in the Amahric language which  is  mainly
         spoken by the Ethiopian nationals,  although  Eritreans  living  in
         Ethiopia also speak with there own language, Tigyrian.   I  do  not
         accept the appellant's evidence that his father would  have  spoken
         to  him  in  Amahric.   The  language  analysis  report  shows  the
         appellant was trying to  On the evidence before me I find that  the
         appellant is an Ethiopian national and not a citizen of Eritrea  as
         she claims.  I come to  my  findings  because  of  the  appellant's
         contradictory  evidence  with  regards  to  her  place  of   birth,
         schooling, language spoken to her by her parents.  I do not  accept
         the appellant's evidence that she is an Eritrean national"

  13. These paragraphs are set out above in precisely the form in which they
      appeared in the Determination.  At para  [38]  the  Judge  pointed  to
      further contradictions, in relation  to  the  evidence  regarding  the
      appellant's claimed Pentecostal faith.

  14. In his Grounds of Appeal Mr  Burrett  criticises  paragraph  [34]  for
      misunderstanding the core issue, when  stating  that  the  appellant's
      case was that his father had taken another wife who  did  not  get  on
      with him. The core issue, submits  Mr  Burrett,  was  the  appellant's
      nationality. This in our  view  is  a  misplaced  semantic  point.  It
      involves a misreading of the FTTJ's description of  what  amounted  to
      the "core" of the A's case. It is not just the first sentence but  the
      entire paragraph that was intended as a summary of that "core" case.

  15. But even if nationality was not the only issue, it was a  core  issue.
      And in the light of that, Mr Burrett's critique of paragraph [37]  has
      force.  There are essentially two limbs to that  critique.  First,  he
      points to the patent flaws in the paragraph: there  is  an  incomplete
      sentence in the middle, and the last  three  sentences  mis-state  the
      appellant's gender.  They point at  best  to  sloppiness,  submits  Mr
      Burrett. We would not place  undue  weight  on  the  mis-statement  of
      gender. This is in substance no more than a typographical  error.  Nor
      does the unfinished sentence seem to us a matter of great moment.   It
      is plain, in our view, that the FTTJ intended to refer to the  finding
      in paragraph 3.3.6 of the AB Report that there  was  evidence  of  the
      appellant  "trying  to  speak  Amharic  with  Tigrinya  accent"   (our
      emphasis). The flaws in paragraph [37], though regrettable, would  not
      be enough to justify the setting aside of the Determination.

  16. It is the second limb of Mr Burrett's critique  that  has  led  us  to
      conclude that the Determination should be set aside. He complains that
      the only reference  to  the  AB  Report  that  can  be  found  in  the
      Determination is the unfinished sentence in paragraph [37].  The Judge
      entirely failed to engage with other aspects of the AB Report, and  in
      particular the "Results" section at  3.4.   He  failed  altogether  to
      address Mr Burrett's submission,  that  this  section  of  the  Report
      supports the appellant's case that he is from Eritrea.  At  root,  the
      complaint is of a failure to give  any  reasons  for  rejecting  those
      submissions and therefore of a failure to give adequate reasons.

  17. In our view this is a justified criticism.  Although it is  trite  law
      that a Judge is not required to address every  argument  addressed  to
      him, there is a duty "to explain the tribunal's assessment of the more
      important pieces of evidence and to provide reasons  for  choosing  to
      give (as the case may be) no, little, moderate or  substantial  weight
      thereto": MK (Pakistan) [2013]  UKUT   641  (IAC).  This  was  in  our
      judgment a central part of the appellant's case which should have been
      directly addressed as part of the Judge's reasons.  We also agree with
      Mr Burrett that if the Judge had accepted his submissions about the AB
      Report  that  might  have  had  a  bearing  on  the  Judge's   overall
      conclusions on credibility,  despite  the  emphatic  nature  of  those
      conclusions.

  18. As Mr Norton has pointed out for the respondent, it can be argued that
      the AB Report is equivocal on the issue of origin or nationality.  The
      conclusion is not that the evidence points to the  appellant  being  a
      native of Assab.  The  language  under  examination  is  Amharic,  the
      language of Ethiopia. The conclusion is that the  appellant's  use  of
      that language is "consistent with Addis Abbaba  dialect  of  Amharic".
      The link with Assab, and the reason the use of language is  consistent
      with the hypothesis, is provided by the evidence of the analyst.  This
      was that the Addis Abbaba dialect "can  occur"  in  Assab  "as  well".
      However, as Mr Norton also very fairly acknowledged  in  answer  to  a
      question from the Tribunal, it cannot be said that it would have  been
      perverse for the Judge to conclude that the report supports  the  view
      that the appellant is from Eritrea.  It is not for  this  Tribunal  to
      engage in fact finding on such an  issue.  Restraint  is  particularly
      appropriate in a case such as this, where  the  outcome  turns  on  an
      overall assessment of credibility, and the point at issue is  but  one
      facet of the kaleidoscope.

  19. It is for these reasons that we determined that  the  Judge  erred  in
      law, set aside the Determination and remitted it for re-hearing before
      another FTT Judge. We did so with  regret,  because  the  result  will
      inevitably  be  needless  delay  and  additional  cost.   We  are  not
      convinced that such a situation need occur in  future.  In  English  v
      Emery Reimbold & Strick [2002] EWCA Civ, [2002] 1 WLR 2409  the  Court
      of Appeal considered the procedure that should  be  adopted  where  an
      appellant complains of  a  failure  to  give  adequate  reasons.  Lord
      Phillips MR said this:

       "24 We are not greatly attracted by the suggestion that a  judge  who
       has given inadequate reasons should be invited to have a second  bite
       at the cherry. But we are much less  attracted  at  the  prospect  of
       expensive appellate proceedings on the ground  of  lack  of  reasons.
       Where the judge who has heard  the  evidence  has  based  a  rational
       decision on it, the successful party will suffer an injustice if that
       decision is appealed, let alone set aside, simply because  the  judge
       has not included in his judgment adequate reasons for  his  decision.
       The appellate court will not be in as good a position  to  substitute
       its decision, should it decide that this course is viable,  while  an
       appeal followed by a rehearing will involve a hideous waste of costs.

       25 Accordingly, we recommend the following course. If an  application
       for permission to appeal on the ground of lack of reasons is made  to
       the trial judge, the judge should consider whether  his  judgment  is
       defective for lack of reasons, adjourning for that purpose should  he
       find this necessary. If he concludes that it is, he should set out to
       remedy the defect by the provision  of  additional  reasons  refusing
       permission to appeal on the basis that he has adopted that course. If
       he concludes that he has given adequate reasons,  he  will  no  doubt
       refuse permission to appeal. If  an  application  for  permission  to
       appeal on the ground of lack of reasons  is  made  to  the  appellate
       court and it appears to the appellate court that the  application  is
       well founded, it  should  consider  adjourning  the  application  and
       remitting the case to the trial judge with an invitation  to  provide
       additional reasons  for  his  decision  or,  where  appropriate,  his
       reasons for a specific finding or findings. Where the appellate court
       is in doubt as to  whether  the  reasons  are  adequate,  it  may  be
       appropriate to direct that the application be adjourned  to  an  oral
       hearing, on notice to the respondent."

  20. As noted in Civil Procedure 2016 at note 52.11.5, the  same  procedure
      applies in family proceedings. An important point, referred to in that
      note, is that the representative of the potential appellant has a duty
      to raise a point of this kind with the Judge, and promptly. The  issue
      was recently considered in In re A and another (Children)  (Judgment:
      Adequacy of Reasoning) [2011] EWCA Civ 1205, [2012]  1  WLR  595  [16]
      where Munby LJ defined the duty in these terms:

      "... it is the responsibility of the advocate, whether or not  invited
      to do so by the judge, to  raise  with  the  judge  and  draw  to  his
      attention any material omission in the judgment, any genuine query  or
      ambiguity which arises on the judgment,  and  any  perceived  lack  of
      reasons  or  other  perceived  deficiency  in  the  judge's  reasoning
      process."


   Sometimes, the appeal Court or Tribunal can remit a point to the Judge at
   first instance for clarification. But this can be  difficult,  especially
   when as here the decision was made many months before  the  appeal  court
   hearing.

  21. These are not procedures that have been adopted in  this  jurisdiction
      so far. We are not critical of the advocate in  this  case.  We  doubt
      that cases such as the present are likely to be numerous.  But  we  do
      consider that in what we expect would be the relatively  small  number
      of cases of similar nature the prospective appellant ought  to  follow
      the   approach   outlined   in   English,   and   that    professional
      representatives should  consider  themselves  to  be  under  the  duty
      referred to in In re A.  This should be seen as part  of  a  range  of
      duties owed by applicants for permission to appeal, another being  the
      duty of candour,  the  importance  of  which  has  recently  been  re-
      emphasised by the Court of Appeal in Khan v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  416;
      see in particular [35] (Beatson LJ).



Signed                                  Date 8 July 2016

The Hon Mr Justice Warby



