
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/11285/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 April 2018                       |       On 03 May 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     JN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Braganza, Counsel instructed by Camden
                    Community Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This decision remakes the appeal of the appellant brought on protection
    grounds. The remaking is required following the decision  of  the  Vice
    President of the Tribunal dated 10 August 2017 setting aside an earlier
    decision of Upper Tribunal Judge  Renton,  the  decision  of  the  Vice
    President being confirmed in a further decision of Upper Tribunal Judge
    O'Connor dated 26 January 2018.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  the
    protection claim.

 3. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan born in 1997.

 4. The appellant maintains that he comes from the village of  Kala-Akhund,
    near Jalalabad in Nangarhar province in Afghanistan.  In 2010 there was
    a land dispute between the appellant's father and paternal cousins.  As
    a result of this dispute the family home was attacked.  The  appellant,
    his mother and siblings were in the main part  of  the  house  but  his
    father and brother were outside.  The appellant heard  gunshots  and  a
    grenade was thrown into the house.  The appellant, his mother  and  his
    younger siblings fled from the house.  The  appellant  understood  from
    his mother that they were to make for an uncle in  Peshawar.   However,
    the appellant became separated from his mother and siblings and,  after
    a number of days of walking, found himself on the border with Iran.

 5. The appellant was then able to use a mobile phone that he had with  him
    and which he was then able to charge to contact his uncle in  Peshawar.
    He was informed that the attack on the house had been part of the  land
    dispute and been carried out by his cousins.  His uncle told  him  that
    his mother and siblings had made the journey to Peshawar  and  that  he
    would send someone to assist the appellant to leave  Afghanistan.   The
    next day an agent came and collected the appellant, bringing him to the
    UK in a journey that lasted for approximately five  months,  travelling
    through various countries including France and Belgium.

 6. The appellant claimed asylum in the UK on 15 June 2011.  His claim  was
    refused on 9 November 2011 but as a result of his age  he  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain until 1 July 2014.  A further application
    to extend his leave on the basis of a protection claim was refused on 1
    December 2014.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  refused  his  appeal  in  a
    decision dated 4 February 2016, that decision initially being upheld by
    the Upper Tribunal but, as set out above, being set aside by the  Upper
    Tribunal in decisions dated 10 October 2017 and 26 January 2018.

 7. It is well understood that the burden of proof lies upon the  appellant
    and that the standard of proof is that of whether there are substantial
    grounds for believing that the appellant will face a real risk of  harm
    on return such that he requires international protection.

 8. There are further principles that I must take into  account  here  when
    assessing the evidence.  Firstly, the appellant was aged  approximately
    14 at the time of the events he describes in Afghanistan and during the
    period of his initial asylum claim in the UK which led to the grant  of
    discretionary leave to remain in 2011.  He was still a  minor  when  he
    applied for further leave to remain, becoming an adult in 2015.

 9. Further, the appellant has provided two psychology reports from Ms  Ann
    Malkin, the first dated 18 December 2015 the second dated  1  September
    2017.  Those reports find that  the  appellant  has  severe  PTSD  with
    moderate mixed anxiety and depressive disorder.

10. It is my conclusion as a result of all of the above  matters  that  the
    appellant should be treated as a vulnerable witness. I  have  borne  in
    mind the  discussion  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  the  case  of  AM
    (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ  1123  given  my  identification  of  the
    appellant as a vulnerable witness.

11. I also consider the appellant's claim against the  background  material
    provided.  In particular, he  provided  two  reports  from  Dr  Antonio
    Giustozzi dated 4 April 2015 and 2 April 2018.  Dr Giustozzi is a well-
    respected expert witness on Afghanistan who has been accepted  as  such
    in all of the Afghan Country Guidance  cases  before  the  Tribunal  in
    recent years.  I found that I was entitled to place weight on his views
    as a result.

12. In particular,  Dr  Giustozzi  identifies  the  proliferation  of  land
    disputes accompanied by violence in Afghanistan at paragraphs 14 to  19
    of his 2015 report at pages 88 to 94 of the  appellant's  bundle.   The
    report identifies the impunity with which  such  violence  takes  place
    given the inability and lack of agency of the  authorities  to  prevent
    such matters taking place.  Dr  Giustozzi  also  identifies  that  such
    feuds can often last for  generations,  that  the  authorities  can  be
    bribed and that corruption allows such feuds to prosper.

13. Of particular note in the 2015 report is the indication  at  paragraphs
    23 and 24 on pages 96 and 97 of the bundle that Dr Giustozzi  used  his
    detailed and extensive contacts in Afghanistan to conduct  a  visit  to
    the appellant's home village in order to  find  out  whether  the  land
    dispute that the appellant describes existed.   The  report  states  as
    follows:

         "23. Enquiries were made by  researcher  SM  with  regard  to  JN's
             claims.  SM has  extensive  experience  as  a  journalist  and
             stringer and currently as a researcher in my projects.  He has
             wide access to all parts of Afghanistan in the past years  and
             has interviewed  hundreds  of  elders,  insurgents  and  other
             actors so far.

         24.  SM sought to confirm the content of JN's statements with  MAR,
             son of HI, born in the Kali  Khumb  Area  of  Khushkhumbet  of
             Behsud district of Nangarhar province in 1967.  In 2005 he was
             appointed as Malik (village elder) for Kali Khumb.  The elders
             confirmed the existence of a  land  dispute  between  the  two
             families, of violent scuffles between Mr N  and  his  cousins.
             They also confirm the disappearance of Mr N from the  village.



         25.  In sum, JN is at risk from his cousins.   The  risk  would  be
             greatest in Nangarhar, but would also extend to other parts of
             the country, depending also on the ability of the  cousins  to
             invest  time  and  resources  in  tracking  him  down   around
             Afghanistan."

14. The respondent does not dispute that this part of Dr Giustozzi's report
    is reliable but maintains that it is not sufficient on its own to  show
    a real risk to the appellant if he returns either to his home  area  or
    to Kabul.  The enquiries made by Dr Giustozzi's agent do  not  identify
    definitively that the appellant's father and brother were killed.

15. It is my view, however, that  given  the  background  evidence  of  the
    commonplace occurrence of  such  land  disputes  and  of  the  violence
    associated with them, that violence often being serious even  where  it
    does not give rise to killings, that  the  confirmation  of  this  land
    dispute concerning the appellant and relatives is sufficient to show  a
    risk to him in his own home area of serious mistreatment such  that  he
    cannot be expected to return there.

16. It was also my view that the information in Dr Giustozzi's report could
    be taken as somewhat  higher  than  submitted  by  the  respondent.  Dr
    Giustozzi knew that the account was that  the  applicant's  father  and
    brother had been killed and that his mother and siblings  had  fled  to
    Peshawar. He is  manifestly  aware  of  his  duty  to  the  court.  Had
    information been obtained by his agent that suggested that  the  father
    and brother were not dead or  the  mother  and  siblings  were  in  the
    village, it would have been included in the report.  It  was  not.  The
    information obtained  about  the  home  area  does  not  undermine  the
    applicant's account and supports it, in my judgment  to  a  significant
    degree.

17. Before reaching a conclusion on the evidence in Dr  Giustozzi's  report
    and whether the applicant was at risk from a land dispute in  his  home
    area, I also considered the other credibility points relied on for  the
    respondent.  The respondent maintains that it is not credible that  the
    appellant could become separated in the manner in  which  he  describes
    from his mother  and  siblings,  would  have  looked  for  them  before
    travelling as far as the Iranian border and that it  was  not  credible
    that the appellant would happen to have a mobile phone with him that he
    was able to use when he arrived on the border with Iran in order to  be
    able to contact his uncle who could assist him in coming to the UK.

18. It was not my view that these  points  relied  on  by  the  respondent,
    albeit put clearly and cogently by Mr Clarke at the hearing before  me,
    were  sufficient  to  undermine  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    account.  Firstly, as above, he is a vulnerable witness, aged  only  13
    or 14 when the events he describes took place  and  when  he  described
    them in his initial asylum claim.  Additionally, he  is  an  uneducated
    person.  In that context, I did not  find  his  inability  to  remember
    exactly how long it took him to  get  to  the  Iranian  undermined  his
    credibility.

19. Further, his account of using his mobile phone was set out in his first
    witness statement from 25 July 2011 in which his evidence was not  that
    he happened to find the phone when he reached the border  but  that  he
    was able to charge it up at that time. I found nothing  implausible  or
    incredible about that being the case.

20.  Further,  the  appellant  has  been  consistent  across  four  witness
    statements and in his oral evidence before me  as  to  the  chaos  that
    occurred when the family home was attacked, that he and his mother  and
    siblings ran into the wooded area surrounding their  village  when  the
    attack took place and that it was in  that  terrain  that  they  became
    separated.  The appellant has also been additionally consistent  as  to
    this occurring because his mother was attempting to take  care  of  his
    younger siblings  whereas  he  was  able  to  move  faster  and  became
    separated from them.

21. I also found that the appellant's claim showed the requisite degree  of
    credibility where, as above,  he  provided  four  different  statements
    across an extended  period  of  years  and  different  appeal  hearings
    including that before me and was notably consistent given his age  when
    the original events took place and the amount of time that  has  passed
    since then.

22. The appellant's evidence also is supported by the psychology reports of
    Ms Malkin.  Her diagnosis of PTSD and a mixed  anxiety  and  depressive
    disorder is consistent with the experiences the appellant sets out.

23. It was suggested at the hearing that Ms Malkin's indication in the most
    recent report at paragraph 7.1 on  page  14  of  the  bundle  that  the
    appellant "has done relatively well" since the previous assessment  was
    inconsistent with the appellant's statement in his most recent  witness
    statement dated 13 December 2017 that "my PTSD has got  worse  and  any
    progress I made has gone".  It was not my view that this was in any way
    an inconsistency.  The second psychology report and  the  2017  witness
    statement both deal with the appellant's detention by  the  immigration
    authorities in July 2017 when there was a misunderstanding  as  to  his
    ongoing protection appeal.  My reading of Ms Malkin's second report  is
    that since seeing the appellant in 2015 he had made progress  but  that
    the detention in Brook House had caused a setback.  This is recorded by
    Ms Malkin at paragraph 6.5 of her second  report  on  page  12  of  the
    bundle as follows:

         "6.5  As  stated  above,  JN  reports  that  since  his  period  of
             detention, he had been feeling more  anxious  and  upset,  had
             problems sleeping and concentrating, and  his  mood  had  once
             again been low.  He also  finds  himself  constantly  thinking
             about the period in detention, when he was very frightened and
             confused, and worried about being sent  back  to  Afghanistan.
             The thoughts about being returned to Afghanistan have  brought
             back the memories of his flight from home, and of  losing  his
             family.  These thoughts have once again  become  intrusive  at
             times."

24. Ms Malkin also identifies in paragraph 6.10 on page 13  of  the  bundle
    that the appellant's assessment for depression had worsened slightly to
    moderate depression from the earlier diagnosis of mild depression.  She
    also identifies "severe" PTSD in paragraph 8.3 on page 15 of the bundle
    and attributes these conditions as being "a direct consequence  of  his
    arrest and detention".

25. Ms Malkin's conclusion was that  if  the  appellant  were  returned  to
    Afghanistan he would become retraumatised  and  his  existing  symptoms
    exacerbated.   This  would  impact  on   his   ability   to   function,
    particularly where, as identified by Dr  Giustozzi,  the  provision  of
    mental  health  services  in  Afghanistan  is  extremely  limited   and
    specialist treatment for PTSD is almost non-existent.

26. In order to assess whether the appellant could be expected to  relocate
    to Kabul, I refer to the very recent country guidance of AS (Safety  of
    Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC).  The  headnote  to  that
    case reads as follows:

         "Risk on return to Kabul from the Taliban

         (i)  A person who is of lower-level interest for the Taliban  (i.e.
             not a senior government or security services  official,  or  a
             spy) is not at real risk of persecution from  the  Taliban  in
             Kabul.

         Internal relocation to Kabul

         (ii) Having regard to the security and  humanitarian  situation  in
             Kabul as well as the  difficulties  faced  by  the  population
             living there (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and other
             returnees, which are not dissimilar to  the  conditions  faced
             throughout may other parts of Afghanistan); it  will  not,  in
             general be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for  a  single  adult
             male in good health to relocate to Kabul even if he  does  not
             have any specific connections or support network in Kabul.

         (iii)    However, the particular  circumstances  of  an  individual
             applicant must  be  taken  into  account  in  the  context  of
             conditions in the place of relocation,  including  a  person's
             age, nature and quality of  support  network/connections  with
             Kabul/Afghanistan, their physical and mental health, and their
             language, education and  vocational  skills  when  determining
             whether a person falls within the  general  position  set  out
             above.

         (iv) A person with a support network or specific connections in
             Kabul is likely to be in a more advantageous position on
             return, which may counter a particular vulnerability of an
             individual on return.

         (v)   Although  Kabul  suffered  the  highest  number  of  civilian
             casualties (in the latest UNAMA figures  from  2017)  and  the
             number of security incidents is increasing, the proportion  of
             the population directly affected by the security situation  is
             tiny.  The current security situation in Kabul is not at  such
             a level as  to  render  internal  relocation  unreasonable  or
             unduly harsh.

         Previous Country Guidance

         (vi) The country guidance in  AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG
             [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation  to  Article  15(c)  of  the
             Qualification Directive remains unaffected by this decision.

         (vii)    The country guidance in AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan  CG
             [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation to the (un)reasonableness of
             internal relocation to Kabul (and other  potential  places  of
             internal relocation) for certain categories of  women  remains
             unaffected by this decision.

         (viii)    The  country  guidance  in   AA   (unattended   children)
             Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 16 (IAC) also remains unaffected by
             this decision."

27. It will be apparent that the Tribunal identifies  in  AS  (Afghanistan)
    that the factors of age, including the  age  at  which  a  person  left
    Afghanistan, the nature and quality of connections to  Kabul,  physical
    and mental health and language, education  and  vocational  skills  are
    relevant factors when assessing whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  or
    reasonable for someone to relocate to Kabul.

28.  The  assessment  for  this  appellant  is,  in  my  view,   relatively
    straightforward.  He left Afghanistan at the age of 14, he has been  in
    the UK for seven years since then.  He has  never  been  to  Kabul  and
    nothing here suggests that he has any meaningful  contacts  or  support
    there.  Certainly, there is a possibility that his  uncle  in  Peshawar
    might be able to provide financial support but nothing  here  indicates
    that the appellant has been able to contact him since he came to the UK
    seven years ago.  That is therefore not a meaningful source of  support
    for the appellant now.

29. I have identified above that  the  appellant  has  been  identified  as
    suffering from PTSD and a moderate  depressive  and  anxiety  disorder.
    The country evidence is clear as to the  very  limited  treatment  that
    would be available. It is not my view that somebody suffering from that
    condition given the appellant's  overall  profile,  without  any  other
    person to assist him or support him in Kabul and where he will have  no
    easy access to either accommodation or finance, would be able to access
    what limited treatment exists.

30. Further, this appellant is of very limited education, undisputed by the
    respondent.  I note that he has obtained a certain amount of  education
    in the UK and I accept that this is something that he might be able  to
    rely on to give him some assistance in the job market  in  Afghanistan,
    but the other factors  pertaining  here,  his  age  when  he  left  the
    country, his mental health problems and his notable isolation  were  he
    to return to Kabul lead me to the conclusion that he is not someone who
    will  be  able  to  obtain  work  and  support  himself.   In  all  the
    circumstances, it is my view that  the  appellant  cannot  be  expected
    reasonably to locate to Kabul and that the circumstances he would  face
    would be unduly harsh. Where that is so he has made out his  claim  for
    international protection.

31. For all these reasons I find that the appellant has shown that he is at
    a real risk of harm on return and  that  he  cannot  avail  himself  of
    internal relocation in order to avoid that harm.  He has therefore made
    out his appeal on protection grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is remade as allowed on protection grounds.


Signed   [pic]                               Date: 3 May 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

