
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11924/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 January 2017                        |On 2 May 2017                      |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                    H I B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Mair, Counsel instructed by TRP
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Mauritania.  Since his arrival in the UK
    it has been his case that he fears persecution in Mauritania due to his
    minority Peuhl ethnic group status because following an attempted  coup
    in June 2003 he and his brother were arrested, ill-treated and detained
    for three months before escaping.

2.   The appellant has obtained permission  to  challenge  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Pacey dated 15 February 2016 dismissing
    his appeal against a decision made by the respondent on 27  April  2015
    refusing his asylum claim.  It is an important backdrop  to  this  case
    that the appellant applied for asylum in 2003 and when refused appealed
    to an Immigration Tribunal  and  that  on  12  May  2004  Judge  Chohan
    dismissed his appeal.  In reaching an adverse credibility finding Judge
    Chohan found his claim to have escaped from prison in 2003  implausible
    and that it "does not fit well with the objective evidence".

3.   In deciding in 2016 to dismiss the appellant's appeal against a  second
    asylum application, FtT Judge  Pacey  applied  principles  set  out  in
    Devaseelan [2004] UKIAT 00082 and  concluded  that  the  appellant  had
    "adduced nothing before me to enable  me  to  displace  the  Devaseelan
    principles".

4.   The grounds of appeal raised three main  arguments:  It  was  submitted
    that Judge Pacey  had  (i)  misapplied  the  Devaseelan  guidelines  by
    failing to  apply  scrutiny  to  the  new  materials;  (ii)  failed  to
    understand the methodology underlying the medical report of  Dr  Julian
    Cohen dated 7 September 2015 and the fact that  the  findings  in  that
    report "were at the high end of the usage of options for assessment set
    out in the Istanbul Protocol"; and (iii) failed to engage with the  new
    background evidence which had been adduced by the appellant.

5.   I am grateful to both parties for their submissions.

6.   It is convenient if I deal with (ii) and (iii) before (i).

7.   I consider  that  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  medical  report  is
    vitiated by legal error: It will assist if I first of all set out  what
    Judge Pacey said about the medical evidence in the case, in  particular
    the report of Dr Cohen:

         "29. I accept the medical report from Dr  Cohen  as  new  evidence,
             which I can therefore take into  account.   However,  although
             she considered the Appellant's mental state to  be  consistent
             with his account, I treat her findings with caution, since  it
             is also reasonable to suppose that someone in the  Appellant's
             position, who has been living in limbo in the UK for a  number
             of years, would manifest signs of depression for  that  reason
             alone, regardless of anything that might have happened  before
             he came to the UK.


         30.  Moreover, I note that the  report  was  only  commissioned  in
             2015, when signs of physical injury would  have  faded.   With
             the passage of time, physical evidence must inevitably  become
             less  precise  (with  the  exception,   of   course,   of   an
             irreversible injury such as an amputation, which  is  not  the
             case here).  It is remarkable that no such medical report  was
             sought when the Appellant first claimed asylum.


         31.  I  also  note  that  Dr  Cohen  did  not  carry  out  an  anal
             examination and  therefore  there  is  no  objective  evidence
             available of the alleged rape.


         32.  Whilst, then, I accept that the Appellant  has  at  some  time
             suffered physical injuries and his mental health problems,  as
             evidenced by his medical record and  in  particular  his  high
             PHQ9 score, in my view, for the reasons I have set  out,  they
             do not constitute such new evidence  as  would  enable  me  to
             displace the finding of the previous Immigration Judge.


         33.  The Appellant initially claimed and continues to claim a  fear
             of persecution based on his previous experiences at the  hands
             of the authorities, which manifests as a fear that he would be
             killed or subject to inhumane treatment on return.  I  do  not
             therefore find his explanation of remaining silent  about  his
             rape and the extent of the torture to be credible.  Whilst  it
             might have been hard - and I accept this - for a proud man  in
             his culture (or indeed perhaps any culture) to admit to having
             been raped, given that silence, on his  evidence,  would  risk
             his being returned to Mauritania, in my view he would  in  his
             own interests have reasonably been able to overcome reluctance
             in the interests of securing his own  safety,  that  would  be
             assured, on his account, by being granted  refugee  status  in
             the UK."

 8. There are several difficulties with  the  assessment,  not  least  that
    despite Dr Cohen's medical report being lengthy the judge dealt with it
    only briefly.  The judge correctly  observed  that  Dr  Cohen's  report
    sought to analyse and evaluate both the appellant's physical and mental
    symptoms.  As regards Dr Cohen's findings on the  appellant's  physical
    symptoms, the judge gave only two reasons why he considered  they  were
    to be treated with caution, namely  that  since  the  report  was  only
    commissioned in 2015, the physical evidence had inevitably become  less
    precise; and no such report was sought when the appellant first claimed
    asylum.  The first of these reasons appears to rest on a  misconception
    about the effect of the passage of time in attribution  of  causes  for
    physical injuries.  Whilst it is widely accepted that  the  passage  of
    time can affect the ability of medical examiners to determine  the  age
    of scars (see KV (scarring - medical evidence) Sri  Lanka  [2014]  UKUT
    00230 (IAC)), there is no suggestion that this prevents attribution  of
    causes.  Insofar as the judge considered the failure of  the  appellant
    to obtain a medical report earlier, it is unfortunate that he  did  not
    at least state why he did not accept the explanation given for that  by
    the appellant and his new solicitors.  In any event, neither  of  these
    reasons begin to address the contents of  Dr  Cohen's  report.   Whilst
    some of the ways in which Dr Cohen seeks to apply the Istanbul Protocol
    five-fold hierarchy of degrees of likelihood of attribution are curious
    (in that she applies them in several places not to the alleged case  of
    torture, but to the likelihood of a particular way in which  an  injury
    was inflicted, e.g. by a blunt object), it is clear that she considered
    that the physical scars which the  appellant  had  (some  61  of  them)
    constituted "very strong evidence corroborating the torture described",
    the wording used in paragraph 64 of the report.

9.   As regards the judge's reasons for treating Dr Cohen's findings on  the
    appellant's psychological conditions "with caution",  the  only  reason
    given is once again problematic.  It is problematic  first  because  it
    does not appear to recognise that Dr Cohen  also  diagnosed   PTSD  and
    second because in rejecting Dr Cohen's assessment that the  appellant's
    psychological problems were consistent  with  his  account,  the  judge
    effectively relies on his own causal assessment.  He states that:-

     "... it is also reasonable to suppose that someone in  the  Appellant's
         position, who has been living in limbo in the UK for  a  number  of
         years, would manifest signs of depression for  that  reason  alone,
         regardless of anything that might have happened before he  came  to
         the UK".

     The judge was perfectly entitled to point out, as Dr  Cohen  had  done,
    that psychological problems of the type the appellant suffered from can
    be caused by or  significantly  characterised  by  stress  relating  to
    experiences in the country  in  which  asylum  is  sought:  indeed  the
    Istanbul Protocol states as much.

10.  In the appellant's case, however, Dr Cohen had considered the  possible
    causation and had expressly rejected it.  A similar encroachment of the
    judge onto the territory of clinical assessment can also be seen in the
    treatment of the issue of the delay on the part  of  the  appellant  in
    failing to mention his allegation of anal rape when  he  first  claimed
    asylum and appealed.  The judge's statement regarding this  essentially
    addresses a generalisation that people who have been subjected to  anal
    rape would not keep quiet about it if they  truly  feared  persecution.
    Issues  surrounding  delay  in  mentioning  rape  are  far  from  being
    straightforward and  in  certain  circumstances  it  will  be  entirely
    legitimate for a decision-maker  not  to  accept  that  the  delay  was
    justified;  but  such  issues  cannot  be  resolved  by   recourse   to
    generalisations of the kind relied on here.

11.  It is also apparent that the judge did  not  really  grapple  with  the
    fact that for Dr Cohen it was not the  physical  or  mental  diagnosis,
    each taken on their own, that was important  in  this  case  but  their
    combination: see paragraph 70 of the report.

12.  I consider that the third main ground of appeal is also  made  out.   I
    take the thrust of the ground to be that the judge failed  to  properly
    assess the new  background  evidence.   In  my  judgement  there  is  a
    significant failure of the judge at  paragraph  26  to  understand  the
    proper scope of Devaseelan  principles.   In  paragraph  26  the  judge
    stated:

     "New objective evidence has  been  provided.   However,  the  issue  on
         which the previous determination was founded  was  the  Appellant's
         lack of credibility.  Since  his  account  was  not  believed,  any
         general, objective evidence cannot reasonably be held to support  a
         case that has not been accepted."

     However,  to  assert  that  "any  general,  objective  evidence  cannot
    reasonably be held to support a case that has  not  been  accepted"  is
    plainly erroneous.  The task set for judges dealing with a  new  asylum
    appeal where there have been adverse credibility  findings  made  by  a
    Tribunal previously is to consider the new evidence, together with  the
    old, in their entirety.  General objective  evidence  is  not  excluded
    from the category of new  evidence  just  because  it  is  general  and
    objective rather than specific to an individual.  For  example,  if  an
    applicant was previously disbelieved because he  claimed  he  had  been
    involved in a mass prison breakout on a  particular  date  even  though
    there was no objective evidence to show there was such  a  breakout  on
    that date, a judge applying Devaseelan principles cannot a priori state
    that such materials "cannot reasonably be held to support a  case  that
    has not been accepted".  The new background evidence in the appellant's
    case did potentially bear on the credibility  of  the  appellant's  own
    account of escape and should not have been excluded a  priori  in  this
    way.  Of possible significance as well was that  Judge  Chohan  in  his
    2004 decision had obviously seen of particular importance the fact that
    the appellant's account did "not fit well with the objective evidence".



13.  I have focused on grounds (ii) and (iii) because in  doing  so  it  has
    been necessary for me to address (i) as well and it  will  be  apparent
    that I am satisfied that the judge misapplied Devaseelan  criteria.   I
    conclude that the judge materially erred in law and that  his  decision
    is to be set aside.

14.  Both representatives stated that if I did decide  to  set  aside  Judge
    Pacey's decision I should remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  I
    am persuaded that this is the right course and in line with the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement, since  the  case  turns  very  much  on
    credibility  and  none  of  Judge  Pacey's  findings  of  fact  can  be
    preserved.

Notice of Decision

15.  I remit the case to be heard in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  not  before
    Judge Pacey or Judge Chohan.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 28 April 2017


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
