
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11587/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                     mn
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Sidhu, Harbans Singh Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant challenges the decision and reasons statement  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Andrew  that  was  promulgated  on  12  June  2015.
    Having heard from both representatives, as I indicated at  the  end  of
    the hearing, I find there is no legal error in Judge Andrew's  decision
    and it shall stand.  I reserved my reasons, which I now give.

 2. The primary argument advanced by the appellant is that she has a  well-
    founded fear of persecution on return to Iran because  it  is  possible
    that the Iranian authorities would be aware of her participation in  an
    anti-Iranian demonstration in London on 30 May 2015 and that she posted
    pictures of  herself  taking  part  in  that  demonstration,  including
    holding a banner or banners on her Facebook page.

 3. Mr Sidhu conceded that the appellant does not seek to  challenge  Judge
    Andrew's other findings and the argument  pursued  is  that  the  judge
    failed to  give  appropriate  weight  to  the  evidence  of  sur  place
    activities.  In the alternative, the appellant argues that Judge Andrew
    gave inappropriate weight to her finding that the appellant  had  acted
    in bad faith when participating in the demonstration at the end of  May
    2015 and this distorted the outcome.

 4. The appellant's arguments are unsound for the following reasons.

 5. It was open to Judge Andrew to find that the appellant had acted in bad
    faith.  She anxiously considered the evidence presented and found it to
    be lacking in credibility for the reasons she gave.  Those findings are
    unchallenged for the most part and where they are challenged it is  not
    so much the findings that are challenged but what  weight  should  have
    been given to the findings relating to the appellant's activities since
    arriving in the UK.

 6. In light of the guidance of the Court of  Appeal  in  YB  (Eritrea)  Mr
    Sidhu is correct in saying that it was not open to Judge Andrew to find
    that political activity undertaken in bad faith to  bolster  an  asylum
    claim was a reason to find  the  appellant  was  not  a  refugee.   But
    despite the implied accusation that Judge Andrew erred in this way, her
    decision and reasons statement is clear.  At no point does Judge Andrew
    make such a finding.  Her approach focuses on risk on return.

 7. It is evident from paragraphs 34 to 41  of  her  decision  and  reasons
    statement that Judge Andrew asked herself the  proper  question,  would
    the appellant face a real risk of serious harm if she were returned  to
    Iran?

 8. Judge Andrew found that the appellant's behaviour at the  demonstration
    was marginal and that the photographs did not reflect her claimed level
    of involvement.  Reviewing the photographs myself, and discussing  them
    with Mr Sidhu and Mr Mills, I noted that they  reveal  a  demonstration
    that took place in  Parliament  Square  and  not  outside  the  Iranian
    Embassy.  The photographs do not show a demonstration against Iran  but
    a demonstration in favour of the Kurdish  people  as  a  whole.   Judge
    Andrew found as much when she found the appellant's evidence (and  that
    of her witness) to be unreliable.

 9. Judge Andrew was right to take into consideration her  findings  as  to
    the lack of reliability of the evidence presented by the appellant  and
    her witness and to infer from  that  evidence  how  the  appellant  was
    reasonably likely to behave.  The appellant had failed to  provide  any
    evidence to show that the demonstration was monitored.   The  appellant
    relied on posting photographs on her Facebook account but that  account
    was opened shortly before the hearing and the evidence showed  she  had
    only 25 friends.  Judge  Andrew  considered  whether  the  account  was
    likely to be available for all to access  and  concluded  that  it  was
    unlikely given the other evidence (see paragraph 41).

10. It follows from these findings that there is no  reasonably  likelihood
    that the Iranian authorities would have  identified  the  appellant  as
    someone against the regime and as a result it is mere possibility  that
    the Iranian authorities might  have  hacked  the  appellant's  Facebook
    account to see the photographs she posted.   Mere  possibility  is,  of
    course, well below the low threshold applicable to  assessing  evidence
    in asylum claims.  Nothing in AB and others (internet activity -  state
    of evidence) Iran [2015]  UKUT  00257  suggests  otherwise  despite  Mr
    Sidhu's reliance on a number of points therein.  Judge Andrew found the
    appellant would not come to the attention of  the  Iranian  authorities
    and gave good reasons for so finding.

11. As a result, I do not find against Judge Andrew on either issue  raised
    by the appellant.

Decision

There is no legal error in Judge Andrew's  decision  and  reasons  statement
and her decision is upheld.




                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
