
                                    [pic]

St

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11293/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At North Shields                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
| on 20th October 2016              |On 29th November 2016              |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  MRS S.F.O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Rodgers, IAC Limited.
For the Respondent:    Mrs R. Petersen, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant has been given permission to appeal to the Upper
       Tribunal the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury. Following
       a hearing on 4 August 2016 the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the
       appellant's appeal.

    2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria. She came to the United
       Kingdom in 2012 on a visit visa along with her daughter and then
       overstayed. She subsequently had another child in the United Kingdom.
       She then made a claim for protection in 2014 principally based upon a
       fear of her in-laws and the possibility her daughter would be forced
       to undergo FGM.

    3. Her claim was refused. It had been accepted by the Competent
       Authority that she was a victim of sexual exploitation and servitude
       in Nigeria. However it was not accepted that she had a genuine fear
       on return. Even if this were accepted the respondent took the view
       that there was sufficiency of protection and localised difficulties
       could reasonably be avoided by relocation.

    4. First-tier Judge Hanbury at paragraph 18 mentions being referred to a
       Social Services report in the appellant's bundle at page 37 as
       suggesting she suffered a high degree of anxiety and fear of
       retribution if returned to Nigeria. It was submitted that she needed
       a support network which would not be available in Nigeria.

    5. Under the heading `Findings and Reasons' at paragraph 20 of the
       decision the judge referred to a Social Services report contained at
       page 45 of the appellant's bundle. The judge recorded `Unfortunately,
       only the odd pages of that report have been photocopied for me.
       Nevertheless I have got the "flavour" of that report.

    6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted that it was
       arguably an error in law for the judge to make findings when only
       part of the report was available.

    7. I checked the documents in the file and noted an appeal bundle on
       behalf of the appellant for use in the First-tier Tribunal with a
       covering letter dated 26 May 2016. It refers to a social worker's
       report dated January 2015 and indicates the representatives were
       seeking an update. The index to the bundle indicates reports on both
       children paged 37 through to 54. However, when the bundle is opened
       only pages 37, 39, 41 43, 44, 46, 48, and 50 have been reproduced.

    8. I asked both representatives if they had any information as to
       whether at the time of hearing the representatives and Judge were
       aware that the report was incomplete. Ms Rodgers who appears for the
       appellant as she had in the First-tier Tribunal advised me that at
       the hearing there was no reference to the report being incomplete.
       The presenting officer, Mrs Petersen, was able to advise that there
       was no note on file of any report being incomplete. Ms Rodgers was
       able to provide me with a full copy of both reports. I note amongst
       the missing pages is a section on parenting capacity relating to the
       first appellant which describes her as struggling emotionally and
       using a counsellor and being frequently tearful. Another missing page
       refers to concerns about her motivation in supporting her children to
       visit their father.

    9. Had all of the parties been aware at the hearing that the full report
       was not available and decided to proceed then I would not have found
       an error of law. However it would appear likely that the judge
       believed the full report was contained in the papers and it was only
       subsequently, when preparing the decision, the omission was noted.
       The judge is not to be faulted because there is limited time to read
       a file in advance and the responsibility lies with the appellant's
       representatives to probably prepare bundles. Nevertheless a
       procedural irregularity has occurred in that part of the evidence
       intended to be advanced had been omitted. Mrs R. Petersen did not
       seek to robustly oppose the submissions made on behalf of the
       appellant.

   10. The Judge had recorded that the appellant was a vulnerable individual
       but that internal relocation was viable. It may be that the missing
       pages would not have made any material difference to the outcome but
       in the interests of justice it is important that all of the evidence
       meant to be placed before the judge in fact was. It cannot be said
       that the missing material was so irrelevant that it could be
       disregarded. For this reason a material error of law has occurred.
       Consequently the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury
       dismissing the appeal cannot stand. Because of the factual evaluation
       necessary the appeal is to be remitted for a de novo hearing in the
       First-tier tribunal.




  Decision

       The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury dismissing the
       appeal contains a material error of law and cannot stand.

       The appeal is remitted for a de novo hearing in the First-tier
       Tribunal


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly


Directions.
    1. List for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.
    2. The appellant's representatives are to prepare a new appeal bundle
       with the items paged and tabbed and a clear index. They should advise
       of any need for an interpreter.
    3. The parties are referred to the recent country guidance given in HD
       (Trafficked women) Nigeria CG [2016] UKUT 00454(IAC)
