
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11457/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                                |Date Sent                  |
|on 17th September and 26th November 2013        |On 5th February 2014       |
|and 27 January 2014                             |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               Selmen mohammed
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:         On 17  September  2013,  Mr  J  Bryce,  Advocate,
                    instructed by Quinn, Martin & Langan, Solicitors; on  26
                    November 2013 and 27 January 2014, Mr R Gibb, of  Quinn,
                    Martin & Langan

For the Respondent:    On 17 September 2013,  Mrs  M  O'Brien,  Senior  Home
                    Office Presenting Officer; on 26 November  2013  and  27
                    January  2014,  Mr  M  Matthews,  Senior   Home   Office
                    Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made.


                           DECISION and DIRECTIONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Wallace, promulgated on 10th April 2013,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against refusal of recognition as a refugee from Iraq.

The hearing on 17th September 2013.

 2. The Respondent accepted that Judge Wallace erred at paragraph 48 of her
    determination where she found that in a prior determination it had been
    held that the Appellant's father, mother and sister had all been killed
    in Iraq.  The determination in question was made by  Immigration  Judge
    Kempton  in  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (case   reference
    AA/10282/2008), promulgated on 23rd January 2009.  Paragraph 20 thereof
    records that the judge "simply  could  not  say"  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant's family members were killed in an explosion near the  family
    home in 2003, when the Appellant also said he  was  injured.   (He  has
    lost a leg.)

 3. Representatives agreed that  Judge  Wallace's  error  as  to  what  had
    previously been determined amounted to an error  of  law,  on  a  point
    sufficiently material for her determination to be set  aside.   It  was
    also agreed that while Judge Kempton might not have  been  required  to
    make a finding on whether the incident was  proved,  in  the  light  of
    cases on the "tracing duty", a  fresh  decision  should  start  with  a
    finding on whether the Appellant  was  telling  the  truth  about  that
    incident.  A further hearing was required in the Upper  Tribunal,  with
    that point as the initial focus.

 4. The  Respondent's  letter  of  26th  February  2013  already  makes  it
    sufficiently clear what the Secretary of State's  position  is  on  the
    nature and extent of the tracing duty in this case.  Mrs  O'Brien  said
    that while it was accepted that Judge  Wallace  erred,  the  respondent
    would argue that failure of the tracing duty did not translate into  an
    obligation on the Secretary of State to  investigate  with  a  view  to
    possibly undermining the allegations of an  asylum  applicant.   If  an
    applicant said that his immediate relatives were all  dead,  there  was
    nothing the Secretary of State had to do, and the burden remained on an
    applicant to prove his case.

 5.  Mr  Bryce  submitted  that  it  could  not  be  determined  what   the
    proportionate remedy for the Appellant was, if there were any breach of
    the tracing duty, except on a clear finding on the antecedent facts.

 6. By agreement, the case was adjourned for a further hearing in the Upper
    Tribunal to carry out a fresh fact finding exercise.  I  observed  that
    such an event as the Appellant claimed to have  occurred  in  2003  was
    likely to have been recorded on police records, hospital records, death
    certificates, and so on and should be capable of  being  authenticated.
    The Appellant should have a final opportunity to obtain that,  and  the
    Secretary of State should have the opportunity to verify  any  evidence
    produced.  A date was to be fixed  to  enable  the  Appellant  to  make
    enquiries with a view to establishing what he said.  If he did not show
    that he had made realistic attempts, or if he  did  not  produce  proof
    that might reasonably be expected, his case was  likely  to  fail.   Mr
    Bryce said that these observations would  be  borne  in  mind  for  the
    further hearing.  To provide reasonable time for preparation, I advised
    that the case would be re-listed before me on or  after  25th  November
    2013.



The hearing on 26 November 2013.

 7. No further evidence had been filed.  I asked Mr Gibb how he proposed to
    proceed.  He said  that  the  appellant  had  no  documentary  evidence
    relating to the attack on his family in 2003.  Mr Gibb had consulted  a
    country expert.  She was of the view that due to the  chaos  prevailing
    in Iraq, then and since, no such evidence was likely to exist. (Mr Gibb
    did not suggest that evidence from the expert, or any  other  evidence,
    would be produced to establish that proposition.)  He sought  admission
    into  evidence  of  (a)  a  supplementary  letter  from   the   Medical
    Foundation, dated 25 November 2013, and (b) information about the "Iraq
    Body Count Project" and an excerpt from that source  regarding  violent
    deaths in Kirkuk in  August  2013.   No  additional  statement  by  the
    appellant was tendered,  although  his  solicitors  had  asked  for  an
    interpreter.  Mr Gibb indicated that he would rely on the evidence  and
    statements the appellant had previously given, but sought  to  ask  him
    "another couple of short questions", without indicating what these were
    to cover.

 8. I asked Mr Matthews whether he proposed to cross-examine.  He said that
    he understood from his colleague's note of the hearing on 17  September
    that the issue  for  this  hearing  was  whether  the  appellant  could
    substantiate events in 2003 by documentary evidence.   He  pointed  out
    that the appellant previously purported to produce such evidence.   The
    hearing before Judge Kempton took place on 12 January 2009.  There  was
    no representation of the Home Office.  The  appellant  then  had  other
    solicitors.   The  determination  shows  that  the  appellant  produced
    documents on the day (or the day before).  Paragraph 20 refers  to  the
    appellant's renewal certificate  of  Iraqi  nationality;  his  identity
    card; and his father's police identity card.  The judge  observes  that
    these appear to be very new and never  to  have  been  used,  that  the
    respondent has had no opportunity to verify them, and  that  they  were
    produced only the day before the hearing although they appeared to have
    been sent to the appellant and passed by him to his solicitor prior  to
    the asylum interview.  There was accordingly no reason why  they  could
    not have been given to the respondent at the time of the interview, and
    the same applied to death certificates of the appellant's  parents  and
    his sister.  It was in those circumstances that the judge said she  had
    no way of knowing whether these were genuine documents, and  could  not
    say whether his family members were killed as the appellant claimed.

 9. Mr Matthews also drew attention to the respondent's  bundle  lodged  in
    the First-tier Tribunal for the present case.  This includes at Item  I
    the appeal bundle, dated 30 September 2010, lodged for the appellant in
    respect of another hearing.  Item 3 within that bundle is  a  statement
    by the appellant,  dated  29  September  2010.   At  paragraph  10  the
    appellant says, "The death certificate of my family  is  available.   I
    have the original  copies  at  my  home.   A  photocopy  of  the  death
    certificates should be on file with my solicitor.   There  might  be  a
    police report ... I cannot get hold of it because I cannot get in touch
    with my uncle as he does not have a phone line."  At paragraph  11  the
    appellant says, "The Home Office has seen the death certificates of  my
    parents and my sister at the  appeal  stage  in  court."   Mr  Matthews
    pointed out that the respondent was not represented at any hearing when
    such documentary evidence may have been produced.  He  also  said  that
    although the appellant has changed  his  solicitors,  and  his  present
    solicitors may not have received full papers, they have had  access  to
    the previous determinations and to the appellant's statement.  Further,
    according to the appellant he had the death certificates at home  here.
    Thus, the appellant contradicts himself in a number of obvious ways.

10. (To  add  to  the  confusion,  the  bundle  at  item  I  is  referenced
    AA/10282/2008, although it seems to postdate that case.  It may  relate
    to another appeal by  the  appellant,  AA/12315/2010,  heard  by  Judge
    Mozolowski  on  4  October  2010  and  disposed  of  by   determination
    promulgated on 11 October 2010, a copy of which is item J.   That  copy
    is incomplete.  I note at paragraphs 12 and 13 that  the  Judge  shares
    Judge Kempton's doubts about the  appellant's  evidence,  although  the
    conclusion again goes no further than  finding  it  difficult  to  know
    where the truth lies.)

11. Mr Matthews did not accept that the appellant would have any case, even
    if his family was attacked as he  claimed  in  2003,  but  he  was  not
    prepared to approach the case on the basis that these events  could  be
    treated as established.

12. Mr Gibb sought an adjournment.  He wished to take instructions from his
    client  regarding  documents  previously   produced.    He   said   his
    understanding had been that the case now turns only on the  credibility
    of events in 2003, and if that  was  established  the  appellant  would
    automatically succeed.  If not, there might  be  a  number  of  complex
    issues with which he was not ready to deal, and in respect of which his
    firm might wish again to instruct counsel.

13. Mr Gibb's understanding did not reflect my record, summarised above, or
    the Presenting Officer's note of what transpired on 17 September 2013.

14. This was rather an unsatisfactory position.  With hindsight, a decision
    and directions  should  have  been  issued  after  the  hearing  on  17
    September 2013, to  avoid  any  doubt.   However,  and  notwithstanding
    change of representatives, it must have been known  to  the  appellant,
    and should have been clear to  his  current  representatives  from  the
    information they had, that he previously tried to support his case with
    documents.

15. None of the materials in this appeal (up to 26  November  2013)  showed
    what happened to the documents after the hearing in 2009.   They  might
    have been left on a Tribunal file (now closed) or they might have  been
    in the hands of parties.  The fact that such  documents  were  produced
    was  of  obvious  importance  given  the  contradictions  which  arose,
    including the appellant saying in 2009 that he could  establish  events
    by  production  of  documentary  records  but  in  2013  that  no  such
    documentary records exist.

16. While it was unfortunate to  delay  this  case  further,  it  was  more
    important to try to resolve matters in the clearest possible light.  Mr
    Matthews did not oppose an adjournment.  I decided that  the  appellant
    should have yet another chance to explain his case, his  representative
    being currently unable  to  formulate  what  that  case  might  be.   I
    reminded Mr Gibb that the onus remains on  the  appellant,  and  if  he
    could not say intelligibly why his case should succeed, it  was  almost
    certain to fail.

17. The appellant was directed to file by 6 January 2014  (a)  any  further
    evidence  upon  which  he  proposed  to  rely,  including  any  further
    statement, and (b) a written submission on how and why his case  should
    succeed, referenced  to  the  supporting  evidence  and  to  case  law,
    including specific passages from country guidance and from any cases on
    the "tracing duty" on which he relied.

18. The respondent was directed  to  file  a  written  explanation  of  the
    respondent's position in response to any such materials by  20  January
    2014.

19. The files for previous appeals having been checked, the Upper  Tribunal
    advised parties on 11 December 2013 that these did not contain original
    or copy documents exhibited by the  appellant  at  the  hearing  on  12
    January 2009, nor any information on the whereabouts of such  documents
    since that date.

Further evidence and written submissions for the appellant.

20. A letter dated 25 November 2013 from the  Medical  Foundation  confirms
    the  conclusion  in  the  previous  report  that   the   appellant   is
    experiencing psychological distress  as  a  result  of  past  traumatic
    experiences, consistent with  a  diagnosis  of  Post  Traumatic  Stress
    Disorder (PTSD) and a depressive episode.  The author  opines  that  it
    would be difficult  to  maintain  unprompted  the  same  narrative  and
    presentation of symptoms over such a long period of time.

21. A further letter from the same source dated 16 January 2014 responds to
    the question from the  appellant's  solicitors  whether  the  appellant
    would  have  sufficient  insight  to  be  able  to  fabricate  symptoms
    described in the original report.  The author states  that  it  is  her
    "... clinical impression that the clinical picture ...  built  up  over
    the last 5 years of working therapeutically with Mr  Mohammed  suggests
    that he does not have sufficient insight to be able  to  exaggerate  or
    fabricate the symptoms described at paragraphs  26-34  of  my  original
    report dated 10 November 2011."

22. A report by Dr Rebwar Fatah, a recognised country expert,  is  dated  3
    January 2014.  Dr Fatah was asked to verify whether there was  evidence
    that the appellant's parents and sister died in  an  explosion  outside
    their family home in the Rahimawa district of Kirkuk on 8 August  2003.
     Dr Fatah was unable to trace any written record of such an event.   He
    ascertained from one well informed resident he was not aware of such an
    event, and that similar events might have occurred at later  date,  but
    not in August  2003.   Dr  Fatah  concludes  that  "...  based  on  the
    objective evidence available in Arabic and Kurdish language sources ...
    the event of 8 August 2003, as described in the instructions to me, was
    not reported."

23. The appellant provides a statement  from  his  partner,  a  citizen  of
    Burundi.  She says that although they separated in the past,  they  are
    again in a relationship, and that they have a young daughter.   She  is
    not aware of the appellant being in touch with any relatives in Iraq.

24. (I  ascertained  at  the  hearing  that  the  appellant's  partner  has
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK and that their daughter  was  born
    on 13 May 2012.  The appellant's current leave to remain runs until  20
    March 2015, and if he is not successful in establishing status  through
    these proceedings, he would expect  to  apply  in  due  course  for  an
    extension of that leave.)

25. The written submission for the appellant argues as follows.  He  should
    be  found  to  be  a  credible  witness.   His  physical  injuries  and
    psychological condition are consistent with his account.  Kirkuk was an
    epicentre of violence  in  Iraq,  and  the  claim  is  consistent  with
    background evidence.  Paragraph 12 records that death certificates were
    provided by the appellant to his solicitor, and sent to an  expert  for
    examination.  The expert concluded that the  documents  "...  lack  the
    main characteristics of reliable documents."   The appellant no  longer
    founds upon them, but that does not indicate that the  deaths  did  not
    occur as  claimed.   The  appellant  had  no  way  of  knowing  whether
    documents sent by his uncle were genuine, and believed that they  were.
    From email communications between  the  appellant's  solicitor  and  Dr
    Fatah following his report, it remained possible that such events might
    have taken place but were not reported within  the  evidential  sources
    available to Dr Fatah.  No direct enquiries had been carried  out  with
    mortuaries, where some deaths were understood to be recorded.  If there
    is a reasonable degree of likelihood that the appellant's  parents  and
    sister were killed in an explosion in Iraq as he claimed, the appellant
    might fall within the category of those with Ba'ath  Party  connections
    at risk of persecution, consistently with HM(2) Iraq [2012] UKUT  00409
    (IAC).  Internal flight would not be available  under  the  appellant's
    particular circumstances because he is subject to  problems  in  Kirkuk
    (paragraph 87, MK (Iraq) [2012] UKUT 00126) and his difficulties  would
    be exacerbated by the fact that he is disabled,  suffers  from  ongoing
    psychological and physical trauma, is unlikely to be able to  work  and
    has not been in Iraq for more than 5 years.

Written submissions for Respondent

26. The respondent points out that the determinations by Judge Kempton  and
    Judge Mozolowski stand.  Although the appellant establishes that he  is
    an amputee who lost his leg in an explosion, that does  not  show  that
    the explosion was targeted  at  his  family.   There  were  significant
    levels of  indiscriminate  violence  in  Iraq  around  2003,  including
    bombings in public areas which did  not  target  specific  individuals.
    The appellant might have been the victim of a random act of violence or
    of an accidental explosion.  The appellant's solicitors argued that  an
    11 year old would not be out without his parents, but that was far from
    unlikely.  Even if his parents died in the explosion, that did not have
    to indicate  a  targeted  attack.   It  was  not  surprising  that  the
    appellant might suffer from PTSD, having undergone significant  trauma.
    If the death certificates were not genuine it was not likely that other
    documents were genuine either, including those sent  to  establish  the
    appellant's age and his father's position in  the  Iraqi  police.   The
    appellant's  evidence   contained   unexplained   contradictions.    He
    prevaricated on whether he had a prosthetic limb or not  in  Iraq.   He
    had said that he was here because his uncle was no longer able to  look
    after him.  There was no evidence to show that  those  responsible  for
    the bomb in 2003 would remain interested in him, a young child  at  the
    time and plainly not a threat now.  The evidence  fell  well  short  of
    establishing that the appellant's father was a  police  officer  and  a
    member of the  Ba'ath  Party,  that  an  incident  occurred  under  the
    circumstances he claimed, or that he was of any remaining  interest  to
    any group in Iraq.  The son of a former Ba'ath Party member was not  at
    risk from State or non-State actors 11 years on from the  fall  of  the
    regime.   In  any  event,  internal  relocation  was  available.    The
    appellant is Kurdish and could reside in the  area  under  the  Kurdish
    Regional Government.  His disabilities were not such as to prevent  him
    from leading a normal life or such as to require any particular medical
    or social assistance.  Assisted Voluntary Return would be available.

The hearing on 27 January 2014.

27. The Presenting Officer sought to put  some  further  questions  to  the
    appellant, to which he consented, having discussed the matter with  his
    solicitor.  He gave evidence in English, without difficulty.

28. The appellant confirmed that he had obtained documents from  his  uncle
    in Iraq.  He thought he last spoke to his uncle in 2010.  They used  to
    telephone each other.  They both had mobile telephones.   However,  the
    appellant lost his telephone.  As a result, he did not have his uncle's
    number, and his uncle regularly changed his  telephone  number  anyway.
    His uncle could not phone him because he did not have the same  number.
    He did not know how to obtain  another  mobile  number  with  the  same
    number as before.  He had been to the Red Cross in Glasgow 2 or 3 times
    to try to get in touch with his uncle, but they  have  been  unable  to
    help.  It is still his belief that the documents sent by his uncle were
    genuine.

29. Mr Matthews relied upon the refusal letters previously  issued  and  on
    the written submissions, summarised above.  He said  that  although  it
    was not logically impossible that false documents  were  obtained  from
    Iraq yet the events described took place, the fabrication of  documents
    was a strong pointer that the account was unreliable.   It  was  highly
    likely that the appellant would have been complicit in such deceit, and
    the claimed lack of contact with his uncle since 2010 because of a lost
    mobile phone was a lame excuse.

30. Mr Gibb said that the expert consulted about  the  documents  had  been
    asked to comment only on the  death  certificates,  not  on  the  other
    documents which went to the appellant's identity and  age  and  to  his
    father's position in the police.  Regarding the  criticism  of  alleged
    lack of telephone contact with the  appellant's  uncle,  it  was  quite
    possible that he might lose his mobile phone and if so  that  he  could
    not retain the same number.  A Kurdish asylum seeker from Iraq was  not
    likely to concoct a story of a father allied to the former  regime,  an
    extremely unpopular position in  his  community.   Although  events  as
    claimed were not  the  only  possible  explanation  for  the  appellant
    suffering from PTSD, his particular  symptoms  were  highly  suggestive
    that his problems did  come  about  in  that  way.   The  supplementary
    reports showed that he was  effectively  incapable  of  inventing  such
    symptoms.  That enhanced his general credibility and the finding should
    be reached that he had been the victim of a  targeted  attack.   If  he
    remained a target he could not be expected to return to Kirkuk.  As  to
    moving elsewhere, evidence cited in the  case  law  suggested  that  he
    would have to go to Kirkuk regularly to renew his documentation.   That
    excluded relocation  elsewhere.    Alternatively,  internal  relocation
    would be unduly harsh in his particular circumstances.

Conclusions.

31. Although failure by the  respondent  in  the  "tracing  duty"  was  the
    original focus of this case at the Upper Tribunal  stage,  it  was  not
    eventually argued that such failure, if there was any, has any  bearing
    on the outcome.

32. The appellant without doubt suffered a traumatic  occurrence  in  Iraq,
    with  serious   physical   and   psychological   consequences.    Those
    consequences are no help in resolving his claims about the  surrounding
    circumstances, as similar consequences could be expected whether or not
    this was a targeted attack.  The unlikelihood of  fabricating  symptoms
    is not a useful pointer.

33. The violence in Iraq, and the  appellant's  particular  misfortune,  no
    doubt played a large part in his leaving the country at a young age and
    travelling here, but that does not  disclose  legal  qualification  for
    protection.  The nub of  the  case  is  straightforward:  is  there  an
    ongoing risk to the appellant from terrorists who attacked  his  family
    with a bomb in 2003 because his father was a policeman and a Ba'athist?
      Previous  judges  were  not  satisfied  of  the  reliability  of  the
    appellant's evidence about the circumstances in 2003, but thought  they
    did not have to decide that issue finally, because  the  appellant  did
    not qualify for protection anyway.  Given another chance  to  establish
    his case, the appellant has made it significantly  worse.   It  emerges
    that he has relied on false documents.   He  has  contradicted  himself
    about whether such occurrences can be documented, and about whether  he
    had any documents. An expert in the sources, both Kurdish  and  Arabic,
    finds no record of the claimed event.   The  appellant  offers  a  poor
    explanation for being now unable to contact his uncle in Iraq.   If  he
    did lose contact, he has not made much of an  attempt  to  re-establish
    it.  The evidence as a whole is  not  persuasive,  even  to  the  lower
    standard, that terrorists targeted his family, or that terrorists  have
    any interest in targeting him now, in Kirkuk or anywhere else.

34. As the appellant could return to  Kirkuk,  the  viability  of  internal
    relocation is not a material issue.  However, it would  not  be  unduly
    harsh to expect him to settle anywhere else in Iraq.  The region of the
    KRG would be the most obvious choice, but there are  many  other  areas
    where Kurds live.

35. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside,  but  the
    appeal is again dismissed.

                           [pic]
                           28 January 2014
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
