
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11167/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th August 2016                           |On 17th August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                 MARYAM [L]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Dr E Mynott (Latitude law)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
      Appellant in relation to a Decision  and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge Ransley) promulgated on 14th April 2015.

   2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Iran born on the 9th April 1979.

   3. She claimed that she was born a Muslim but never considered herself to
      be a practising Muslim.  She was introduced by a female friend to  the
      Baha'i faith in April 2011 and she decided to convert.   She  did  not
      undergo any particular ritual when she converted and attended a  total
      of five meetings.

   4. At the fifth meeting, in April 2012, at the house  of  another  Baha'i
      member the Appellant with the other attendees was arrested.   She  was
      detained for three weeks during which time she was  interrogated.  She
      did not give them the answers they were looking for  and  was  beaten.
      She was released after three weeks subject to  a  condition  that  she
      report fortnightly.  Three months later  she  was  released  from  the
      reporting requirement.  She then had  no  further  problems  with  the
      Iranian authorities and she applied for a student visa for the  United
      Kingdom.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on 31st October  2012  and
      studied for a Masters  degree  in  biomedical  sciences  at  Sheffield
      Hallam University which she was awarded on the 21st February 2014.

   5. In November 2013 she had been informed by a friend  that  her  friend,
      [F], who had  introduced  her  to  Baha'i,  had  been  arrested.   The
      Appellant  understood  her  to  have  informed   Ettelat   about   the
      Appellant's  conversion  to  Baha'i.   In  January  2014  the  Ettelat
      contacted her father indicating that the  Appellant  was  required  to
      start reporting again.  She was then told by her father  in  mid  July
      2014 that she had been put on a list of individuals to be arrested.

   6. The Judge in the First-tier Tribunal found the Appellant had sought to
      change her story to cover up internal inconsistencies in her  evidence
      which damaged her credibility.   She  noted  that  the  Appellant  had
      produced no members of the Baha'i in the United Kingdom to support her
      claim that she was a Baha'i.  The Judge noted that no  medical  report
      had been provided to substantiate her claim that she had been  beaten.
      The Judge found that the documentary evidence in terms of  photographs
      did not corroborate her claim and found that she had not satisfied her
      even on the low standard of proof that she had converted from Islam to
      Baha'i.  At paragraph 38 of the Decision and Reasons, after the  Judge
      had found the Appellant to be without credibility,  she  accepted  the
      Presenting Officer's submission that the expert report was  of  little
      assistance because it was largely of a generic nature.  Also she found
      it not helpful because the  expert's  conclusion  that  the  Appellant
      would face a real risk on return to Iran was based on the premise that
      her asylum account is true.  On that  basis  she  found  the  expert's
      report of little assistance to the Appellant.

   7. Permission to appeal was initially refused by a Judge of the  First  -
      tier Tribunal but then allowed by a Judge in the Upper Tribunal on the
      basis that it was arguable that the Judge erred in her approach to the
      expert report in so far as that report was required to  be  considered
      in the context of assessing credibility and  not  simply  rejected  ex
      post facto  because  it  simply  found  the  Appellant's  account  was
      credible.

   8. It was the Judge's treatment of the expert report that  was  the  main
      plank of the argument before me with regard to the  issue  of  whether
      the Judge had made a material error of law.  Dr Mynott referred me  to
      the various negative findings and the findings start from paragraph 20
      of the Decision and Reasons but it is only at paragraph  36  right  at
      the end that the Judge makes any reference to the expert evidence.

   9. The Secretary of State refused the application on the basis  that  she
      did not accept that the Appellant had converted to the Baha'i faith or
      what had happened to her in Iran.

  10. Dr Mynott took me to the expert's report which he argued  contained  a
      great deal of evidence material to whether or not the Appellant was  a
      Baha'i.  At paragraphs 98 and 99 of the report the expert  deals  with
      how the Appellant practised her faith in the United  Kingdom  and  why
      she would not practise openly.

  11. One of the reasons given in the letter of Refusal rejecting the  claim
      is in connection with the Appellant's explanation that there are spies
      in the United Kingdom reporting  to  the  Iranian  authorities.   That
      issue is dealt with at paragraph 72 of the expert's report.   This  is
      relevant to the way in which the appellant practises her faith in  the
      United Kingdom.

  12. He also referred me to paragraph 14 of the report which refers to  the
      monitoring of persons who follow the Baha'i religion.

  13. Paragraphs  16  to  19  relates  to  the  procedures  of  the  Iranian
      authorities and the way in which they  release  detainees  subject  to
      reporting conditions  and  at   paragraph  25  he  gives  reasons  why
      releasing a detainee on bail is plausible.

  14. Overall the expert has dealt with the Appellant's claims  as  to  what
      happened to her in Iran and given his opinion on their plausibility.

  15. Mr McVeety argued that the Judge had not found against  the  Appellant
      on the basis of a lack of plausibility of her claims but on the  basis
      of inconsistencies.

  16. I am persuaded that the Judge made a material  error  of  law  in  her
      treatment of the expert report.  It certainly has  the  appearance  of
      her having made adverse credibility findings without reference to that
      report  and  in  particular  there  has  been  no  assessment  of  the
      Appellant's claims about what took place in Iran which is  dealt  with
      at length in  the  report.   The  expert's  report  should  have  been
      included as part of the overall credibility assessment  in  accordance
      with established case law.

  17. As credibility is at the heart of this claim I set aside the  Decision
      in its entirety.

  18. After  hearing  submissions  from  both  representatives,  noting  the
      substantial credibility findings that need to be made, it  was  agreed
      that the appropriate course was to remit the matter  to  the  First  -
      tier Tribunal for a full re hearing on all issues.

  19. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the
      First -tier Tribunal's Decision is set aside and the  matter  remitted
      to the First - tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.

  20. There was no application for an  anonymity  direction  and  I  see  no
      justification for making one.


Signed                              Date 16th August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
