
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11360/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|on 25 October 2016                         |on 26 October 2016             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    A K A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fowell, dismissing his appeal against refusal of recognition as a
    refugee from Eritrea.

 2. Permission to appeal to the UT was granted on 7 grounds.   However,  Mr
    Forrest concentrated on two submissions: (1) inadequacy  of  reasoning,
    or lack of evidence, to support the finding that the appellant had  not
    done all that might be expected of him to show that he  does  not  have
    Ethiopian nationality; it was not for him to prove that point; and  (2)
    error in identifying the applicable  country  guidance  and  background
    evidence, in particular as to the age  at  which  an  Eritrean  may  be
    liable to national service, which may be as young as 7 or 8,  and  does
    not apply only at age 17.

 3. Mr Matthews submitted that the appellant was born in a  place  then  in
    Ethiopia, prior to the existence of Eritrea as a state, of  parents  of
    Ethiopian citizenship and so has been an Ethiopian citizen since birth.
     He cited MA (Ethiopia) EWCA Civ 289 at paragraph  78  as  establishing
    that it was for the appellant to show any deprivation  of  citizenship,
    and to do so on the balance of probability.  It was not enough to  show
    only that some approach had been made to the Ethiopian Embassy.

 4. Mr Matthews accepted that country guidance and background  evidence  is
    that conscription in Eritrea may take place from an early age, so  that
    the judge's reasoning based on age on (alleged) departure from  Eritrea
    was suspect.  He also acknowledged that  there  was  substance  in  the
    criticism of the judge's rejection of  the  evidence  of  a  supporting
    witness at paragraph 35; someone might easily not know whether  another
    person of similar age was older or younger, and some description of the
    allegedly shared neighbourhood had been given.

 5. Mr Matthews was unable to submit that the case had been bound  to  fail
    on the Ethiopian citizenship issue  alone,  because  the  evidence  was
    intertwined, and said that the case should be remitted.

 6. That is the outcome which was sought for the  appellant,  although  not
    for precisely the same reasons.

 7. At the fresh hearing parties should be ready to address  the  issue  of
    Ethiopian nationality in the context of onus and standard of proof, and
    to assess the case according to the most  recent  country  guidance  (a
    further case is about to be published).

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  its
    findings are to stand. The nature of  the  case  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate in terms of section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the  2007  Act  and  of
    Practice Statement 7.2 to remit the case to the  FtT  for  an  entirely
    fresh hearing.

 9. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Fowell.

10. An anonymity direction was made in the FtT, although no reason is given
    for departing from the usual principle of open justice  unless  a  need
    for anonymity is shown.  The matter was not addressed in the UT,  so  I
    have preserved anonymity in this decision.


            [pic]

            25 October 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
