
                                    [pic]
IAC-TH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11778/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th January 2017                           |On 20th January 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 Tirhas [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Marcus of Counsel instructed by Bankfield Heath
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Dearden
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 11th February 2015.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Eritrea  born  on  3rd  May  1987.   She
    arrived in the UK on  22nd  August  2014  and  claimed  asylum  on  2nd
    September 2014.  She was refused by letter on 15th  December  2014  and
    her appeal against that refusal was dismissed on 18th February 2015.

 3. She sought permission to appeal on a number of  different  grounds  and
    permission was granted by Judge Macdonald on 23rd March 2015.

 4. On 16th June 2015 the matter  came  before  me  and  I  set  aside  the
    decision on the grounds that the judge had erred in law in  failing  to
    resolve a central issue in the appeal  and  had  failed  to  take  into
    account all of the relevant evidence.  The matter was remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 5. For reasons which are entirely unclear that did not occur, and  on  4th
    November 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan set down the  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal at Bradford.

 6. Prior to the hearing, the appellant submitted a  skeleton  argument  to
    the effect that the appeal ought to be allowed in accordance  with  the
    country guidance of MST and Others (national service - risk categories)
    Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 443.

 7. Mrs Pettersen, for the respondent, accepted the appellant's case.   She
    agreed that the issue of illegal exit was not the decisive factor since
    the appellant was at risk on return to Eritrea  because  she  would  be
    conscripted and she did not want to go into the military.

 8. She therefore succeeded, both on Article 3 grounds  and  on  the  basis
    that she would be at risk  on  persecution  as  a  consequence  of  her
    imputed political opinion, being of draft age.

 9. Mrs Pettersen acknowledged that the question of whether  married  women
    are conscripted had, as she put  it,  become  somewhat  muddled  before
    Judge Dearden, and there was in fact no  basis  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant would be able to escape conscription on the  basis  that  she
    might have married.  The country guidance does not support the  finding
    that married women are systematically  either  released  from  military
    service or not called up at all (paragraph 321 of MST and Others).

Findings and Conclusions

10. MST and Others held that the age limits for national service are likely
    to remain the same as stated in MO, namely 54 for men and 47 for women.
     The Eritrean system of military/national service  remains  indefinite.
    Even if the appellant left Eritrea lawfully,  at  the  age  of  5,  she
    remained outside the country and did not return despite being  eligible
    for military service.  She is therefore likely to  be  perceived  as  a
    draft evader if returned to Eritrea (paragraph 366 of MST and  Others).



11. Accordingly, she has established a risk of persecution on return.



Notice of Decision

12. The original judge erred in law.  His decision has been set aside.   It
    is remade as follows.  The appellant's appeal  is  allowed  on  refugee
    grounds and on Article 3 grounds.

13. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed[pic]                             Date 19 January 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

