











UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11316/2014
                                                               AA/00114/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Birmingham              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 14th  March 2016               |On 25th April 2016                       |
|                                  |                                         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between
                              Mr Daud Omarkhail
                             Mr Javed Omarkhail
                        no anonymity directions made

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, counsel (instructed by Guildhall
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are brothers and nationals of Afghanistan.


   2. The first appellant was born on 25 December 1996. He  entered  the  UK
      clandestinely on 9 September 2009 and claimed asylum on  10  September
      2009. His application was refused but  he  was  granted  discretionary
      leave until 22 April 2013. A further application made on 17 April 2013
      was refused on 4 December 2014 and a decision was made to  remove  him
      pursuant to s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


   3. The second appellant was born on 15 June 1995. He came to the UK  with
      the first appellant  and  applied  for  asylum.  His  application  was
      refused on 10 March 2010 but he was granted discretionary leave  until
      15 December 2012. His application for further leave to remain dated 13
      December 2012 was refused on 16 December 2014 and a decision was  made
      to remove him under s.47 of the 2006 Act.


   4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Asjad  dismissed  their  appeals  "in  their
      entirety" in a decision promulgated on 11 March 2015. She  found  that
      they are economic migrants, who had been sent to the UK to join  their
      brother. She found their accounts to be fabricated. There was no basis
      to the asylum claim [24].


   5. She considered Article 8 within the Immigration Rules, namely Appendix
      FM. The second appellant, Javed, entered into an Islamic marriage with
      Ms Z Bibi on 24 January 2015. Ms Bibi was herself born in  Afghanistan
      and came to the UK when she was 13. She is  now  20  years  old.  That
      marriage  is  not  recognised  under  UK  law.  She  found  that   the
      relationship was not a genuine and subsisting  one.   It  was  entered
      into solely for the purpose of securing his immigration status in  the
      UK [32].


   6. She refused both their appeals under Appendix FM [34].


   7. With regard to their claim under paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
      Rules, she did not find that the  appellants  would  face  significant
      obstacles to their reintegration and accordingly found that  paragraph
      276ADE(vi) was not met [36] and [37].


   8. Nor did she find that there are  any  arguable  grounds  for  granting
      leave outside the rules and did not propose to consider Article  8  on
      that basis [39].


   9. On 10 April 2015, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nicholson  granted  the
      appellants permission to appeal. Ground 22 contended  that  the  Judge
      erred in failing to consider Article 8 outside  the  rules.  He  found
      that it was arguable that  as  the  relevant  rules  did  not  form  a
      complete code, an Article 8 assessment outside the rules  should  have
      been made. As it could not be said that an arguable error  could  have
      no material bearing on the  outcome  of  the  appeal,  permission  was
      granted on that ground.  He did not refuse permission on the remaining
      grounds, but stated that "most have no discernible merit."


  10. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Mills noted that the  appellants  had
      come to the UK as minors and had lived for a number of years in  their
      brother's household.  He  stated  that  the  Judge  had  not  properly
      addressed their case in the light of their ties  in  the  UK.  Whether
      family life continues in the UK as dependants of their brother had  to
      be addressed.  He stated that in the circumstances, the Judge erred in
      failing to consider the Article 8 claim outside the rules.


  11. Mr Mills accordingly accepted that the Article 8  decision  should  be
      set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.




  12. Mr Pipe  adopted  the  grounds  of  appeal  prepared  by  counsel  who
      represented the appellants at the First-tier hearing.    He  submitted
      that the nature of the relationships needed to be considered by having
      regard to the number of brothers in the UK. Moreover,  at  [32]  there
      had been no reference to the second appellant  at  all.  The  evidence
      that he produced was not even recorded.


  13. He submitted that the Judge erred in law with regard to  their  asylum
      appeals. The determination was at  times  incoherent  in  places.  The
      findings were not entirely clear to the reader and  were  inadequately
      reasoned. They were  unclear  or  incomprehensible.  Accordingly,  the
      Judge did not consider the appeal with the most anxious scrutiny.


  14. At [11] the Judge found that  the  appellants  belonged  to  a  family
      totalling six brothers, three of whom are resident in  the  UK  having
      been  granted  refugee  status.  A  sixth  brother  was  deported   to
      Afghanistan. That finding is factually incorrect as all four  brothers
      of the appellants are settled in the UK and all obtained  status  here
      through discretionary leave to remain. None was  granted  asylum.  The
      sixth brother whom the Judge  recorded  as  having  been  deported  to
      Afghanistan was in fact Mr Abdul Latif, who gave evidence in the  case
      and who had in the past removed from the UK but is now settled here.


  15. He submitted that the Judge's comments at [24] that  she  found  Abdul
      Latif to have inadvertently stated the real reason for the appellants'
      coming to the UK, namely, to complete the family unit and that  it  is
      their intention now for their parents to join them  as  well,  was  an
      error. The Judge misconstrued or misunderstood the evidence  given  by
      him. He was giving evidence  regarding  the  appellants'  family  life
      having been established in the UK though  they  had  arrived  here  as
      minors who lived with Mr Latif. This was set out at [16].


  16. The Judge failed to deal with the relevant issues  she  was  asked  to
      determine. There was no evaluation of the interview questions  or  the
      manner  in  which  the  screening  and  full  asylum  interviews  were
      conducted. It was evident that the interviewing officer  placed  undue
      pressure on them.  There  was  no  proper  reasoning  as  to  why  the
      submissions made were rejected.  By way of example, Mr  Pipe  referred
      to questions 41 and 42 of the  second  appellant's  interview.  It  is
      apparent from these questions that  the  interviewer  was  stating  in
      effect that he did not believe the appellant's account that his father
      was a commander in the army.


  17. He questioned whether the Judge applied the correct lower standard  of
      proof. At paragraph 11 of the grounds, it is contended that the  Judge
      materially erred by taking a speculative and negative approach towards
      their  credibility  without  properly  considering  or  assessing  all
      aspects of their claim in the context of their age at the time of  the
      interviews. She did not apply the benefit of the doubt more  liberally
      in view of their age at the date of the interviews.


  18. With regard to [23] Mr Pipe noted that the Judge  found  that  it  was
      difficult to accept why at the time the Afghan army was  supported  by
      NATO and non-NATO troops, it is alleged that  the  appellants'  father
      allowed Taliban members to frequent his home for five  or  six  months
      without doing anything about it. It  was  not  credible  that  a  high
      ranking officer in the Army with soldiers under his control would feel
      powerless to do anything.


  19. He contended that the Judge erred by reviewing this evidence from  the
      standpoint of her own environment and not of that of a  country  where
      persecution, harassment, torture and ill treatment are endemic.


  20. He submitted in reliance on paragraph 14  of  the  grounds,  that  the
      Judge did not indicate with clarity what evidence she  accepted,  what
      she rejected, what evidence she could not make up  her  mind  on,  and
      what evidence she regarded as irrelevant.


  21. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Mills submitted  with  regard  to  the
      contention that there was a lack of anxious scrutiny, that whilst  the
      Judge had at [11] made mistakes, they were not 'in and of  themselves'
      material and do not show that anxious scrutiny had not been given.


  22. The argument that the Judge's  reasons  were  inadequate,  unclear  or
      incomprehensible and confusing is essentially a matter of form and not
      substance. Whilst it would have been best  practice  to  set  out  the
      evidence as well as detailed reasons, there is nothing to suggest that
      the decision relating to asylum cannot stand.


  23. He submitted that the Judge had made a clearly  significant  point  at
      [16]. There she stated that if it as accepted as submitted,  that  the
      appellants were minors and were frightened and nervous and not used to
      the environment of questioning when they  gave  their  interviews,  it
      would then follow that any statement they gave in a more  relaxed  and
      less pressurised environment would by inference be more reliable  than
      the interview conducted. It was on that basis that  she  proceeded  to
      consider the second statements made by the appellants  in  support  of
      the applications for leave to remain.


  24. Mr Mills submitted that  the  Judge  did  properly  consider  relevant
      matters, including the fact that they were  minors  and  they  had  no
      representative at their interviews. There was however an adult present
      when it was conducted. This was their brother. The  findings  at  [16]
      were reasonably clear and there was a  proper  basis  upon  which  the
      Judge declined in effect to exclude the interview in evidence.


  25. At [24] the Judge  properly  found  that  the  reason  why  the  first
      appellant struggled to give a proper account, and had repeatedly tried
      to do so, was because the  circumstances  are  not  true.  The  second
      appellant's inconsistencies are also as a result of  his  having  been
      coached by his parents and brothers in his evidence. He was  taken  by
      surprise by the probing questions of the interviewing officer.


  26. However, the Judge did not accept that the questioning was in any  way
      harsh. His brother had acted  as  an  appropriate  adult  and  at  the
      beginning of the interview this role was explained  to  him  including
      the fact that the interview could be stopped if he thought his brother
      was becoming upset or distressed. The appellant only asked for a break
      once and that was when there was a major inconsistency that was put to
      him [24].  She accordingly found that the account of  both  appellants
      was fabricated.


  27. Mr Mills submitted that if anything untoward had happened, the brother
      who was present would have complained. There is no suggestion from the
      interview record however that he did.


  28. He submitted that the finding at [23] was significant. The core of the
      claim is that the father was a high ranking officer in the  Army  with
      soldiers under his control. The finding was that it  is  not  credible
      that a high ranking officer  in  the  army  with  soldiers  under  his
      control would have allowed Taliban members to frequent  his  home  for
      five or six months without doing anything about  it.  The  grounds  in
      this regard contend that the Judge evaluated this  evidence  from  the
      point of view of a person with a British  cultural  context.  However,
      the reasons given by the Judge would  be  equally  applicable  in  the
      context of Afghanistan. There is no latent cultural bias that has been
      used. This was not plausible in any context.


  29. It is in that context that the Judge went on at [24] to make a finding
      that the appellants are economic migrants.  If viewed in isolation  it
      would constitute a misdirection. However, this has to be assessed with
      regard to the earlier finding which rejected the  core  claim  of  the
      appellants.


  30. Although the Judge's assessment and analysis might  have  been  better
      structured, it can be discerned why the Judge came to her decision and
      it should be upheld.


  31. In reply, Mr Pipe submitted that cumulatively,  the  failure  to  give
      effect to the  best  practice  adds  up.  There  was  nothing  in  the
      judgement about the ongoing strength of the Taliban.


      Assessment


  32. I have referred to the factual errors made by the Judge. I  have  also
      considered the contention that the decision was inadequately reasoned.
      The effect of the submissions is that the Judge failed to  demonstrate
      that she had applied the  most  anxious  scrutiny  to  evaluating  the
      evidence of the appellants.


  33. The fact that the Judge wrongly recorded Mr Abdul Latif as having been
      deported to Afghanistan even though he was in the past removed but  is
      now settled here and gave evidence was, as acknowledged by Mr Mills, a
      mistake.


  34. However, I accept his submission that in and of itself  this  did  not
      constitute a material misdirection in the circumstances. The Judge had
      regard to his evidence.


  35. It is contended that the Judge  failed  to  evaluate  the  probity  of
      interview questions which is said  to  reveal  that  the  interviewing
      officer placed undue pressure on the appellants.  Nor  was  there  any
      proper reasoning as to why the Judge rejected the submissions made. It
      is asserted that there was  no  proper  evaluation  of  the  interview
      questions which were drawn to her attention.


  36. In that respect, the Judge did not accept  that  the  questioning  was
      harsh  in  any  way.  The  brother  attended  the  interviews  as   an
      appropriate adult. His role had been explained to him. He was informed
      that the interview could be stopped if  he  thought  his  brother  was
      becoming upset or distressed.


  37. At [16] the Judge again refers to the  closing  submissions  regarding
      the manner in which the screening  and  full  asylum  interviews  were
      conducted. She found that  even  if  the  submission  that  they  were
      frightened, nervous and not used to the environment  and  questioning,
      were accepted, it follows that any statement that they gave in a  more
      relaxed and less pressurised environment would be more  reliable.   It
      was upon that basis that she analysed the statements of the appellants
      including their second statement as  well  as  the  first  appellant's
      third statement.


  38. It was on that basis that she ultimately found it difficult to  accept
      why, if their father was a high  ranking  officer  in  the  army  with
      soldiers under his control, he would feel  powerless  to  do  anything
      with regard to the Taliban whom he allowed to frequent  his  home  for
      five or six months [23].  That is a finding which is supported by  the
      evidence including the background identified by the Judge.


  39. The finding that the appellants are  economic  migrants  followed  her
      earlier finding that she did not accept that their claim  about  their
      father was true in the light of the objective evidence.  She  did  not
      accept that they were visited at their home by Taliban members for the
      same reason [23].


  40. She did not find with regard to risk on return, that  even  if  it  is
      accepted that their father did leave the army without resigning,  this
      would lead to their persecution [29].  That was not supported  by  the
      objective evidence.


  41. Although, as submitted by Mr Mills the structure of the decision might
      have been more coherent, the Judge has given sustainable  reasons  for
      dismissing the asylum appeals.


  42. I accordingly find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      in respect of the appellants' asylum claims did not involve the making
      of any material error on a point of law.


  43. With regard to the  Article  8  claim  however,  I  accept  Mr  Mills'
      assertion that the Judge should in the circumstances have  found  that
      there were arguable grounds for granting leave outside the rules.  The
      fact that she did not proceed to consider Article 8 outside the  rules
      constitutes a material error given that the  relevant  rules  did  not
      form a complete code.


  44. The parties agreed that if that contention were  upheld,  this  is  an
      appropriate case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh
      decision to be made. I accept that this is an appropriate case  to  be
      remitted.


Notice of decisions


The decision of the First tier Tribunal  not  to  consider  the  appellants'
Article 8 claims outside the rules involved the making  of  an  error  on  a
point of law. To that extent their appeals are allowed.


The decision is set aside and their Article 8 claims outside the Rules  will
be re-made at Birmingham, by another Judge.


      No anonymity directions are made.






      Signed                             Date 19 April 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

