
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/11834/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 July 2015                      |On 21 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE TRIBUNAL blum


                                   Between

                                   mr H K
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mills, Counsel instructed by Kanaga Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a Sri Lankan national, date of birth 1 May  1990.   He
    appeals against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Malins
    promulgated on 12 May 2015 dismissing his asylum appeal.  The basis  of
    the asylum claim is as follows.

2.   The appellant is a Tamil.  He claims that he joined the  LTTE  aged  16
    in May 2006.  He  claims  he  received  basic  training  and  was  then
    informed by the LTTE to return home and that they would get in  contact
    with him if needed.  He maintains that between 2006  and  2007  he  was
    required by the LTTE to deliver up to ten parcels.  He  does  not  know
    the content of those parcels.

3.   Following the conclusion of the conflict in Sri Lanka in May  2009  the
    appellant claims that he helped, via an NGO, individuals, including two
    LTTE  members,  to  escape  detention  camps.  In  September  2009  the
    appellant applied for a student visa to the UK. This was rejected. On 2
    May 2010 the appellant maintains he was arrested. He claims that he was
    questioned concerning his involvement in the LTTE and his assistance in
    facilitating  the  escape  of  the  LTTE  members.  He  claims  he  was
    mistreated. He maintains that his father arranged payment  of  a  bribe
    for his release on 26 May  2010  and  he  was  given  weekly  reporting
    conditions.

4.   On 15 July 2010 an application was made by him for a  student  visa  to
    study in the UK. This was granted. The  appellant  left  Sri  Lanka  in
    October 2010 and entered the UK. He was  subsequently  granted  further
    periods of leave until January 2015.  However, the college at which  he
    was studying had its licence revoked and his leave  was  curtailed.  He
    made an application for further leave to remain but this was refused on
    3 September 2014.  On  11  October  2014  he  was  encountered  working
    illegally and he claimed asylum on 13 October 2014.

5.   The respondent refused the asylum claim finding the appellant  entirely
    incredible.  The appellant appealed and the First-tier Judge also found
    the appellant's claim  seriously  lacking  in  credibility.  The  judge
    rejected the appellant's credibility on a  number  of  bases  and  this
    included the timing of the appellant's departure from  Sri  Lanka,  the
    circumstances surrounding the infliction of  injuries  present  on  his
    body, his claimed relationship with the LTTE, his proven dishonesty  in
    dealing with the British High Commission and the  immigration  services
    in the United Kingdom and the delay in his  asylum  claim.   The  judge
    concluded that the appellant would not be at  risk  on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka.

6.   The grounds of appeal against that  decision  contend  that  the  judge
    failed to follow GJ and ignored objective evidence.  The  grounds  take
    issue  with  the  judge's  credibility  findings  in  relation  to,  in
    particular, the medical evidence, and the  grounds  maintain  that  the
    judge failed to apply anxious scrutiny.

7.   There were two medical reports before the judge.  One  was  from  a  Dr
    Saleh Dhumad who  qualified  as  a  doctor  in  Iraq  before  obtaining
    psychiatric qualifications in London.   Dr Dhumad is now  a  Consultant
    Psychiatrist in the Central and Northwest London Foundation NHS  Trust.
    The second medical report, a scarring report, was written by Mr  Andres
    Izquierdo-Martin, Consultant in  Emergency  Medicine.   His  report  is
    dated 15 March  2015.   Dr  Dhumad's  report  is  dated  February  2015
    although strangely it does make reference to Mr Martin's report.

8.   At paragraph 10 of  her  determination  the  judge  considered  various
    aspects of the appellant's claim and found him incredible. Between 10.1
    and 10.7 of the decision the judge considered, inter alia,  the  timing
    of  the  appellant's  departure  from  Sri  Lanka,  his  injuries,  his
    relationship with the LTTE and his dishonesty in dealings with  the  UK
    authorities and the judge gave a number of relatively detailed  reasons
    for those findings.  Of particular relevance for the  purposes  of  the
    error of law hearing is 10.7.  Having considered  a  range  of  matters
    relating to the appellant's credibility the judge stated:

         "It must accordingly follow, not just on the appellant's total want
         of credibility, but also from some of the specific findings I  have
         made, that I am not able to accept the appellant's  claim  to  have
         been either a member of the LTTE who worked for them or that he was
         tortured as described by the Sri Lankan authorities. With a certain
         degree of perplexity but in a spirit of enquiry, I  shall  make  my
         findings upon the detail of the medical evidence below."

9.   In my view this is a classic error of law on the basis of a failure  to
    holistically  consider  the  medical  evidence  in  relation  to  other
    findings. It is irresistibly clear at 10.7 that the judge  had  already
    rejected the  appellant's  account  before  then  considering  the  two
    medical reports. This was in effect putting the cart before the  horse.
    The Judge reached conclusions  on  credibility  prior  to  and  without
    reference to the expert reports, an approach which is unlawful  (Mbanga
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367). I am
    reinforced in my conclusion by  reference  to  paragraph  10.8  of  the
    determination where, after considering the psychiatrist's  report,  the
    judge states:

         "I find that even on the lower standard of proof  I  am  unable  to
         rely upon this report because in my judgment the appellant  heavily
         embellished the original accounts of events given (see my  findings
         on credibility above)."

10.  I am further  reinforced  by  reference  to  10.10(a)  of  the  judge's
    determination where the judge says in respect of the scarring report:

         "Doctors consider the presentation before them in the  round:  this
         physician did not of course consider the patient in the context  of
         the adverse credibility finding I  have  made  with  the  resulting
         exaggeration from the appellant."

    This in my view suggests that the judge had already made those  adverse
    credibility findings.

11. In his Rule 24 response Mr Melvin has argued that the judge  did  adopt
    the proper procedure at the hearing and stated that paragraph 9 of  the
    determination reveals that the written  evidence/medical  reports  were
    taken into account prior  to  the  findings  being  made,  the  medical
    evidence being assessed alongside  the  oral/written  evidence  of  the
    claim.  I do not accept this.  The judge in my view at paragraph 9  was
    doing no more than identifying the evidence before  her  including  the
    medical evidence.   The  paragraph  says  nothing  about  the  approach
    adopted by the judge in her assessment of the evidence. Mr  Melvin  has
    also reminded me that the Upper Tribunal should not normally set  aside
    decisions where no misdirection of law is made  and  the  fact-findings
    process cannot be criticised.  For  the  reasons  already  given  I  am
    however satisfied that the Judge materially misdirected herself in  law
    by failing to adopt  the  correct  approach  to  consideration  of  the
    medical evidence.

12. In these circumstances the appeal is remitted back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be considered 'de novo' by a Judge other than Judge Malins

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed; the matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to
be considered afresh, all issues open and no factual findings retained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



[pic]    21 July 2015
Signed   Date

Judge Blum
Upper Tribunal Judge

