
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/11703/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 September 2016                          |On 6 October 2016             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                MOHAMMED [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Mellon (Counsel instructed by Asylum Aid)
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant whose date of birth is 6 December 1997, is a  citizen  of
    Somalia.  He appeals against a decision made by the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Lucas) ("FTT") who dismissed his appeal on  asylum  grounds  and
    under the Qualification Regulations 15(c).

2.   That decision was promulgated on 20 June 2016.

3.   The appellant entered the UK on 1  January  2015  as  an  unaccompanied
    asylum seeking minor and was accepted by  the  UK  from  transfer  from
    Holland under Dublin  III.   He  claimed  asylum  on  that  date,   his
    screening interview was conducted on 6 January 2015 in Arabic, and  his
    substantive interview was conducted on 23 July 2015 in Somali.

4.   The factual background  was  accepted  by  the  respondent  namely  the
    appellant's nationality as Somali citizen, the account of his  life  in
    Saudi Arabia and Yemen, his membership of  the  Reer  Hamar  clan,  his
    account of being attacked in the Yemen by Houthis and that  his  father
    was kidnapped by Al Shabaab in 2010  after  he  was  deported  back  to
    Somalia.  The respondent rejected the appellant's claim  on  the  basis
    that he failed to establish risk on return  in MOJ and  Others  (Return
    to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC).

FTT findings and decision

5.    The First-tier Tribunal considered risk on return from [54  -  64]  in
    its decision and reasons.  In reaching its decision the  FTT  concluded
    that the appellant could relocate to Mogadishu. It found that he was  a
    resourceful person who had managed to settle in the UK  notwithstanding
    that he was displaced from Somalia at a very early age.  The FTT  found
    that the appellant would not face significant difficulties reintegrated
    into life in Somalia on account of his minority clan status.  It  found
    no realistic prospect that the  appellant  faced  any  threat  from  Al
    Shabaab.  It found that the appellant on the balance  of  probabilities
    the appellant had family members located in Somalia.  The appellant had
    a large extended family in the UK and it was found to be  inconceivable
    that they would not be prepared to support him on  return  to  Somalia.
    It found that the appellant was clearly able to speak Somali as he  had
    done so during the hearing.  The appellant could take advantage of  the
    economic boom in Somalia and did not come within the  categories  under
    MOJ.  Article 3 ECHR was dismissed on the same basis.

Grounds of Application for Permission

6.   The FTT erred in fact by making a finding that the appellant can  speak
    Somali.  This was a material error and based exclusively on  the  FTT's
    mistaken understanding that the appellant's interpreter  was  a  Somali
    interpreter when in fact he  was  interpreting  using  the  Reer  Hamar
    dialect.

7.   The FTT failed to conduct a "careful assessment" in line  with  factors
    identified in MOJ.  The FTT applied the wrong test in terms  of  length
    of absence from Somalia,  focussing  on  whether  the  absence  was  an
    insurmountable obstacle.  The FTT failed to make findings as to whether
    the appellant would be able to secure a livelihood on return and having
    regard to his individual circumstances.  The  FTT  failed  entirely  to
    consider the appellant's circumstances on departure and the question of
    minority clan support.

8.   The FTT failed to give adequate  reasons  and/  or  take  into  account
    relevant considerations as  regards  finding  that  the  appellant  had
    family in Somalia.  The FTT  found  that  the  appellant's  mother  was
    living in Hargisa which in fact is in Somaliland not Somalia.

9.   The FTT failed to give adequate reasons and /or take into account  that
    the appellant had not been in contact with his mother  who  had  funded
    his journey to the UK, oral evidence  from  family  and  witnesses  who
    confirmed they would not be able to provide financial support and  that
    the appellant had applied for NASS support for basic subsistence.

Permission to Appeal

10.  Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  McWilliam  on
    10 August 2016 on all  grounds.   Judge  McWilliam  directed  that  the
    parties would be expected to make submissions re  MOJ  and  Others  and
    SSHD v Abdukadir Ahmed Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442.

Error of Law Hearing

11.  At the hearing before me both  representatives  made  submissions.   Ms
    Mellon expanded on the grounds for permission and made reference to her
    skeleton argument prepared for the First-tier Tribunal hearing  in  May
    2016.

12.  Ms Ahmad submitted that the findings made by the FTT were open  to  him
    on the evidence available.  She cited  the  references  throughout  the
    decision and reasons to the  appellant  speaking  Somali  and  as  such
    evidence was inconsistent it was open to the FTT to  make  the  finding
    that he could speak Somali.

13.  The FTT had  taken  into  account  all  the  relevant  factors  in  the
    decision  and  reasons  including  length  of  absence,  minority  clan
    membership and involvement of Al Shabaab.   The  FTT  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the appellant had some family in Somalia and it  did  not
    accept that he would be destitute.

14.  Ms Ahmad relied on Said in which it was held  that  the  threshold  for
    Article 3 cases was high and it could not be met by this appellant.

15.  Ms Mellon  responded  by  clarifying  that  the  appellant's  screening
    interview had been conducted in Arabic, his  substantive  interview  in
    Reer Hamar and the hearing in Somali spoken with that dialect.

16.  It was important to take into  account  that  the  respondent  had  not
    disputed any of the factual aspects of the appellant's  claim.   Whilst
    the FTT had in general terms considered some of the risk factors in MOJ
    there was a failure to give clear findings and reasons having regard to
    this  particular   appellant   given   his   factual   background   and
    circumstances.

Decision

17.  At the end of the hearing I gave my decision that there  were  material
    errors of law in the decision and reasons which I set aside.   In  this
    appeal the details of the appellant's  claim  were  not  contested  nor
    disputed by the Respondent and the appeal issue  focussed  on  risk  on
    return. I am satisfied that the FTT failed properly  to  engage  in  an
    adequate consideration of the evidence in assessing whether or not  the
    appellant came within the risk factors  identified  in  MOJ.   The  FTT
    appears to have proceeded on a factual misunderstanding as regards  the
    ability of the appellant to speak  the  Somali  language,  which  is  a
    significant issue in terms of his ability to reintegrate in Somalia.  I
    accept the submissions made by Miss Mellon as to  language.  A  further
    mistake has been made in  finding that  the  appellant  has  family  in
    Somalia.  The evidence given by the appellant was that his  mother  was
    in Somaliland and not Somalia, which I accept.  I  find  that  the  FTT
    reached a finding that contradicted with  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant and his witnesses as regards the availability of funding  and
    remittance for the appellant in the event that he were to  be  returned
    to Somalia.  In short the analysis and assessment conducted by the  FTT
    falls short of the careful assessment required to be made  for  persons
    relocating to Mogadishu in circumstances where there is membership of a
    minority clan with no former links to the city, no access to funds,  no
    other form of clan, family or social support including the  absence  of
    means to establish a home and some form of  ongoing  financial  support
    resulting in living in makeshift  accommodation  within  an  NIDP  camp
    where conditions can fall below the acceptable humanitarian  standards.
    The FTT engaged  in  a  generalised  assessment  only  of  the  factors
    relevant in MOJ and much  of  that  assessment  was  based  on  factual
    mistakes. Furthermore there was a lack of reasoning given for  negative
    findings in circumstances where the factual nexus and  details  of  the
    appellant's claim had been accepted by the respondent.

18.  There are material errors in law and the decision and  reasons  is  set
    aside. The appeal grounds are made out.   Both  representatives  agreed
    that the appeal should be heard de novo.  In light of the criticisms of
    the facts as found by the First-tier  Tribunal,  I  conclude  that  the
    proper course of action is  the matter to be remitted  for  hearing  de
    novo at Taylor House (excluding Judge Lucas).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 6.10.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 6.10.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


