
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11172/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 January 2017                            |On 20 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     hd
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr C McWatters instructed by Migrant Legal Project


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the respondent.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Archer) allowing the appeal of HD (hereafter
    the "claimant") against a decision to remove  her  to  Vietnam  on  the
    basis that to do so would breach the Refugee Convention.

 3. The claimant, who is a citizen of Vietnam, was born on  4  April  1987.
    She arrived in the United Kingdom sometime at  the  beginning  of  2012
    having, she claimed, left Vietnam in August/September  2011  travelling
    to, and staying in, Germany and France before travelling to the  UK  by
    lorry.

 4. On 18 August 2014, she claimed asylum.  The  basis  of  her  claim  was
    twofold.  First, she claimed that she had been trafficked  and  was  at
    risk of being re-trafficked if  returned  to  Vietnam.   Secondly,  she
    claimed to be at risk because of her Catholic faith.

 5. On 24 July 2015, the Secretary of State refused  the  claimant's  claim
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.  The  Secretary
    of State accepted that the claimant had been the victim of trafficking.
     However, she did not accept that  there  was  a  real  risk  that  the
    claimant would be re-trafficked from Vietnam.  In any event, there  was
    a 'sufficiency of protection' available to the claimant in Vietnam and,
    further,  she  could  safely  and  reasonably  internally  relocate  in
    Vietnam.  Finally, the Secretary of State did not accept that there was
    a real risk of persecution because of the claimant's Catholic faith.

 6. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Following a hearing,
    Judge Archer allowed the claimant's appeal on asylum grounds.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on a number of grounds.  First, the judge  failed  to  make  a
    finding whether the claimant, as a victim of trafficking, was a  member
    of a Particular Social Group (PSG) in  Vietnam.   Secondly,  the  judge
    failed to give adequate reasons for allowing the appeal and had  relied
    upon a number of cases not relevant to the claimant's claim.

 8. On 9 August 2016, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Pooler)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.

The Submissions

 9. At the  outset  of  the  hearing,  Mr  Richards,  who  represented  the
    Secretary of State, indicated that he  did  not  rely  upon  the  first
    ground, namely that the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  whether  the
    claimant (as a trafficked woman) formed part of a PSG in  Vietnam.   He
    accepted that the respondent in para  12  of  the  refusal  letter  had
    accepted that a trafficked woman from Vietnam was a member of a PSG.

10. Nevertheless, he submitted, relying upon the  remaining  grounds,  that
    the  judge  had  given  inadequate  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
    appellant was at real risk of being re-trafficked  by  simply  adopting
    the views of the experts.  Further, the three cases relied upon by  the
    judge, namely EK (Article 4 ECHR) Tanzania [2013] UKUT 00313 (IAC),  AZ
    (Trafficked women) Thailand CG [2010] UKUT 118  (IAC)  and  TD  and  AD
    (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC) were  irrelevant  to  his
    decision.  EK was concerned with Art 4 of the ECHR and not the  Refugee
    Convention, and the remaining two cases concerned trafficked women from
    Thailand and Albania and not Vietnam.

11. In his reply, Mr Richards submitted that the judge had not engaged with
    the Secretary of State's reasons in the refusal letter  for  concluding
    that there was a 'sufficiency of  protection'  and  that  the  claimant
    could safely and reasonably internally relocate within Vietnam.

12. On behalf of the claimant, Mr McWatters submitted that  the  judge  had
    been entitled to adopt the views of  the  experts  and  find  that  the
    appellant was likely to be re-trafficked.  Further, he  submitted  that
    the judge had effectively come to the conclusion  that  there  was  'no
    sufficiency  of  protection'  and  that  internal  relocation  was  not
    possible.

Discussion

13. The judge's reasoning  is  at  paras  18-20  of  his  determination  as
    follows:

         "18. The appellant is a victim of trafficking.  The NSPCC report at
             A54-A69 of the appellant's bundle states that the appellant is
             highly vulnerable and at risk of re-trafficking.  The risk  of
             exploitation is high (A66).  The country report from  Dr  Tran
             Thi Lan Anh dated 12 May 2016 confirms that the appellant  has
             been diagnosed with PTSD and concludes that the appellant  and
             [EV] would face many significant challenges  and  difficulties
             if returned to Vietnam.  She would not have  essential  papers
             such as a birth certificate or an ID card.  She does not  have
             a Ho Khau booklet.  Without those she would be  considered  as
             an illegal immigrant and might be forced  to  do  exploitative
             work.  The appellant and [EV] are at high risk  of  being  the
             target of traffickers as the  appellant  is  in  a  vulnerable
             state, has mental capacity and health issues and has no family
             protection.   [EV]  would  face  severe  and   possibly   life
             threatening risks because of poor medical facilities, lack  of
             treatment and the cost of heart disease treatment.   The  cost
             of such treatment is prohibitively expensive and very  clearly
             the appellant cannot afford the heart  treatment  or  her  own
             treatment.

         19.  I find both reports to be credible.  I  have  also  considered
             the psychiatric report from Dr Alison Battersby dated 5  March
             2016.  The appellant has now disclosed sexual abuse during her
             trafficking.  She is frightened of being  made  to  sex  work.
             Those initial disclosures include repeated sexual assault  and
             shouting at men to stay away from her because  she  has  AIDS.
             She has a history  of  perpetual  victimisation  and  is  very
             vulnerable to anyone who  shows  her  the  slightest  hint  of
             affection as she still craves someone to love.  That makes her
             highly susceptible to people who are adept at exploiting  this
             weakness and she may be subject to further  victimisation.   I
             find the psychiatric report to be credible.

         20.  I have carefully considered all of  the  country  information.
             The appellant is likely to be vulnerable to  retrafficking  or
             other forms of abuse if returned  to  Vietnam.   There  is  no
             evidence  of  adequate  facilities  or  government  action  in
             Vietnam such as to provide adequate state protection  to  this
             highly vulnerable appellant.  On that basis, her asylum  claim
             must succeed.  I have considered EK (Article 4 ECHR)  Tanzania
             [2013] UKUT 00313, AZ (Trafficked women)  Thailand  CG  [2010]
             UKUT 118 (IAC) and TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT
             00092 (IAC)".

    The reference to "EV" is to the claimant's daughter who was born in the
    UK on 5 April 2014.

14. Whilst the judge's reasoning is brief, he was in my  judgment  entitled
    to accept the views set out in the three reports  from  the  NSPCC,  Dr
    Tran Thi Lan Anh and Dr Battersby and for the reasons he gave find that
    there was a real risk of the claimant being re-trafficked.   The  judge
    clearly had in mind the background of the appellant's  claim  which  he
    set out at para 13 of his judgment as follows:

         "13. The appellant states that her parents lived in  a  poor  rural
             area  of  Vietnam  and  were  Catholics.   As  a   result   of
             persecution by the communist government a  due  to  not  being
             able to afford looking after her they sent  the  appellant  to
             [HN] ('the foster mother').  The appellant was 15-16  and  was
             forced to work really hard for no pay; from 4am to 10pm.   She
             left the house when she was 22-23 but went back to visit.  She
             was duped into being trafficked to Germany for the purpose  of
             domestic servitude.  She was taken to France and then  to  the
             UK where she was able to  escape  in  March  2012.   She  then
             worked in a nail shop in Swansea and  became  pregnant.   [EV]
             was born on 5 April 2014, her father is a  UK  citizen.   [EV]
             was born with a serious heart defect and other illnesses.  The
             family court became involved and  [EV]  was  placed  with  the
             appellant  under   a   supervision   order.    [EV]   requires
             significant medical evidence".

15. On the basis  of  the  claimant's  circumstances  including  her  clear
    vulnerability and previous history, the judge's finding that she was at
    real risk of being re-trafficked was properly open to him.   It  cannot
    be said that that finding was perverse or irrational.

16. Whilst Mr Richards pointed to the judge's reference to the cases of EK,
    AZ and TD and AD at the end of para 20 of the judgment,  all  that  the
    judge says is that he has "considered" those cases.  Nothing  in  those
    cases is inconsistent with the  judge's  finding  in  relation  to  the
    claimant made in para 20 that she is likely to be re-trafficked.  I see
    no material error in his reference to them having been considered.

17. Where, however, the judge has erred in law is that  he  has  failed  to
    consider, if the claimant is at  risk  of  being  re-trafficked,  first
    whether there would be a 'sufficiency of protection' for her in Vietnam
    and secondly,  whether  she  could  safely  and  reasonably  internally
    relocate.  I do not accept Mr McWatters' submission that the judge  has
    effectively decided those issues in paras 18-20.  He makes no reference
    to the issues of sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal  relocation
    which were relied upon by the Secretary of State and are dealt with  in
    detail in the refusal letter at paras 37-49 and 50-55 respectively.  It
    was not sufficient for the judge to allow the appellant's appeal simply
    on the basis that there was a real risk of being re-trafficked  without
    considering these issues and determining them in the claimant's favour.

Decision and Disposal

18. For those reasons, the judge materially erred in law  in  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal.  The decision is set aside and must be re-made.

19. The judge's finding that the claimant is at real risk of re-trafficking
    stands and is preserved.  However,  the  decision  in  respect  of  the
    asylum  ground  must  be  re-made  and  findings  made  in  respect  of
    'sufficiency of protection' and 'internal relocation'.

20. In addition, the judge made no finding in relation to  the  appellant's
    claim based upon her Catholic religion.  That aspect of the claim  also
    must be considered in any re-making of the decision.

21. I also note that the judge, because he allowed  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds, did not make a decision in respect of Art 8 of the ECHR.   The
    decision in respect of Art 8 must, therefore, also be made in re-making
    the decision.

22. Having regard to  the  nature  and  extent  of  fact-finding,  both  in
    relation to the asylum claim and also in relation to  Art  8,  applying
    para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement,   it   is
    appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal in order  to
    re-make the decision to the extent I have already indicated.

23. The appeal may be listed before any Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.





                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


