
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11509/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th January 2017                 |On 27th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     MH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain of Lei Dat and Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Robson of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 10th May 2016.

 2. The Appellant is an Iranian citizen born  27th  May  1979  who  claimed
    asylum on 10th March 2015, having arrived in the UK the  previous  day.
    The  Appellant's  claim  was  based  upon  his  fear  of  the   Iranian
    authorities because of his involvement with  the  Democratic  Party  of
    Kurdistan (KDPI).

 3. The Appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity.  He claimed  that  he  had  been
    arrested in February 1999 because of his attendance at a  demonstration
    in 1998.  The Appellant was tortured while in detention  and  sentenced
    to imprisonment of three years and three months.  He  was  released  in
    April 2001 and had to report to the authorities for a  year  after  his
    release.  He also had to undertake military service.

 4. After his  release  from  imprisonment,  prior  to  leaving  Iran,  the
    Appellant had been helping Kurdish activists belonging to the KDPI.  In
    July 2014 the Appellant was visited by two KDPI members, and his  house
    was raided by the authorities, but he managed to escape and leave Iran.



 5. The application was refused on 6th August 2015.

 6. The Appellant's appeal was heard by the FTT on 19th  April  2016.   The
    FTT took the view (paragraph 51) that the appeal  revolved  around  the
    credibility of the Appellant and  found  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    served a sentence of imprisonment, and there was no objective  evidence
    to confirm the abuse that he claimed to have suffered.

 7. The FTT did not find it credible that the Appellant was able to conduct
    clandestine activities following his release,  without  coming  to  the
    attention of Etelaat.   It  was  not  credible  that  if  Etelaat  were
    watching the Appellant's house, they would have allowed him to  escape.
    The FTT therefore concluded that the Appellant had not been  active  on
    behalf of the KDPI in Iran.  As to the Appellant's  activities  in  the
    UK, the FTT did not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had  undertaken  any
    activity for the KDPI in this country, because  the  Appellant  claimed
    that his involvement arose because of the mistreatment he  suffered  in
    prison, and the FTT did  not  find  that  he  had  been  imprisoned  as
    claimed.

 8. The FTT found that the Appellant would not be at risk simply because he
    had left Iran illegally.

 9. The Appellant applied for permission to  appeal.   In  summary  it  was
    contended that the Respondent had misunderstood the Appellant's account
    regarding his release from prison.  The Respondent  believed  that  the
    Appellant had claimed that he was released because he was  a  wrestler,
    but the Appellant's case was that he was released following  completion
    of his sentence.  It was contended that the FTT  erred  by  failing  to
    take into account the Appellant's explanation.  It was  submitted  that
    paragraph 52 of the FTT decision is "disjointed and  incomprehensible."
    The FTT had not given adequate reasons for finding that  the  Appellant
    had not been imprisoned.

10. Further, the FTT had erred at paragraph 52  by  failing  to  take  into
    account material objective evidence, when making a finding there was no
    objective evidence to confirm the abuse that the Appellant  claimed  he
    had suffered.

11. It was submitted  that  the  FTT  had  made  an  illogical  finding  in
    concluding that the Appellant had not been imprisoned and tortured, and
    this had infected the consideration of the whole claim.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan in the
    following terms;

         "2.  Given that the judge's credibility findings relied largely  on
             his own view of the plausibility of the Appellant's account it
             is at least arguable that  the  judge  failed  to  assess  the
             credibility of the account in light of the relevant background
             evidence.  It is also arguable that in other places the  judge
             may have failed to give sufficiently  clear  reasons  for  his
             findings and for rejecting evidence that was supportive of the
             Appellant's account.  The grounds are sufficiently arguable to
             warrant further consideration at a hearing.

         3.   Permission to appeal is granted."

13. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    dated 6th September 2016 pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 contending in summary that the FTT had  not
    erred in law, and had given adequate reasons for the findings that  had
    been  made.   It  was  contended  that  the  grounds  amounted   to   a
    disagreement with findings made by the FTT,  but  did  not  disclose  a
    material error of law.

14. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Appellant's Oral Submissions

15. Mr Hussain relied upon the grounds contained within the application for
    permission to appeal.  I was asked to find that no adequate reasons had
    been given by the FTT for not accepting the Appellant's claim  to  have
    been imprisoned.  I was also asked to find that the FTT failed to  take
    into  account  material  objective  evidence  regarding  treatment   of
    detained people in Iran.

16. If the FTT at paragraph 52 was referring to the  absence  of  objective
    evidence in relation to the Appellant's injuries, it was contended that
    the FTT had erred by failing to take into  account  that  the  injuries
    suffered while being tortured,  had  occurred  approximately  seventeen
    years previously.

17. Mr Hussain submitted that the FTT had not given reasons for  concluding
    at paragraphs 54 and 55 that it was not credible that the Appellant was
    able to conduct clandestine activities without coming to the  attention
    of Etelaat.





The Respondent's Oral Submissions

18. Mr Diwnycz relied upon the rule 24 response.  I was asked to find  that
    the FTT was entitled to conclude that the Appellant was  not  credible,
    and that adequate reasons had been given for that conclusion.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. The FTT correctly identified at paragraph 51 that the central and  core
    issue in this appeal is the credibility of the Appellant.

20. When findings are made, the FTT must provide adequate reasons for those
    findings, and the duty to give reasons is set out in the head  note  to
    Budhathoki (Reasons for Decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) which I  set
    out below;

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

21. I do not find that the  FTT  has  provided  adequate  reasons  for  the
    conclusion at paragraph 52 that the Appellant had not  been  imprisoned
    as claimed.  I  set  out  below  the  final  three  sentences  of  that
    paragraph;

         "I do not find that the circumstances in relation  to  his  release
         are  credible.   The  Appellant  had  simply  served   a   sentence
         imprisonment in full imposed upon him, if that had occurred.  This,
         therefore, casts doubt on the actual fact of imprisonment  and  the
         abuse that he said he suffered  of  which  there  is  no  objective
         evidence."

22. The Appellant's case according to paragraph 77 of his witness statement
    was that he did not claim  to  have  been  released  from  imprisonment
    because he was a wrestler.   He  was  given  a  specific  sentence  and
    released on completing that sentence.  The Wrestling  Federation  tried
    to help him, with his parents' involvement, but ultimately  he  had  to
    serve the sentence that was imposed.

23. The FTT does not adequately explain why the circumstances  in  relation
    to his release are not credible.  There is no adequate  explanation  as
    to why doubt is cast on the Appellant's claim to have been imprisoned.

24. The reference to objective evidence  is  not  clear.   If  the  FTT  is
    stating that there is no objective evidence as to  the  treatment  that
    Kurdish opponents of the Iranian regime receive, that is  an  error  of
    law.  This is because there was contained within the Appellant's bundle
    material evidence relating to  the  treatment  of  Kurdish  dissidents.
    There is reference to this in a Human Rights Watch Report at  pages  25
    and 26 which makes reference to torture and threats of sexual violence.
     There is further reference at page 35 of the Appellant's bundle  which
    is the Home Office country information  and  guidance  on  Iran:  Kurds
    [August 2015] which at 2.2.5 makes reference  to  those  involved  with
    Kurdish  political  parties  being  targeted  for   arbitrary   arrest,
    prolonged detention and physical abuse.  At 2.2.6 there is reference to
    those arrested by the Iranian regime for political activities being  at
    real risk  of  being  subjected  to  serious  human  rights  violations
    including torture and the death penalty.

25. There is reference at page 47 of the Appellant's bundle  which  is  the
    same Home Office report, to KDPI members  being  tortured  during  pre-
    trial detention.

26. I do not find that the  FTT  has  provided  adequate  reasons  for  the
    conclusion at paragraphs 54 and 55 that it was not  credible  that  the
    Appellant would be able to conduct any clandestine  activities  without
    coming to the attention of Etelaat.

27. I do not find that adequate reasons have been given for the  conclusion
    at paragraph 58, that the Appellant was able to escape from his home if
    Etelaat had been watching him.

28. The FTT rejects the Appellant's account to have  undertaken  activities
    on behalf of the KDPI in the UK, because the Appellant claimed that  he
    entered into these activities because of his mistreatment in prison  in
    Iran.  Because the FTT rejected his account of  being  in  prison,  his
    account of being involved  in  KDPI  activities  in  the  UK  was  also
    rejected.

29. I conclude that the FTT has  erred  by  failing  to  consider  material
    evidence, and failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  findings.   In
    particular, the lack of adequate reasons for rejecting the  Appellant's
    account of imprisonment, is an error, and has infected consideration of
    the whole claim.

30. I therefore  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  FTT  and  find  having
    considered paragraph 7 of the Senior  President's  Practice  Statements
    that it is appropriate to remit the appeal back to the FTT  because  of
    the nature and extent of judicial fact-finding that will  be  necessary
    in order for this decision to be re-made.

31. The appeal will be heard at  the  Manchester  Hearing  Centre  and  the
    parties will be advised of the time and date in due course.  The appeal
    is to be heard by an FTT Judge other than Judge  Robson.   The  parties
    should note the  asylum  interview  record  in  the  tribunal  file  is
    incomplete.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FTT with no findings of fact preserved.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of  court  proceedings.   I  make
this direction of my own volition as the Appellant  has  made  a  claim  for
international protection.



Signed                              Date 20th January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of any fee award will need to be considered by the FTT.



Signed                              Date 20th January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
