
[pic]
st

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11772/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At  Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10th June  2015                   |On 15th July 2015                     |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                 MR M R A W
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. N. Jorthy of Vasuki Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. In these proceedings it is the Secretary of State who  is  appealing.
       For convenience I will continue to refer to the parties as they  were
       in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  anonymity  direction   made   is
       maintained.

    2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on  30  July  1967.  He
       claimed asylum on 8 July 2014. This was refused on 15  December  2014
       and a decision taken to remove him by reason of  section  10  of  the
       Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

    3. His appeal was heard by First-tier Judge Russell on 7 April 2015.  In
       a decision promulgated on 21 April 2015 the appeal was allowed  under
       the Refugee Convention.

    4. The appellant claimed he was at risk from the Sri Lankan  authorities
       because of his support for  the  LTTE.  Based  upon  medical  reports
       submitted  Judge  Russell  treated  the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable
       witness. A medical report commenting on scaring had  been  submitted.
       The judge accepted the truth of the claim and concluded he  would  be
       at risk of persecution as someone who had provided support  to  them.
       The judge concluded that relocation was not a viable option.

    5. The respondent has challenged the decision, arguing  that  the  judge
       did not give adequate reasons for accepting the appellant's claim. It
       was contended that the credibility issues raised by the respondent in
       the Reasons for Refusal letter and at  hearing  were  not  addressed.
       Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on this issue.



    6. MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC) was  cited
       by the respondent. The head note of the President's decision is  that
       if a tribunal finds oral evidence to be  implausible,  incredible  or
       unreliable or a document to be worth  no  weight  whatsoever,  it  is
       necessary to say so in the determination and for such findings to  be
       supported by reasons.  A  bare  statement  that  a  witness  was  not
       believed or that a document was afforded no  weight  is  unlikely  to
       satisfy the requirement to give reasons. The  converse  would  apply.
       Extracts from case law was cited including the comment that there  is
       a  duty to explain the tribunal's assessment of  the  more  important
       pieces of evidence and to provide reasons for choosing  to  give  (as
       the case may be) no, little, moderate or substantial weight thereto.

The claim

    7. The appellant is not Tamil but a Muslim Moor. He  claimed  he  was  a
       successful businessman and his wife was a teacher. They have one son,
       born on 4 August 2002. He had a number of interests including dealing
       in shares; diamonds; having a pharmacy and employing  various  staff.
       He. He attended an  Anglican  school  and  Tamils  were  amongst  his
       classmates. In 1983 he saw Tamils  being  beaten  and  a  friend  who
       joined the LTTE and was later killed. Because of these  incidents  he
       became sympathetic to the LTTE.

    8. In June 2002 he helped the LTTE  by  providing  medication  from  his
       pharmacy. He also provided shelter for those wounded or on  the  run.
       He was able to profit as he was paid for  his  help.  He  was  not  a
       member of the LTTE.

    9. His problems started in April 2014. The authorities  questioning  two
       LTTE men whom he had assisted and  they  gave  his  details.  He  was
       arrested on 25 April 2014 and detained for around  25  days.  In  the
       course of this he was beaten and burnt by his captors. His brother-in-
       law was able to pay a bribe and secure his release. With the help  of
       an agent he was able to leave the country on  21  June  2014.He  flew
       from Colombo airport to France on a false passport.  The  agent  came
       with him and in France they travelled by car to the  United  Kingdom,
       arriving the same day. Whilst in the United Kingdom  he  attended  an
       event held in Wembley in support of Tamils. He phoned home  regularly
       and his wife told him that the authorities were looking for him.

The response.

   10. The Reasons for Refusal letter sets out in  detail  the  respondent's
       view of the claim. It was accepted the claim made engaged the Refugee
       Convention. It was accepted he was Muslim Moor and a national of  Sri
       Lanka. It was accepted if he attended an Anglican school  in  Colombo
       he could have been exposed  to  people  of  different  religions  and
       origins. The objective evidence indicated that there  were  riots  in
       July 1983 when Tamils were attacked.

   11. There was an inconsistency as to when his  involvement  first  began.
       His account about giving medicines to LTTE supporters from  2002  was
       relatively consistent. However, his account about giving shelter  was
       not, with his involvement varying from between  June  2002  and  2007
       (question 182 and  195  of  his  substantive  interview).  There  was
       inconsistency as to  when  he  ceased  providing  shelter,  with  his
       accounts varying from the start of 2013 to April 2014 (questions  195
       and 208 of his interview). The respondent did not find it credible he
       would not know the names of at least some of the people he claimed to
       have sheltered (question 192 and 201). There was also a query  as  to
       whether he was saying his motivation was out of principle or gain.

   12. There was an inconsistency about his escape. At question 9 he gave no
       explanation as to how this occurred whereas at question  215  and  at
       screening at 5.1 he said it was through a bribe.  There  was  also  a
       time gap noted from being detained, escaping and leaving the country.
       He said he was detained on 25 April 2014 and kept in custody  for  25
       days. This would have meant he was free  from  around  20  May  2014.
       However, he said he did not leave Sri Lanka until 21  June  2014  and
       had not explained where he was between 20 May and 21 June 2014.

   13. The county guidance case of GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees)
       [2013] UKUT 00319 was referred to. It indicated the conflict ended by
       18 May 2009. Those affected by the conflict  were  broken  down  into
       three categories:  active members of the LTTE, numbering around 1400;
       former members; and low-level members. The  latter  numbered  between
       3000 and 4000.  It was not considered  credible  that  the  appellant
       would be of any interest to the  authorities  five  years  after  the
       ceasefire. It was accepted that non-Tamils had been involved with the
       LTTE but nevertheless the appellant was not Tamil; was not  a  member
       of the LTTE and his claim amounted to low-level activity.

   14. The appellant had produced a photograph which  was  accepted  was  of
       him. His intention was to show scarring on his back  to  support  his
       claim of torture. However there was no medical  evidence  to  confirm
       the details.

   15. The objective evidence did not suggest his participation at an  event
       in Wembley would expose into any risk.

   16. Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants)  Act
       2004 was raised in a challenge to his credibility on the basis he had
       not claimed asylum in France and said he used  a  false  passport  to
       gain entry. He did not produce this to  confirm  his  date  of  entry
       saying the agent kept it.

   17. The respondent's records revealed he had been granted  a  visit  visa
       valid from 19 November 2003 to 19 May 2004.  The  respondent  queried
       whether the appellant had in fact overstayed and never return to  Sri
       Lanka. If so, this would mean his entire  claim  was  a  fabrication.
       Reference was made to a lack of documentation to confirm his presence
       in Sri Lanka after that date.

Consideration

   18. Material facts must be assessed in the context of the evidence  as  a
       whole. Karanakaran v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
       [2000] EWCA Civ 11 established that everything capable  of  having  a
       bearing on the case must be given the weight  due  to  it.  This  was
       summarised in SM (Section 8: Judge's process) Iran [2005] UKAIT 00116
       (5 July 2005):

           "It is the task of the fact-finder, whether official  or  judge,
           to look at all the evidence in the round, to try and grasp it as
           a whole and to see how  it  fits  together  and  whether  it  is
           sufficient to discharge the burden of proof. Some aspects of the
           evidence may themselves contain the seeds of doubt. Some aspects
           of the evidence may cause doubt to be cast on other parts of the
           evidence... Some parts of the evidence may shine with the  light
           of credibility. The fact-finder must consider all  these  points
           together; and ... although some matters may go against and  some
           matters count in favour of credibility,  it  is  for  the  fact-
           finder to decide which are the important, and which are the less
           important features of the evidence, and to reach his view  as  a
           whole on the evidence as a whole".

   19. Credibility is potentially damaged by behaviour that falls within the
       scope of section 8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
       Claimants, etc) Act 2004. The behaviours specified in section  8  are
       not exhaustive or determinative.

   20. The respondent had discovered  a visit visa had been  issued  to  the
       appellant and raised the possibility he never returned to  Sri  Lanka
       .If this were so, it would mean the claim was a complete lie. In oral
       evidence the appellant said he did not use the visa. The judge  asked
       the presenting officer if there was any record to show the  appellant
       had used the visa and was told there was not. It is not  apparent  if
       the Presenting Officer was indicating  if  technology  could  confirm
       this or whether there was simply nothing  on  file.   The  issue  did
       formed part of the Presenting Officer's submission which referred  to
       the appellant's claim of extensive business interests  in  Sri  Lanka
       and regular contact with his wife but a lack of evidence of presence.
       The  expectation  was  he  could  produce  evidence  to   allay   the
       respondent's concerns. In the leave application it was  accepted  the
       judge dealt with this point but  it is not clear if the respondent is
       contending it was not dealt with adequately

   21. At paragraph 6 the judge sets out in general  form  the  respondent's
       view of the claim. At paragraph 12 the judge refers to the presenting
       officer submitting that the appellant had not  produced  evidence  to
       support his physical presence in Sri  Lanka  at  the  relevant  time.
       Reference is made to the  presenting  officer's  submissions  on  the
       points raised in the Reasons for Refusal letter. Paragraph 14 records
       that the appellant's representative was not placing reliance  on  sur
       place activities. The judge then refers to the objective evidence and
       the country guidance case GJ, which is set out in detail.  The  first
       24 paragraphs set  the  scene  including  the  country  guidance  and
       indicate the judge appreciated the issue to be decided.  The  crucial
       aspect then is the judge's analysis.

   22. At paragraph 25 the judge prefaces  the  assessment  by  stating  the
       appellant  appeared  to  be  suffering  from  post-traumatic   stress
       disorder and said that allowance had  to  be  made  for  his  fragile
       mental state.

   23. Paragraph 27 dealt with the medical report on the scarring. The judge
       refers to the doctor's opinion that the scarring was caused by  burns
       from heated implements.  Whilst the  judge  indicates  an  acceptance
       that the age of the scarring as consistent with  the  timing  of  the
       claim it is not clear if a finding is made by the judge on the likely
       cause.

   24. Paragraph 28 states:

           "I had the benefit of seeing and hearing from the  appellant.  I
           found him to  be  a  careful  witness  during  the  hearing.  He
           answered questions directly and without exaggeration, although I
           noted that he was under pressure. He did not  attempt  to  evade
           questions. I find the appellant to have  been  truthful  in  his
           answers to me and I feel certain about his evidence in total."

       There are dangers in relying on a witness's  demeanour,  particularly
       if they are accepted as being vulnerable and questioned  accordingly.
       In an immigration Tribunal hearing typically  the  witness  adopts  a
       prepared  statement.  The  cross-examination  is  often  carried  out
       through an interpreter and may not be as forceful as for instance  in
       a criminal trial.

   25. At paragraphs 29 and 30 the  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant's
       evidence has been internally consistent at the various stages of  the
       assessment and is in line with the objective evidence.  The  comments
       are general and did not deal with the specific points raised  by  the
       respondent. Because a witness is consistent this does not necessarily
       mean they are telling the truth.

   26. At paragraph 31 the judge states "I find as a fact that the appellant
       did not travel to the UK and was present in Sri Lanka in  the  period
       claimant". No reasoning is given.

   27. When the decision is considered in the round it contains a beginning,
       setting out the issues and an end,  dealing  with  the  consequences.
       However, the crucial middle, addressing the specific points raised by
       the respondent is missing. Instead, there are generalised  statements
       and conclusions which are  not  explained.  I  appreciate  the  judge
       identified the issues and the file indicates extensive  evidence  was
       recorded. However, the respondent was entitled to have an explanation
       as to the judge's reasoning in relation  to  the  credibility  points
       taken. For this reason the decision cannot stand.

Decision.

   The decision of Judge Russell cannot stand. The appeal is remitted to the
   First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

