
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11723/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 14th June 2017                            |On 03rd July 2017              |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                    [m t]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss P Ma, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1987.  She claims to be Eritrean  but  is
    believed by the Secretary of State to be Ethiopian.  The Appellant  had
    applied for asylum in the United Kingdom and asked to be recognised  as
    a refugee claiming that she had a well-founded fear of  persecution  in
    Eritrea on the basis of her religion.  That application was refused  by
    the Secretary of State in a Notice of Refusal dated 17th August 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal PJM Hollingworth sitting at Nottingham  on  2nd  November
    2016.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 29th November 2016  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal  on  9th  December
    2016.  Those grounds contended that the judge failed to  give  adequate
    reasons as  to  why  he  had  dismissed  the  appeal  under  Article  8
    particularly bearing in mind that the  Appellant's  husband  had  shown
    that he had  international  protection  in  the  UK  and  evidence  was
    produced to show that he was the biological father of his children.

 4. On 1st February 2017 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Adio  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Adio noted that the judge  had  found  the
    Appellant was from Ethiopia and had accepted that her husband was  from
    the Sudan and that it followed that there was an arguable error of  law
    as to the adequacy of the Article 8 findings made  by  the  judge.   On
    16th February 2017 a  holding  Rule  24  response  was  served  by  the
    Secretary of State.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    solicitor, Miss Ma.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr Bates.

 6. I am aware that dependent upon this appeal  is  the  Appellant's  child
    [BA] (born on [ ] 2015).  As a preliminary issue to this hearing  I  am
    advised that the Appellant gave birth to a second child  [HA]  on  [  ]
    2016.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. Miss Ma submits that it was  incumbent  upon  the  judge  to  give  due
    consideration to the fact that the Appellant's husband had been granted
    refugee status and that he had produced at court a  biometric  card  to
    this effect.  Further he had produced a birth certificate  to  show  he
    was the father of [BA] and a wedding certificate which is to  be  found
    in the Appellant's bundle.  She submits that in the  circumstances  the
    judge had failed to give due consideration to Section 55  of  the  2009
    Act and to give full and proper consideration to the appeal pursuant to
    Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  of  Human  Rights.   In  such
    circumstances she asked me to find that the  decision  was  unsafe,  to
    find that there was a material error of law therein and  to  remit  the
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

 8.  In  response  Mr  Bates  submits  that  the  provision  of  the  birth
    certificate and evidence of the Appellant's spouse's refugee status  is
    irrelevant.  Those factors are not in dispute and that the judge  found
    that there was no reason why the Appellant and  her  family  could  not
    return to Ethiopia.

 9. It is accepted, he points out, that the Appellant's husband has refugee
    status and therefore it is acknowledged that he could not return to the
    Sudan.

10. He emphasises that in the Grounds of Appeal the finding by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge that the Appellant was Ethiopian was not challenged
    and that the Appellant had failed to discharge the burden of  proof  to
    the contrary.  He submits that the judge set out his findings and found
    that the Appellant does have status and a right to reside  in  Ethiopia
    and that the judge has given proper consideration to the best interests
    of the child on the basis that the child will  be  returning  with  her
    parents.  He submits that the Appellant has not discharged  the  burden
    of proof that the Appellant cannot carry on family life in Ethiopia and
    it is immaterial that Section 55 has specifically  not  been  mentioned
    particularly as the child is not a qualifying child and  therefore  the
    test is not one of reasonableness.

11. In brief response Miss Ma submits that the principle  of  international
    protection should also apply to the child and that it is not reasonable
    to expect the Appellant's husband to leave the UK.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. This appeal turns entirely on whether or not there is a  finding  of  a
    material error of law as to the manner in which the judge has addressed
    the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  of
    Human Rights.  It is relevant to  note  that  the  Appellant  does  not
    challenge the finding of the First-tier Tribunal Judge that  she  is  a
    citizen of Ethiopia.  I  am  satisfied  having  heard  submissions  and
    considered the documents that there is no material error of law in  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  The relevant paragraphs  of  the
    decision are paragraphs 61 to 67.  As a starting point the rejection of
    the Appellant's credibility is not challenged.  However the judge heard
    the Appellant's husband's testimony.  He accepts that he  is  from  the
    Sudan and accepts that he has been granted asylum  on  account  of  his
    fear of persecution in the  Sudan.   The  judge  does  not  expect  the
    Appellant or her husband to return to Sudan.   The  decision  that  has
    been made is that they can return as a family to Ethiopia  and  despite
    the judgment indicating  that  there  were  difficulties  in  producing
    relevant documentation the documents mentioned before in this  decision
    were available for the judge and he made findings at paragraph 67  that
    it had not been established on the basis of the factual  matrices  that
    family life could not be led outside the United Kingdom.

15. In particular the  judge  found  that  there  was  no  reason  why  the
    Appellant's husband could not go to Ethiopia.  It is quite  simply  bad
    law for Miss Ma to submit that merely because the  Appellant's  husband
    has been granted asylum because of a fear of persecution in Sudan  that
    he cannot return  with  the  Appellant  to  Ethiopia.   Further  it  is
    accepted that the  child  is  not  a  qualifying  child  and  would  be
    returning with her parents.  There is no  suggestion,  quite  properly,
    that the family unit would in any way be broken up.

16. This is a judge who has looked carefully at the documents  and  at  the
    position of the family generally and has made findings there would  not
    be a breach of Article 8 both within the Rules and outside the Rules in
    returning the Appellant and her family to Ethiopia.  Those findings are
    well-reasoned.  For the reasons given above the submissions of Miss  Ma
    do not find any favour with the Tribunal and certainly do not show that
    there is a material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.   In  such  circumstances  the  Appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed no material error  of  law
and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed  D N Harris                               Date: 28th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed  D N Harris                               Date: 28th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris















