

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/11230/2015
                                                               AA/11231/2015
                                                               AA/11232/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 14 July 2016                               |On 15 July 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                                   RR (1)
                                   ER (2)
                                   RR2 (3)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Miss P. Solanki of counsel, instructed by Greater
                    London     Solicitors.
For the Respondent:     Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

   1. The first appellant is the husband of the second appellant. The  third
      appellant is their child, now aged 2 years old.  All are  citizens  of
      India. Although each is an appellant in this  appeal,  the  protection
      claim is that advanced by the first appellant and the outcome  of  the
      appeals of the other two appellants is wholly dependent upon  that  of
      the  first  appellant,  to  whom,  therefore,  I  will  refer  as  the
      appellant.


   2. The appellants have been granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge A. W.  Khan  who  dismissed  the
      appeals. He did so because he did not believe to be true any  part  of
      the appellant's account of being at risk on return  India.  The  judge
      summarised the claim being advanced as follows:


           "The first appellant's case is  based  on  his  claim  that  his
           problems began in India on 10th December 2015  when  the  Indian
           security services known as Q Branch  came  to  the  family  home
           looking for him claiming that he had been selling explosives  to
           two Sri Lankans  as  part  of  assisting  the  LTTE.  The  first
           appellant claimed that during 2008 or 2009 he was approached  by
           [KN] and [SK], members of the LTTE. The first appellant  claimed
           that he  had  attended  demonstrations  with  them  as  well  as
           attending marches. He supplied these  two  people  with  medical
           supplies for them to give to people in Sri Lanka  to  help  them
           through the civil war and as a  result  Q  Branch  came  to  the
           family home. The first appellant fears that if  he  returned  to
           India, he  would  be  imprisoned  or  even  killed.  The  second
           appellant  and  third  appellants  are  included  in  the  first
           appellant's asylum claim as his dependants."


      In support of that  claim  the  appellant  produced  some  documentary
      evidence, including letters from an attorney in  India  and  a  letter
      from a police officer in  India,  confirming  that  a  case  had  been
      registered against him, and letters from others,  none  of  which  the
      judge felt able to rely upon as to the truth of their content.


   3. The thrust  of  the  challenge  pursued  by  Miss  Solanki  is  neatly
      summarised at paragraph 3 of the  grounds  upon  which  permission  to
      appeal was sought and granted:


           "The grounds ... raise numerous errors in the reasoning given by
           the FTTJ which demonstrate a  clear  lack  of  anxious  scrutiny
           being applied and a failure to give  adequate  consideration  to
           the appellant's evidence before him.  These  errors  render  the
           credibility findings as a whole to be materially unsafe."


   4. The grounds then go on to identify a catalogue of what are asserted to
      be errors by the judge. Each of these was  addressed  specifically  by
      both Miss Solanki and Mr Avery in submissions.  Mr  Avery  recognised,
      realistically, that the judge had  got  some  things  wrong,  but  his
      central submission was that as there was no specific challenge set out
      in the grounds against a key finding of fact at paragraph 15(e) of the
      decision, even if the judge had  misunderstood  some  aspects  of  the
      evidence, that was not material because he was entitled  to  find  the
      account of events at the very heart of the  claim  to  be  lacking  in
      credibility and so not established.


   5. Before returning to consider  that  submission,  it  is  necessary  to
      address briefly some of the issues raised by the grounds and  to  make
      clear what is to be made of them.


   6. At para 15(a) the judge held against the appellant that he "was unable
      to say with any degree of accuracy when the authorities first came  to
      the family home to question him about his  alleged  LTTE  activities".
      That was because in his screening interview he said  this  was  on  10
      July 2015 but in his asylum interview the date given was  10  December
      2014. The judge  considered  this  to  be  "a  material  discrepancy".
      However, the  appellant  had  made  perfectly  clear  in  his  witness
      statement and in oral evidence that the date  of  this  event  was  10
      December 2014. In that witness statement he said that the  date  given
      in the record of the screening interview was  incorrect.  It  may,  he
      said, have been a mistake by him, because he was nervous, or a mistake
      by the interpreter. Thus the judge was wrong to say that the appellant
      was unable to say with any  degree  of  accuracy  when  this  occurred
      because the appellant had made clear his account of precisely when  he
      said it occurred. The judge was, of course entitled to  point  to  the
      fact that a different date had been given at the  screening  interview
      but if he was to hold that against the appellant  then  he  needed  to
      demonstrate that he had considered also the  explanation  offered  for
      having done so. As he did not, we do not know what he would have  made
      of that explanation had he addressed it.


   7. At para 15(b) the judge considered  the  appellant's  account  of  the
      visit made to the family home on 10 December 2014. The judge said that
      as the appellant knew about these events only from what  he  had  been
      told by relatives at home in India:


            "I therefore find that anything the first appellant has said is
           based upon hearsay and speculation and cannot be relied upon"


      The difficulty with this is that this  was  a  sur  place  claim.  The
      appellant was in the United Kingdom at  the  time  and  so  could  not
      possibly give first  hand  evidence  of  events  he  did  not  witness
      himself. It was plainly not open to the judge to discard this evidence
      entirely and to reject it as incapable of carrying any weight  because
      that comes very close to say that a sur place claim must  always  fail
      because evidence of events not personally witnessed  by  the  claimant
      cannot be relied upon.


   8. Next, at paragraph 15(d) the judge held against the appellant that  in
      April 2014 he  had  been  able  to  make  a  visit  to  India  without
      experiencing any problems, drawing  from  this  that  his  credibility
      generally was damaged. But, of course,  the  appellant's  account  was
      that adverse interest in him had not arisen before  10  December  2014
      and so there was no reason for his visit before  then  to  excite  any
      interests from the authorities.


   9. At paragraph 15(f) of his decision the judge gave a further reason for
      making an adverse credibility finding in  respect  of  the  appellant,
      that being "the absence  of  any  credible  evidence  that  the  first
      appellant ever took part in demonstrations or marches  in  support  of
      the LTTE". However, that raises a concern that the  judge  had  simply
      misunderstood the case being advanced by the appellant. It was no part
      of his claim that  he  attracted  adverse  attention  because  he  had
      participated  in  any  public  displays  of  support  for  the   LTTE.
      Therefore, his failure to advance evidence that he had done so  should
      have been seen as immaterial to  the  assessment  of  his  credibility
      because there was no reason for him to have done so.


  10. There are yet further errors disclosed by this decision of the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge. When  considering  the  documentary  evidence  he
      referred, critically, to letters as "unsigned" when they were in  fact
      signed. As he thought it appropriate to record the fact that they were
      unsigned, it must be assumed that he found that relevant to the weight
      that could be given to them and so he assessed that  evidence  on  the
      basis of a mistaken view of it. Also, at paragraph 20 he held  against
      the appellant that:


            "... no photographic evidence has been supplied in  support  of
           the first appellant's  claim  although  it  was  said  that  the
           authorities came to the family home and  showed  photographs  to
           the first appellant's father and asked whether his  son  was  in
           the middle of the photograph".


      However, nowhere has it  been  suggested  that  the  police  left  any
      photograph with the appellant's father. Indeed it would be  surprising
      if they left this piece of apparently incriminating evidence with  the
      appellant's father rather than retaining it for possible future use.

  11. The judge rejected other documents relied upon by the appellant simply
      on the basis that they were "self-serving", but that is not in  itself
      a sufficient basis to attach no weight at all to documentary  evidence
      because the same could probably be said of all such evidence.


  12. The grounds raise other complaints about the approach and reasoning of
      the judge, including that he rejected the documentary evidence  of  an
      Indian attorney relied upon by the appellant on the basis that he  had
      not conducted himself in a way that he would  expect  an  attorney  to
      act, giving at least the impression that he was  expecting  an  Indian
      attorney to conduct his work in a similar way to that  expected  of  a
      lawyer in the United Kingdom.


  13. Miss Solanki identified other concerns about  the  reasoning  in  this
      decision but what I have said already is enough to establish that  the
      decision of Judge Khan cannot stand. Returning to Mr  Avery's  central
      submission, the difficulty is that the finding made at para 15(e) must
      have been informed by the view formed by the judge of the  appellant's
      credibility generally. The analysis of  the  judge  plainly  discloses
      legal error. In my judgment it is simply not possible to be  satisfied
      that the outcome of the appeal would necessarily have been the same if
      not for the errors made by the judge. For that reason  the  appeal  to
      the Upper Tribunal succeeds to the extent that the decision  of  Judge
      Khan will be set aside and the appeal remitted to be determined afresh
      by a different judge of the First-tier Tribunal.







   Summary of decision:


  14. First-tier Tribunal Judge A. W. Khan made an error of law material  to
      the outcome of this appeal. His decision is set aside in its entirety.


  15. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the
      appeal is remitted to be determined afresh by a different judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal



      Signed                 [pic]
                               Date:    14 July 2016

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


