
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11161/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 19 August 2016                    |On 31 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [E Y]
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr N Barnes, solicitor, of Neil Barnes, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.     I have considered whether any parties require the protection  of
    an anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

    2.     The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  brings  this
    appeal but in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred  to  as
    they were in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  This  is  an  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kempton, promulgated on25  May  2016,  which  allowed  the  Appellant's
    appeal.

    Background

    3.     The Appellant was born on [ ] 1990 and is a national of Eritrea.
    The Appellant arrived in the UK on 17 March 2015 and claimed asylum the
    next day.  On  6  August  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    Appellant's application.

    The Judge's Decision

    4.     The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. Judge Kempton
    ("the Judge") allowed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision.
    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 22 June  2016  Judge  Andrew  gave
    permission to appeal stating inter alia
         "It is arguable that in coming to his conclusion the Judge did  not
         apply the guidance in MA(Ethiopia) v  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  289.
         Further, the Judge did  not  consider  and  make  any  findings  in
         relation to the time spent by the Appellant in Sudan which may have
         affected the Judge's decision in relation  to  overall  credibility
         had this been done."

    The Hearing

    5.     (a) For the Respondent, Mr Matthews moved the grounds of appeal.
    He told me that the Judge made a  material  misdirection  in  law,  and
    failed to follow the guidance given in MA (Ethiopia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA
    Civ 289 when considering evidence  of  the  appellant's  visit  to  the
    Ethiopian embassy in London. He referred me to documents 13 and  14  of
    the appellant's bundle, which appears to be an untranslated application
    for an Ethiopian passport. He took me to [31] of  the  decision,  where
    the Judge summarises the appellant's evidence, and  told  me  that  the
    Judge had placed undue  weight  on  evidence  which  was  bordering  on
    inadmissible because the passport application is written in a  language
    other than English. He  reminded  me  of  rule  7(5)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (FTIAC) Rules 2014.

    (b)    Mr Matthews told me that on the evidence placed before the Judge
    she  could  not  have  concluded  that  the  appellant  has  taken  all
    reasonable steps to make a bona  fide  application  for  the  right  to
    return to Ethiopia.

    (c)    Mr Matthews turned to the second ground of appeal  and  told  me
    that the Judge failed to make findings on a material matter which is in
    dispute. He told me that it is an important  part  of  the  appellant's
    claim that he lived in Sudan for 12 years. That part of the appellant's
    claim  was  challenged  by  the  respondent,   yet   nowhere   in   the
    determination does the Judge deal with that area of dispute.

    (d)    Mr Matthews told me that the decision is tainted by  a  material
    error of law. He urged me to set the decision aside.

    6.     (a) For the appellant, Mr Barnes told me that the decision is  a
    well-reasoned and carefully considered decision which does not  contain
    errors, material or otherwise. He told  me  that  the  Judge  carefully
    summarises  the  evidence  at  [31]  before  reaching  evidence   based
    conclusions at [35] and [36]. He told me that at [36] the  Judge  takes
    account of the language spoken by the appellant (Amharic)  and  accepts
    the additional witness as a credible and reliable witness, so that  the
    Judge gives three reasons for accepting the  appellant's  evidence.  He
    argued that the Judge adequately followed the guidance in MA, and that,
    in any event, the Judge did not  view  the  appellant's  visit  to  the
    Ethiopian embassy as the factor which is solely determinative  of  this
    case. Instead, the Judge considered all of the evidence in  the  round,
    and found that for three reasons  the  appellant  was  a  credible  and
    reliable witness

    (b)    Mr Barnes told me that  the  Judge  considered  each  strand  of
    evidence and clearly  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant's
    account of life in Sudan was not determinative of this case.  What  was
    determinative was the appellant's nationality and religion, and it  was
    on those determinative matters that the Judge focussed. He asked me  to
    dismiss the appeal and allow the Judge's decision to stand.

    Analysis

    7.     This case turned on the question of the appellant's nationality.
    The appellant claims to be Eritrean. The respondent believes  that  the
    appellant is Ethiopian. The respondent emphasises the guidance given in
    MA (Ethiopia) v SSHD (2009) EWCA Civ 289, in particular the requirement
    to take all reasonably practical steps to seek the necessary  documents
    to enable return.

    8.     In MA (Ethiopia) v SSHD (2009) EWCA Civ 289, the Court of Appeal
    said that to make attempts at de jure  and  de  facto  nationality  was
    likely to  obscure  the  questions  in  issue.   Where,  as  here,  the
    essential issue before the Tribunal was whether someone would or  would
    not be returned, the Tribunal should in the normal course  require  the
    claimant to act bona fides and take all reasonably practical  steps  to
    seek to obtain the requisite documents to enable return.  There was  no
    risk of ill treatment if an application for a passport  was  made  from
    within the UK. The evidence in that case indicated that the  appellant,
    of dual Ethiopian/Eritrean nationality had  gone  to  the  Embassy  and
    asked for a passport but told Ethiopian  embassy  staff  that  she  was
    Eritrean. That could not  constitute  a  bona  fides  attempt  by  that
    appellant to obtain an Ethiopian passport and her appeal was dismissed.



    9.      In  ST  (Ethnic Eritrean-  nationality-  return) Ethiopia  CG
    [2011]UKUT 00252 (IAC) the Tribunal held that (i) There is nothing  in
    MS  (Palestinian  Territories)  [2010]  UKSC  25  that  overrules   the
    judgments in MA (Ethiopia) [2009]  EWCA  Civ  289.  Where  a  claim  to
    recognition  as  a  refugee  depends  on  whether  a  person  is  being
    arbitrarily denied the right of return to  a  country  as  one  of  its
    nationals, that issue must be decided on an appeal under section 82 the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (paragraphs  69  to  72);
    (ii) Although the question of whether a  person  is  a  national  of  a
    particular state is a matter  of  law  for  that  state,  the  question
    whether  a  national  of  a  particular  state  has  been  lawfully  or
    unlawfully deprived of the nationality of that state  is  a  legitimate
    issue for a court or tribunal to determine, in the course of deciding a
    person's entitlement to international protection (paragraph 74);  (iii)
    Whether arbitrary deprivation of nationality amounts to persecution  is
    a question of fact. The same is true of the  denial  of  the  right  of
    return as a national; although in practice it is  likely  that  such  a
    denial will be found to be persecutory (paragraphs 76 and 82 to 89).

    10.    At [35] the Judge records that the appellant initially said that
    he would not go to the Ethiopian embassy, but, after  accepting  advice
    from his solicitor, travelled to London and applied  for  an  Ethiopian
    passport. Mr Matthew's criticisms of  the  evidential  quality  of  the
    untranslated application for an Ethiopian passport  reproduced  in  the
    appellant's bundle were well made, but from a fair reading of  [35]  it
    is the respondent, and not the Judge, who places undue emphasis on that
    document.

    11.     At  [35]  The  Judge  makes  it  clear  that  she  accepts  the
    appellant's account of travelling to the Ethiopian embassy  in  London,
    not just because an untranslated passport application form is produced,
    but because (a) The appellant says that that is what he  did;  (b)  His
    witness (Mr Hagos) says that that is what the appellant  did,  and  (c)
    the bus ticket for the journey to  London  is  produced  together  with
    photographs of the appellant within the Ethiopian embassy.

    12.    The first sentence of [36] is, perhaps, a little careless, but a
    fair reading of the decision as a whole makes it clear that for clearly
    specified reasons the Judge found the appellant to be  a  credible  and
    reliable witness. Neither MA nor ST say that nationality is  determined
    exclusively on the quality of a trip to  the  Ethiopian  embassy.  What
    they say is that an appellant entitled to nationality of both  Ethiopia
    and Eritrea should use his/her best efforts  to  obtain  the  necessary
    travel document to enable return to Ethiopia. This appellant's position
    is that he is not a national  of  Ethiopia,  and  (as  if  to  prove  a
    negative) he has visited the Ethiopian embassy to show that he  is  not
    entitled to an Ethiopian passport.

    13.    The appellant emphasises the need to  act  in  good  faith.  The
    Judge found that the appellant did  act  in  good  faith.  That  was  a
    conclusion open to  the  Judge  on  the  evidence  placed  before  her.
    Although  the  Judge  does  not  cite  either  ST   (Ethnic Eritrean-
    nationality-  return) Ethiopia  CG  [2011]UKUT  00252  (IAC)   or  MA
    (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ 289, the  decision  adequately  demonstrates
    that she followed the guidance given in those cases, and considered the
    relevant  evidence,  which  supports  her  findings  in  fact  and  her
    conclusions on law.

    14.    The second ground of appeal  is  an  assertion  that  the  Judge
    failed to make findings on material matters which were in dispute.  The
    respondent claims that the Judge ignored a passage  of  evidence  about
    the twelve years that the appellant claims to have spent in Sudan.

    15.    In [11] the Judge records the appellant's account of  travelling
    to Sudan in 2002, and leaving Sudan in January 2014. In her findings of
    fact at [36] the Judge  discusses  the  dominance  of  Amharic  in  the
    appellant's speech, and records
         "... He was only there for two years when he  was  taken  to  Sudan
         ..."

    16.    Paragraph 18 of the reasons for  refusal  letter  sets  out  the
    respondent's challenge to the appellant's account of  living  in  Sudan
    for 12 years. The respondent relies on a  poor  performance  at  asylum
    interview. The respondent does  not  think  that  the  appellant  is  a
    national of Sudan. The challenge to his evidence is a challenge to  the
    overall credibility of his account,  which  drives  the  respondent  to
    assert that the appellant is Ethiopian.

    17.    The respondent's position is that the appellant does not give  a
    credible account, and that the determinative questions in  this  appeal
    are the appellant's nationality and his religion. It is  on  those  two
    determinative matters that the Judge  has  focused  in  the  first  two
    sentences  of  [35],  after  accurately  summarising  the  respondent's
    position between [17] and [23].

    18.    It would have been helpful if the Judge had made more clear  and
    elaborate findings of fact, but the essential elements are contained in
    her decision. Even if the Judge had carried out a clinical exegesis  of
    the evidence of the appellant's 12 years in Sudan, it would  have  made
    little difference to the decision because (although to  the  respondent
    that passage of evidence is a part of an overall credibility challenge)
    the determinative issues (correctly  identified)  are  nationality  and
    religion. The Judge clearly focused on those determinative  issues  and
    made sufficiently reasoned findings in fact to support  the  conclusion
    that she reached.

    19.    Even if the appellant is lying about his  time  in  Sudan,  that
    does not upset the Judge's finding that the appellant  is  an  Eritrean
    national. The respondent accepts that the appellant  is  a  Pentecostal
    Christian. Those two evidence based  facts  are  determinative  of  the
    appellant's case.

    20.    In YT (Minority church members at risk) Eritrea  CG  2004  UKIAT
    00218 the Appellant's case was that he had been arrested as someone who
    had held Pentecostalist Bible study and prayer meetings  in  his  home.
    He had been detained for two months and interrogated and beaten  on  at
    least nine occasions.  The  Tribunal  accepted  there  was  in  effect,
    "compelling  objective  evidence  to  support  the   proposition   that
    Pentecostalists continued to be persecuted in Eritrea".  In the context
    of the Adjudicator's other findings that the religious "profile" of the
    Appellant was of a man whose religious  convictions  would  render  him
    incapable of limiting his involvement to meetings  of  less  than  five
    people in a house, as required by  law,  the  Tribunal  considered  the
    Appellant would be at risk on return.

    21.    At paragraph 49 of MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49, it was said that


         "Where a tribunal has referred to considering all the  evidence,  a
         reviewing body should be very slow to conclude that  that  tribunal
         overlooked some factor, simply because the factor is not explicitly
         referred to in the determination concerned."

    McCombe LJ in VW (Sri Lanka) C5/2012/3037 said
         "Regrettably, there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases,
         when a First-tier Tribunal Judge has given  a  judgment  explaining
         why he has reached a particular decision, of seeking to burrow  out
         industriously areas of evidence that have  been  less  fully  dealt
         with than others and then to use this as a  basis  for  saying  the
         Judge's decision is legally flawed because it did not deal  with  a
         particular matter more fully.  In my judgment, with  respect,  that
         is no basis on which to sustain a proper  challenge  to  a  Judge's
         finding of fact"

    22.    In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85
    (IAC) the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to give
    a brief explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which an
    appeal is determined, those  reasons  need  not  be  extensive  if  the
    decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to the material accepted
    by the judge; (ii) Although a decision may  contain  an  error  of  law
    where the requirements to give adequate reasons are not met, the  Upper
    Tribunal would not normally set aside  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal where there has been no misdirection of law, the  fact-finding
    process cannot be criticised and the relevant Country Guidance has been
    taken into account, unless the conclusions the  judge  draws  from  the
    primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

    23.    There is nothing wrong with the Judge's fact  finding  exercise.
    In reality  the  grounds  of  appeal  amount  to  little  more  than  a
    disagreement with the way the Judge has applied the facts as she  found
    them to be. The respondent might not like the conclusion that the Judge
    has come to, but that conclusion is the result of the correctly applied
    legal equation. The decision does not contain a material error of law.

    24.    The Judge's decision, when read as a whole,  sets  out  findings
    that are sustainable and sufficiently  detailed  and  based  on  cogent
    reasoning.

    CONCLUSION

    25.    No errors of law have been  established.  The  Judge's  decision
    stands.

    DECISION

    26.    The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    stands.


Signed      Date 25 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
