
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/11634/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 September 2015                          |On 30 September  2015         |
|Prepared 10 September 2015                    |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                               mohammed ullah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott, Counsel instructed by Messrs Paragon
Law
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born  on  23  May  1995.   He
    entered Britain on 23 May 2011 and claimed asylum  on  30  August  that
    year.  His application was refused on 3 October 2011 because he  was  a
    minor he was given discretionary leave  to  remain  until  3  September
    2012.   The  appellant  applied  for  an  "upgrade"  appeal  under  the
    provisions of Section 83 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002.  His appeal was heard by Immigration Judge Ford  on  18  November
    2011 and dismissed.  She did not consider that  the  appellant's  claim
    was credible nor did she find that  he  was  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection under Article 15 of the Directive.   She  commented  on  the
    respondent's failure to trace the appellant's family.

2.   The decision of  Judge  Ford  was  appealed  and  on  8  December  2011
    Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   Woodcraft   granted
    permission to appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

3.   Further grounds of appeal were submitted and these were  considered  in
    the Upper Tribunal by Upper Tribunal Judge Lane who on 20 December 2011
    refused further permission.

4.   It appears, that at that stage the file  was  incorrectly  archived  at
    Field House and indeed at some stage parts of the file were  destroyed.
    The papers therefore held by the Tribunal were incomplete.  The  appeal
    seems only to have been listed for hearing this year.

5.   In the meantime, however, before the  appellant's  discretionary  leave
    to remain ended a further application  for  an  extension  of  stay  on
    asylum grounds was made on 23 August 2011, before  the  expiry  of  the
    appellant's discretionary leave to remain on 1  September  2011.   That
    application was extant on 7 August 2014 when the  respondent  wrote  to
    the  appellant's  then  representatives,  Cambridge  Immigration  Legal
    Centre, confirming that  the  application  was  pending  and  that  his
    discretionary leave to remain would continue until his application  had
    been considered.  When the original Section 83 appeal  was  resurrected
    in the Upper Tribunal two case management hearings  were  heard  before
    Upper Tribunal Judge Craig at which pressure was placed on the  parties
    to reconstruct the file and in particular the documentary evidence that
    was before Judge Ford.  That has only been partially  successful.   The
    appeal was then set down for the error of law hearing before me.

6.   At the hearing Mr Norton referred to a letter written  on  22  December
    2011 by Mr Melvin of the  Specialist  Appeals  Team  stating  that  the
    Secretary of State:-

         "does not oppose the appellant's appeal and invites the Tribunal to
         determine the appeal with a fresh  oral  (continuance)  hearing  to
         consider the only issue, that of humanitarian  protection,  as  set
         out in the grant of application".

7.   At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr Norton indicated that he  was
    minded to argue that the findings of the  judge  regarding  credibility
    should stand.  He did not oppose the appeal being remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

8.   I have considered the limited evidence before me and in particular  the
    issues relating to the circumstances in the appellant's  home  province
    of  Kandahar  and  whether  or  not  they  would  have  impacted  on  a
    consideration of the issue of humanitarian protection.

9.   Taking account of the passage of time let alone the fact that I do  not
    have the material on which the judge based her decision I consider that
    the appropriate decision for me is to set aside  the  determination  of
    Judge Ford and order that the appeal proceed to a hearing afresh on all
    issues.

10.  However it is clear that  the  passage  of  time  will  impact  on  the
    appellant's claim for asylum and humanitarian protection as well as any
    rights which he may have built up under Article 8 of the ECHR.   He  is
    entitled to a decision on the application for asylum which was made  in
    2011  and  it  is  appropriate  for  the  respondent  to  consider  the
    appellant's Article 8  claim.   I  consider  that  decisions  on  these
    matters should be made as a matter of  urgency  and  that,  should  the
    appellant be refused further leave to remain by the respondent that  he
    should be granted an appeal against that further refusal  which  appeal
    could be heard at the same time as this remitted appeal.

11.  I therefore make the following decision and directions:

Decision

12.  The decision of the judge of the First-tier Tribunal be set  aside  and
    the appeal will proceed to a hearing afresh in the First-tier  Tribunal
    (IAC) Birmingham after four months.

Directions

(1)  Within 14 days hereof the appellant's  representatives  will  serve  on
    the  respondent  any  submissions  they  wish  to  make  regarding  the
    appellant's claim for protection under Article 8 of the ECHR.

(2)   Within  two  months  the  respondent  will  make  a  decision  on  the
    appellant's application  for  asylum  made  in  2011  together  with  a
    decision on any application relating to his rights under Article  8  of
    the ECHR.

(3)  The appeal will be set down for a Case  Management  Review  after  four
    months.

Signed:                                                         Date:



Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


