
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11637/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11 March 2016                     |On 21 March 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And




                                     PR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Chelvan, counsel instructed by Hackney Law
Centre



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ Housego, promulgated on 22
    December 2015.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on 21 January 2016 by FTTJ Ransley.

Background


 3. The respondent arrived in the United Kingdom during February 2010  with
    leave to enter as a Tier 4 migrant. She was granted  further  leave  to
    remain on the same basis and applied for asylum during  February  2015.



 4. The basis of the respondent's asylum claim is that she  was,  for  many
    years, a victim of domestic abuse at the hands of her husband, both  in
    Sri Lanka and the United Kingdom. She also feared  retribution  at  the
    hands of her husband's family in Sri Lanka. In essence, the  respondent
    first obtained an ex parte non-molestation order against her husband in
    October 2013 and in August 2015 her husband was convicted of crimes  of
    violence against her in the United Kingdom.

 5. The Secretary of State accepted the respondent's nationality  and  that
    she was a victim of domestic violence but did not accept that there was
    a Refugee Convention reason apparent in this case. Nor was it  accepted
    that she could not either obtain a sufficiency  of  protection  in  Sri
    Lanka or relocate to avoid non-state agents.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  concluded  that  the  respondent  was  a
    refugee and in that he relied  heavily  on  the  Secretary  of  State's
    Operational Guidance Note. He also found that she  was  entitled  to  a
    grant of Humanitarian Protection and that  she  was  at  risk  of  ill-
    treatment coming within Article 3 ECHR.

Error of law


 7. Permission to appeal was sought firstly; on the basis that the FTTJ had
    materially misdirected himself as to particular social group, which  he
    considered to be "divorced single women," said to be a contradiction in
    terms because the term "single" implies unmarried,  which  is  not  the
    same as divorced. Furthermore,  it  was  argued  that  "no  documentary
    evidence of a decree nisi seems to have been adduced" and therefore the
    FTTJ's "assumption" that the respondent would obtain a decree  absolute
    was said to be, "speculative in the extreme."  Secondly, it was said to
    be trite law that the FTTJ erred in allowing the appeal both on  asylum
    and Humanitarian Protection grounds.

 8. The FTTJ granting permission considered that it was arguable  that  the
    FTTJ erred in finding that the  respondent  belonged  to  a  particular
    social group, that described as divorced single women;  that  the  FTTJ
    erred in finding  that  the  respondent  was  divorced  when  "she  had
    provided no documentary evidence of a decree nisi or a decree absolute"
    and that the FTTJ erred  in  relation  to  allowing  the  appeal  on  a
    mutually exclusive basis. FTTJ Ransley concluded as follows;

         "The Judge's Decision has been shown to involve arguable errors  of
         law that might have made a material difference to  the  outcome  of
         the appeal.  Permission is granted. "

 9. On 8 February 2016, those representing the respondent sent  a  Rule  24
    reply by facsimile to the Upper Tribunal, copied to Mr Dewison  of  the
    Special Appeals Unit. That reply was prefaced  with  a  request  for  a
    "senior tribunal" to be convened in order  to  "determine  and  provide
    guidance  on  the  documents  which  firstly  should  be   before   the
    Respondent, when drafting grounds of appeal and secondly, be before the
    Tribunal when determining whether  an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal should be granted."

10. The Rule 24 reply argued that Mr Dewison, who drafted the grounds,  had
    "deliberately misled" the Tribunal with respect to the grounds  pleaded
    or,  in  the  alternative,  "acted  negligently  and  unreasonably"  in
    drafting the grounds.  A question as to what material  was  before  the
    FTTJ granting permission was also raised.

11. In relation to the grounds of appeal, it was argued that it  was  trite
    law that gender amounts to  a  Particular  Social  Group  and  that  in
    relation to the sub-classification, the appellant was both divorced and
    single, in that she had not re-married. Reference was made to  the  OGN
    considered by the FTTJ, which  considered  women  in  the  respondent's
    position to be refugees.

12. With regard to the ground that there was no evidence that a decree nisi
    was granted, the Rule 24 reply made reference to [3]  of  the  decision
    and reasons, where the FTTJ stated that it was granted on 28  September
    2015; that the respondent had applied for a decree  absolute  and  more
    than six weeks had elapsed since her application. It  was  argued  that
    the decree nisi was enclosed in  the  appellant's  bundle  before  FTTJ
    Housego and that both Mr Dewison and the FTTJ granting  permission  had
    fallen into the same error of not considering the material on the file.
    The second ground was described as unarguably immaterial and  academic.
    Finally, the grounds asked the Tribunal to seriously consider costs  to
    be awarded against the Secretary of State and the possibility of wasted
    costs against Mr Dewison.

The hearing

13. When this matter came before me, Mr Chelvan  submitted  a  schedule  of
    Controlled Legal Representation costs calculated at inter partes  rates
    from 4 January 2016 as well as  his  own  professional  fees  for  work
    undertaken on the respondent's behalf since the same date.

14. Mr Parkinson advised me that he had been instructed to proceed with the
    application as well as to resist costs. He briefly  argued  that  there
    was inconsistency in the FTTJ  finding  that  the  appellant  was  both
    single and divorced; that there was no evidence before  the  FTTJ  that
    the appellant was divorced and there was no  reference  to  any  decree
    nisi  in  the  decision.  Mr  Parkinson  stated  that  ground  2,   the
    Humanitarian Protection point, was both irrelevant and immaterial.

15. Mr Chelvan drew my attention to item 6 in the appellant's bundle, which
    he said was before the FTTJ. I looked at the copy of this bundle on the
    IAC case file, which, as I advised the parties at the  hearing,  showed
    that the Decree Nisi was certainly before the  FTTJ.  Mr  Chelvan  also
    argued that the appellant's evidence was that she had applied  for  the
    Decree Absolute and this had been issued on 17  November  2015,  albeit
    she had not received it until after the hearing, which took place on 14
    December 2015. I would add that the Decree Absolute formed part of  the
    respondent's bundle produced for the hearing before me.

Decision on error of law

16. I decided that the FTTJ made no material error of law  and  upheld  his
    decision for the following reasons.

17. In relation  to  the  issue  of  the  refugee  Convention  reason,  the
    Secretary of State's OGN of July 2013 states, inter alia, as follows;

         "Where a Sri Lankan woman is able to show that  she  faces  a  real
         risk of gender-based violence amounting to torture  or  inhuman  or
         degrading treatment is unable, or unwilling through fear, to access
         protection and where internal relocation is unduly harsh,  a  grant
         of refugee status would be appropriate as a member of a  particular
         social group."

18. That the aforementioned OGN was relied upon by the Secretary of State's
    representative  during  the  hearing  is  apparent  from  [31]  of  the
    decision. Therefore, notwithstanding what was said in the  reasons  for
    refusal letter, the Secretary of State's  guidance  to  caseworkers  is
    that women in the respondent's position are  members  of  a  particular
    social group. No issue is raised as  the  FTTJ's  findings  as  to  the
    respondent's inability or unwillingness  to  access  protection  or  on
    internal relocation. It is also well established that gender alone fits
    within the Convention reason in question. Accordingly, the FTTJ did not
    err in his overall finding or on the sub-category concerned.

19. As indicated above, the respondent's Decree Nisi was contained  in  the
    respondent's evidence before the FTTJ. It remains on the IAC case  file
    and was referred to at [19] of  the  decision  and  at  [3],  the  FTTJ
    recorded that the  decree  nisi  was  granted  on  28  September  2015.
    Accordingly, the grounds were misconceived in asserting that there  was
    "no documentary evidence of a decree nisi" being adduced.

20. I concur with the parties as to the immateriality of the FTTJ  allowing
    the appeal on both asylum and Humanitarian Protection grounds.

21. The Secretary of State has, therefore, not satisfied me that there  was
    any error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal capable  of
    affecting the outcome.

22. It is troubling that the respondent, who is an exceptionally vulnerable
    person, has been put through the  unnecessary  distress  of  a  further
    hearing having succeeded at the First-tier. In this,  I  refer  to  her
    victim impact statement dated 9 March 2016. There are indeed issues  to
    be explored in relation to the fact that the grounds gave the  distinct
    impression that the Decree Nisi was not before FTTJ Housego and whether
    if the true position had been put before FTTJ Ransley, permission would
    have been granted.

23. At the hearing, Mr Parkinson attempted to seek further instructions  on
    the costs issues, without success. I therefore declined  to  hear  oral
    submissions from Mr Chelvan and adjourned the  issues  of  whether  the
    costs should be awarded against  the  Secretary  of  State  and/or  the
    Secretary of State's representative to a further hearing in respect  of
    which I will give directions.

24. The Secretary of State is also put on notice that if she unsuccessfully
    resists the costs order then she may well face paying the  respondent's
    costs of the further hearing.

Summary of Conclusions

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error of law and I uphold it.

      2. The issue of whether and to what  extent  the  Secretary  of  State
         and/or her representatives must bear the respondent's costs  is  to
         be considered at a further hearing in respect of  which  directions
         set out below shall apply.

Anonymity

    An anonymity  direction  was  made  by  the  FTTJ  and  I  consider  it
    appropriate that this be continued and  therefore  make  the  following
    anonymity direction:

    "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. "

Directions with respect to the adjourned hearing to consider costs

      1. The matter to be listed on the first  available  date  (before  any
         judge) after 28 days for the convenience of Mr Chelvan, with a time
         estimate of 1.5 hours, for the following issues to be addressed:

         a. Whether the Secretary of State shall be ordered to  pay  all  or
             part of the respondent's costs incurred in connection with the
             appeal before the Upper Tribunal; and/or whether the Secretary
             of State's representatives shall be ordered to pay all or part
             of the respondent's costs  incurred  in  connection  with  the
             appeal before the Upper Tribunal;

         b. The summary assessment of the amount of any such costs.

      2. Within 7 days of these directions the  respondent  shall  file  and
         serve an amended schedule of costs to include an estimate of future
         costs to include the costs hearing.

      3. Within 21 days of the issue of these directions  the  Secretary  of
         State and/or her officers shall file and serve  witness  statements
         together  with  any  evidence  in  support  in  response   to   the
         respondent's application for costs; showing cause why  they  should
         not be ordered to  pay  all  or  part  of  the  respondent's  costs
         incurred in connection with the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

      4. Within 28 days of the issue  of  these  directions  the  respondent
         shall file and serve any further evidence and a skeleton argument.

      5. If either party fails to comply with these  directions  within  the
         time period given, they will be deemed to be  no  longer  resisting
         the  application  for  costs  or  no  longer   seeking   costs   as
         appropriate.


Signed      Date: 12 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
