
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11180/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 October 2015                   |On 26 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [M K]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Youssefian (DJ Webb Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant [MK], a citizen of Sierra Leone born 8 May 1973,  appeals
    to the Upper Tribunal with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal to dismiss her appeal against the removal directions made
    against her as an overstayer that  had  followed  the  refusal  of  her
    asylum claim.

 2. Her asylum claim was based on her account as summarised in  the  letter
    by which her asylum claim was refused, and turned on her fear that on a
    return to Sierra Leone she would have to inherit her mother's role as a
    practitioner of Female Genital Mutilation (FGM),  known  locally  as  a
    sowei. She came from the village  of  Makeni.  The  Appellant's  mother
    initiated children into the Bondo, by using a razor to circumcise their
    genitals,  a  role  she  had  performed  throughout   the   Appellant's
    childhood, having inherited the role from her own mother. The Appellant
    herself had never agreed with the practice and made this clear  to  her
    mother. The Appellant had been initiated into the  Bondo  society  aged
    twelve by her grandmother. Her mother had died some 12 days  after  she
    arrived in the United Kingdom, on 20 March 2012; the Bondo society left
    a message for her that as the next  of  kin  she  was  to  inherit  her
    mother's role; her sister informed her that she would be forced to join
    the society if she returned to Sierra Leone and, given her own mother's
    experiences, she  felt  this  was  a  genuine  risk.  Her  husband  had
    originally told her that he would look after her business for  her  but
    in fact abused her  trust  and  defrauded  her  of  its  proceeds,  and
    additionally sought to divorce her and took another wife. She felt that
    the Bondo society were demons and would be able to  trace  her  through
    the underworld using witchcraft.

 3. The Secretary of State acknowledged that the claim potentially  engaged
    a Refugee Convention reason given the  reasoning  in  FB  Sierra  Leone
    [2008] UKAIT 00090, which found that  the  inferior  position  of  most
    women in that country and the relative lack of support provided by  the
    community meant that a woman who has undergone FGM but who has  opposed
    traditional practices is capable of being  a  member  of  a  particular
    social group.

 4. However, it was not accepted that the Appellant would truly  suffer  at
    the hands of the Bondo society, as, citing the opinion of Dr  Fanthorpe
    in FB, it could be seen that the cutting role was too important to have
    been suspended in her absence, and given the lengthy period over  which
    she had been abroad, it had to be assumed that another candidate  would
    have filled the role by now.  Furthermore, there was no reason to think
    that they would  be  able  to  locate  her:  the  prevalent  belief  in
    supernatural forces in Sierra Leonean was acknowledged, but that  could
    not found any objective basis for thinking she could be  located,  and,
    again citing Dr Fanthorpe as the source, notwithstanding  the  presence
    of the Bondo in every neighbourhood nationally, she  would  not  be  at
    risk of anything more than harassment and taunting if her circumstances
    came to light.

 5. The Appellant gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal,  explaining
    that she still had two sisters in  Sierra  Leone,  both  of  whom  also
    disagreed with the Bondo's devotion to FGM: she had had no contact with
    them since her mother's death in 2012. Around that time the  Bondo  had
    visited the family home in Freetown, where her sisters  witnessed  them
    looking for her, leaving the crown that they wished her to inherit; she
    had had no direct contact with the Bondo herself. Her  own  mother  had
    originally resisted the overtures of the Bondo for two or three  months
    before succumbing to the pressure to become a cutter. The Appellant had
    left her own daughter in the care of her sisters when she came  to  the
    United Kingdom, and then asked a friend to take over the  girl's  care:
    she had subsequently lost touch with them.  She  had  come  here  as  a
    visitor, aided by her cousin [RK] whose details appeared  on  her  visa
    application form: [RK]'s [ - ] address was not known to  her  relatives
    in Sierra Leone. It was only via a woman that she met,  [R],  that  she
    learned of the institution of asylum, which is why she had not  made  a
    claim until 2014. She did not think she could  relocate  safely:  aside
    from her superstitions, people would ask questions where a newcomer was
    from, especially in the era of the Ebola crisis.

 6. Country evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  included  a  report,
    misattributed by the First-tier Tribunal as emanating  from  the  UNHCR
    but in fact from the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, dated  27
    March 2009, entitled Sierra  Leone:  The  practice  of  female  genital
    mutilation  (FGM);  the  government's  position  with  respect  to  the
    practice; consequences of refusing to become  an  FGM  practitioner  in
    Bondo Society, specifically, if a daughter of a practitioner refuses to
    succeed her mother. Therein it is stated that

         "... practitioners generally inherit their  profession  from  their
         mother or grandmother (IAC June 2008, 14, 16). Information  on  the
         consequences  for  refusing  to  become  a  practitioner,  or   the
         consequences for a  daughter  of  a  practitioner  who  refuses  to
         succeed her mother, could not be found among the sources  consulted
         by the Research Directorate. However, the following information may
         be of interest.

         FGM  practitioners  in  Sierra  Leone  are   "very   powerful   and
         influential" both politically and socially (IAC June 2008, 18;  see
         also Women's eNews 7 Sept. 2007). According to  the  2007  Writenet
         report, "people who speak out against the  societies  risk  violent
         confrontation and forced initiation"  (Fanthorpe  Aug.  2007,  16).
         Other sources consulted similarly indicate that  those  who  oppose
         the practice may face  "hostility"  (IPS  19  Apr.  2005),  and  be
         subjected to "harassment and threats" (Women's eNews 7 Sept. 2007).
         In February  2009,  Bondo  Society  members  kidnapped  four  women
         journalists in the city of Kenema [Eastern Sierra Leone]  who  were
         conducting interviews to mark the 6 February International  Day  of
         Zero Tolerance of Female Genital Mutilation (Reuters 11 Feb.  2009;
         RSF 10 Feb. 2009). The Bondo members stripped  the  journalists  of
         their clothing and forced one of them to walk naked through  Kenema
         (ibid.; Reuters 11 Feb.  2009).  It  is  reported  that  the  Bondo
         members believed the journalists'  questioning  and  comments  were
         disrespectful to their traditions  (RSF  10  Feb.  2009;  see  also
         Reuters 11 Feb. 2009).

         In 11 March 2009 correspondence to the  Research  Directorate,  the
         Executive Director of the Center for  Safe  Motherhood,  Youth  and
         Child Organization (CESMYCO),  a  Sierra  Leonean  non-governmental
         organization (NGO) that campaigns against FGM (IAC June  2008,  7),
         stated that "[t]here is no  protection  for  women  and  [anti-FGM]
         advocates in Sierra Leone" (CESMYCO 11 Mar. 2009).

         Concerning risks faced by Sierra Leonean critics living abroad, the
         Writenet report states the following:

             'There have been no reports of Sierra Leoneans  living  abroad
             suffering persecution for criticizing the societies, nor  have
             there been any reports of  individuals  suffering  persecution
             abroad for citing  a  fear  of  forced  initiation  or  ritual
             participation (e.g., forced  performance  of  FGM)  in  asylum
             claims. (Fanthorpe Aug. 2007, 16)'"

 7. The IRB also note that a 2007 report from the United Nations (UN)  High
    Commissioner  for  Human  Rights  stated   that   "the   Sierra   Leone
    government's response to the widespread practice of FGM in the  country
    "is at best ambivalent in that it has neither  condemned  the  practice
    nor has it put in place any  legal  enforcement  mechanism  to  end  or
    curtail it" and that other reports indicated that the police in  Sierra
    Leone do not interfere in the practice of FGM.

 8. The headnote of FB Sierra Leone sets out that

         "1.      Given the pervasive influence of the  Bondo  societies  in
         Sierra Leone, the inferior position of most women in  that  country
         and the relative lack of support provided by the community, a woman
         who has undergone FGM but who has opposed traditional practices  is
         capable of being a member of a  particular  social  group  for  the
         purposes of the Refugee Convention.

         2. Although the appellant faces a specific risk in her home area of
         being forced to be a sowei and of being forced  into  marriage,  in
         general members of the Bondo societies fall  short  of  adopting  a
         positively hostile or combatant attitude to non-adherents of  Bondo
         principles and avoid targeting them. The  treatment  faced  by  the
         minority is not persecutory.

         ...

         4. There is a significant migration to Freetown from  rural  areas.
         For migrants to Freetown, those with the ability to access  support
         would face no risk. Such support mechanisms might include family or
         other connections, support mechanisms from other  groups,  such  as
         the Bondo societies and support from  a  local  mosque  or  church.
         There  is  however  no  compelling  evidence  that  these   support
         mechanisms  are  the  sole  means  of  eliminating  the   risk   of
         destitution and its corollary of the risk of beggary,  recourse  to
         crime or prostitution."

 9. The Tribunal in FB directed themselves that AA (Uganda) [2008] EWCA Civ
    579 did not  suggest  that  internal  relocation  to  cities  would  be
    unreasonable in circumstances falling short  of  those  exemplified  by
    destitution, beggary,  crime  or  prostitution.  Young  men  and  women
    increasingly migrated to Freetown and could settle in the  cosmopolitan
    society there, their ability to support themselves so as to  avoid  the
    risk of social exclusion and  destitution  depending  on  their  family
    connections,  and  access  to  the  support  mechanisms  of  the  Bondo
    themselves and from local mosques or churches. Other forms  of  support
    might also exist, and the  Tribunal  observed  that  it  would  require
    cogent evidence to establish  that  jobs  are  not  available  as  shop
    workers, waitresses,  typists,  office  workers,  domestic  workers  or
    street  vendors,  or  in  teaching  or  nursing  for  those  with   the
    appropriate skills.

10. The opinion of Dr Fanthorpe as set out in FB was to the effect that the
    female elders of the local  community  selected  leaders  from  amongst
    themselves and might  prefer  descendants  of  previous  leaders:  age,
    experience and local standing would also be considered. In general  FGM
    went unquestioned in  the  country  and  even  in  Freetown  the  state
    authorities  were  influenced  by  those  cultural  norms.  A  person's
    whereabouts could soon filter back to their home area  because  society
    in Sierra Leone operated via networks that united ethnic groups  across
    the country and to cut off links with one's family would deprive one of
    a major source of economic security and personal  protection.  A  young
    woman who had not only refused to take up their duties as a  sowei  but
    additionally refused to enter a polygamous marriage with a local  chief
    might be at local risk though it was very unlikely that there would  be
    a coordinated attempt to track them down elsewhere:  they  might  well,
    however, be ill-equipped to face the taunting and harassment that might
    result from their history coming to light in the local Bondo community.



11. The First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  because,
    whereas FB's appeal failed because her vulnerability as a young  single
    woman was counteracted by the  nursing  skills  with  which  she  could
    sustain herself in Freetown, [MK] was in an  even  better  position  on
    return, as  she  was  more  mature  and  experienced  and  had  already
    successfully established a business in Freetown,  suggesting  that  she
    would have a support network to draw upon, as well  as  being  able  to
    draw on the presumed availability of her two sisters  who  on  her  own
    evidence bore her no ill-will: accordingly she faced nothing worse than
    a degree of social ostracism or non-physical harm. Furthermore  it  was
    not all likely that the cutting role remained  unfilled  in  the  three
    years since she left the country.

12. Thus the appeal failed taking her case at its highest. However, aspects
    of her evidence were troubling, such as the  circumstances  surrounding
    her relationship with her daughter, who it was hard to accept  she  had
    truly left to be cared for without any arrangements for contacting  her
    and whose transfer from her sisters' care to that of a third party  had
    not  been  detailed  in  evidence;  her  departure  from  her  cousin's
    accommodation in [ - ] to uncertain conditions merely  because  of  her
    fears that her sisters might reveal her location in the United  Kingdom
    to other  family  members  was  implausible,  particularly  absent  any
    adequate detail about her  whereabouts  and  support  over  the  period
    between her leave's expiry and her asylum claim; and  her  late  asylum
    claim given that it was  unlikely  that  the  possibility  of  claiming
    asylum had not occurred to her earlier.

13. As to her Article 8 claim, her relationship with  her  present  partner
    was of recent origin and had  been  established  at  a  time  when  her
    immigration status was precarious;  her  lack  of  income  and  limited
    English language proficiency counted against her, and  the  risks  from
    Ebola in Sierra Leone were something  that  had  to  be  borne  by  the
    population generally and absent any right independent of that issue  to
    remain in this country, the Appellant could not rely on  her  temporary
    presence here to gain an advantage over those who had stayed abroad.

14. Grounds of appeal argued that the decision was unsafe because:

         (1)       The  finding  that  the  Appellant  faced  no  more  than
             ostracism failed to take account of evidence in the March 2009
             report that people who spoke out against  the  societies  that
             practised  FGM  risked  violent   confrontation   and   forced
             initiation, and there was no basis  for  concluding  that  the
             fact that a temporary candidate for  the  cutting  role  might
             have been found would diminish the risk to  the  Appellant  of
             her inheritance nevertheless being forced upon  her  once  she
             returned;

         (2)      It was unfair to doubt the Appellant's evidence because of
             concerns as to her daughter's care arrangements and as to  her
             departure from her cousin's [ - ] home, matters that were  not
             raised at the hearing and the latter of which could have  been
             explained by her evidence of her fears of supernatural  forces
             being used against her;

         (3)      She was in a relationship with her partner which  had  not
             received proper consideration outside the  Immigration  Rules,
             particularly bearing in mind the  risks  posed  by  the  Ebola
             outbreak in Sierra Leone.

15.  A  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  having   originally   refused
    permission, Judge McWilliam of the Upper Tribunal granted permission to
    appeal on 31 July 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge
    did not make discrete findings in relation to risks on  return  to  the
    Appellant's home area as opposed to the difficulties she would face  in
    finding  internal  relocation;  she  did  not  restrict  the  grant  of
    permission to any particular ground.

16. At the hearing before me Mr Youssefian made submissions consistent with
    the grounds of appeal, making it clear that the third  ground  was  not
    pressed  given  the  limited  duration  of  the   Appellant's   present
    relationship. Ms Everett for the  Respondent  stated  that  whilst  the
    Refworld report had been overlooked,  it  in  fact  relied  on  sources
    largely predating FB; the Appellant was not a public campaigner but was
    merely opposed to the practice at  a  personal  level.  Whilst  it  was
    accepted that the  Appellant's  lack  of  care  and  contact  with  her
    daughter was not challenged at the hearing below, even taking the  case
    at its highest it could not succeed as there was no reason to think she
    would face anything beyond social ostracism in Freetown.

Findings and reasons

17. The first ground of appeal asserts that there was evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal which undermined its conclusions that there were no
    risks to  a  person  who  refused  to  participate  in  FGM  for  those
    relocating to Freetown. I do not consider this challenge is  made  out.
    The reality is  that  the  IRB  report  which  was  the  sole  evidence
    identified at the hearing  before  me  as  relevant  to  this  question
    expressly stated that information on the consequences  of  refusing  to
    take up an inherited role as a FGM practitioner was  lacking;  and  the
    only examples of serious harm actually eventuating arise in the context
    of those who have actively campaigned against the practice rather  than
    merely taken a personal stand against it. To equate the two effectively
    ignores the conclusions of FB which clearly finds  internal  relocation
    to be a solution to a local fear  of  persecution.  There  are  sources
    cited by the IRB report which post-date FB, but these  do  not  suggest
    national risks beyond campaigners operating at essentially a  political
    rather than a personal level.

18. Nor is any legal  error  established  in  the  findings  regarding  the
    diminished risk faced by the Appellant on a return given that  it  must
    be presumed that the cutting role has been taken up by  somebody  other
    than herself over the lengthy period that she has been away from Sierra
    Leone. Dr Fanthorpe noted that age, experience and local standing would
    be relevant factors in such an appointment, all of which would strongly
    count against the Appellant being viewed as the best solution.

19. I appreciate the point made by the Appellant's advocate  that  FB  does
    not appear to be designated as a Country Guidelines  decision:  however
    the case has clearly been reported with a view  to  assisting  decision
    makers assess FGM cases from Sierra Leone, and whilst  the  absence  of
    express designation may slightly  reduce  its  force  as  a  source  of
    instruction, particularly where cogent evidence is  supplied  as  to  a
    change of circumstances, the reality in this appeal is that  there  was
    very little evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  that  could  have
    cast doubt on the conclusions in FB. The Tribunal there had the benefit
    of expert as well as public domain evidence, and the materials on which
    they were able to  draw  seem  significantly  richer  than  those  that
    informed the IRB's survey.

20. The second ground of appeal is on stronger ground,  particularly  given
    Ms Everett's realistic concession that there is no  reason  to  dispute
    the contention made on the Appellant's behalf that the doubts expressed
    by the First-tier Tribunal as  to  her  credibility  were  not  matters
    raised at the hearing, which seems to have been conducted on the  basis
    that her account of historical facts was  accepted.  It  is  of  course
    unfair to doubt an Appellant's credibility where the matter is not  put
    clearly in issue.  However,  the  fact  is  that  these  concerns  were
    essentially raised in the alternative to the primary  determination  of
    the appeal, which was on  the  basis  that,  taking  her  case  at  its
    highest, there was no national risk of serious harm  to  the  Appellant
    and that internal relocation would  be  reasonable.  FB  takes  as  its
    starting point the premise that  it  is  plausible  that  over  time  a
    person's refusal to participate in FGM will  become  more  known  in  a
    place of relocation, but finds that the consequences that  would  ensue
    would be no worse than harassment.

21. The Upper Tribunal raised a concern when granting permission to  appeal
    that the First-tier Tribunal may have wrongly equated its  approach  to
    risks in the home area with the reasonableness of internal  relocation.
    On closer inspection of its reasoning, I do not consider  that  it  did
    so. The First-tier Tribunal was entitled to  identify  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's history which tended to show that she had a support network
    on return. If Sierra Leonean society is  sufficiently  close-knit  that
    the Bondo society could locate the Appellant's family home in Freetown,
    it would appear reasonable to  presume  that  she  could  in  turn  re-
    establish contact with her sisters, who would be an  additional  source
    of support for her;  and  she  has  previously  apparently  established
    herself economically in Freetown.

22. As to the Article 8  ground  of  appeal,  given  that  the  Appellant's
    residence in the United Kingdom has been wholly precarious and that she
    has not resided with her new partner for any  significant  period,  her
    case could not have  succeeded  under  Appendix  FM  (the  route  being
    foreclosed to her given the lack of two  years'  cohabitation).  Absent
    cogent evidence of a real risk from Ebola across the  whole  of  Sierra
    Leone,  that  could  not  constitute  an  insurmountable  obstacle   or
    exceptional circumstance counting against her  return,  and  I  do  not
    consider that a full second-stage enquiry is merited outside the  Rules
    given the scant basis for the claim, bearing in mind that  this  ground
    was  (realistically  and  correctly)  not  pressed  before  the   Upper
    Tribunal.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law.

    The appeal is dismissed.


[pic]
Signed:     Date: 2 November 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes

