
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11246 /2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 July 2016                      |On 15 September 2016                 |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |Secretary of State for the Home Department        |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|and                                                                         |
|           |MJ                                                |Respondent   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |


                               ANONYMITY ORDER
    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269),  I  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant referred to in  this  decision  as  the
    claimant or any of the member of his family mentioned in this decision.




    This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Coleman, of Counsel, instructed by S Satha &  Co
Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State has been granted permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Hanley who allowed the appeal of MJ, a national of Sri Lanka born on 10
    April 1987 (hereafter the "claimant"), on asylum grounds, human  rights
    grounds (Article 3 of the 1950 European Convention for  the  Protection
    of Human  Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms  (ECHR))  and  immigration
    grounds against the decision of the Secretary of State of 4 August 2015
    refusing his asylum and human rights claims.

 2. The claimant arrived  in  the  UK  on  11  September  2008  with  entry
    clearance as a student, travelling on  his  own  passport.  He  claimed
    asylum on 28 August 2014.

 3. The Secretary of State's grounds do not take  issue  with  the  judge's
    assessment of credibility. They contend that he materially erred in law
    in his assessment of the  future  risk  of  persecution,  in  that,  he
    materially erred in applying the country  guidance  in  GJ  and  others
    (Post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

 4. The guidance in the head-note  of  GJ  and  others  reads  (insofar  as
    relevant):

         (1)  This determination replaces all existing country  guidance  on
             Sri Lanka.

         (2)  The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern  has  changed
             since the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri  Lanka
             itself is a spent force  and  there  have  been  no  terrorist
             incidents since the end of the civil war.

         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
             activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism
             and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state  enshrined  in
             Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in  1983,  which
             prohibits the 'violation  of  territorial  integrity'  of  Sri
             Lanka.  Its focus is on preventing both (a) the resurgence  of
             the LTTE or any similar Tamil separatist organisation and  (b)
             the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka.

         (4)  If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  security  services
             there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring
             international protection.

         (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri  Lanka  for  a
             person at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the
             government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils  are
             required to return to a named address  after  passing  through
             the airport.

         (6)  There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
             whose names appear on a "stop" list will be detained from  the
             airport.   Any  risk  for  those  in  whom  the   Sri   Lankan
             authorities  are  or  become  interested  exists  not  at  the
             airport, but after arrival in their  home  area,  where  their
             arrival will be verified by the CID or  police  within  a  few
             days.

         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:

                  (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat
                  to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a  single  state  because
                  they are, or are perceived to have a significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.



                  (b)  ...

                  (c)  ...

                  (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised  "stop"
                  list accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on a "stop"  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant.

         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
             intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in
             the diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know that  many  Sri
             Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and  also
             that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had  some  level  of
             involvement with the LTTE during  the  civil  war.   In  post-
             conflict Sri Lanka,  an  individual's  past  history  will  be
             relevant only to the extent that it is perceived  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government.

         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
             "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is
             not reasonably likely to be detained at the airport  but  will
             be monitored by the security services after his or her return.
             If that monitoring does not indicate that such a person  is  a
             Tamil activist working to destabilise the unitary  Sri  Lankan
             state or revive the internal armed conflict, the individual in
             question is not, in general, reasonably likely to be  detained
             by the security forces.  That will be a question  of  fact  in
             each case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out by
             such an individual.

         (10) Consideration must always be given to whether, in the light of
             an individual's activities  and  responsibilities  during  the
             civil war, the exclusion clauses are engaged  (Article  1F  of
             the Refugee Convention and Article 12(2) of the  Qualification
             Directive).  Regard  should  be  had  to  the  categories  for
             exclusion set out in the "Eligibility Guidelines For Assessing
             the International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from  Sri
             Lanka", published by UNHCR on 21 December 2012.

Basis of asylum claim

 5. In summary, the basis of the  claimant's  asylum  claim  was  that  his
    motorbike was stolen on 15 May 2008.  He  reported  the  theft  to  the
    police. The next day, on 16 May 2008, there was  a  bomb  explosion  in
    Colombo in which a motorbike was used. He was  arrested  in  connection
    with the police investigation. He was released on 25 June 2008. He  was
    granted bail at court but there a bribe was also paid. He absconded and
    escaped from Sri Lanka. During his detention, he was  tortured  by  the
    authorities. He was also sexually assaulted by other prisoners.

The judge's decision

 6. The claimant did not give oral evidence before the judge.

 7. The judge accepted, on the basis of a psychiatric assessment by  a  Dr.
    Raj Persaud, a section 12 approved consultant  psychiatrist,  that  the
    claimant was not fit to give evidence.

 8. The judge found the  claimant  credible.  He  accepted  the  claimant's
    account and found that he had been  arrested  and  tortured,  including
    being sexually abused by other prisoners in Sri Lanka in 2008. He  said
    that he had "no real reason to doubt" the  documentation  submitted  in
    respect of his contact with the authorities and his release on bail. He
    noted that his account was corroborated by his mother's letter and said
    that he was prepared to give the mother's letter some weight because it
    was "detailed, highly consistent  with  the  [claimant's]  account  and
    focuses on matters within her personal knowledge and reads with a  ring
    of truth". He found that the mother's letter was evidence of continuing
    interest in the appellant by the authorities.

 9. The judge considered the future risk at paras 60-62  of  his  decision,
    which read:

         60.  I am satisfied that the appellant falls within a risk category
             identified in GJ.  Because of the arrest  in  connection  with
             the 2008  bombing,  there  [sic]  is  reasonable  grounds  for
             believing that he will be arrested and detained on  return  to
             Sri Lanka.  He is likely to be on a watch or stop list.  He is
             particularly vulnerable to questioning in view of  his  mental
             ill-health.  He was not fit to give evidence in the hearing of
             the asylum appeal and he is even less likely  to  be  able  to
             cope with questioning and, indeed,  there  is  a  prospect  of
             drawing attention to himself  as  submitted  by  his  counsel,
             because of his demeanour.  If arrested and detained, there  is
             a grave likelihood of further ill-treatment.

         61.  GJ establishes that internal relocation is not an option for a
             person at real risk.

         62.  The risk category that the appellant falls  into  is  that  of
             7(a), namely, by virtue of his history  he  is  likely  to  be
             perceived to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka  or  to
             have continuing Tamil separatist links.   In  addition,  7(d),
             his escape and failure to cooperate with the terms of his bail
             is likely to mean that there  is  an  extant  court  order  or
             arrest  warrant  in  existence  and   that   is   a   document
             identifiable at the airport and he is likely to be on  a  stop
             list.

The Secretary of State's grounds

10. The Secretary of State's grounds may be summarised as follows:

    i.   (Ground 1, i.e. paras 1. b)-f) of the grounds) The judge  did  not
         correctly apply the guidance in head-notes 7(a) and  8  of  GJ  and
         others in making his finding at  para  60,  that  "Because  of  the
         arrest in connection with the 2008  bombing,  there  is  reasonable
         grounds for believing that he will  be  arrested  and  detained  on
         return to Sri Lanka.  He is likely to be on a watch or  stop  list"
         and at para 62 that "by virtue of his history he is  likely  to  be
         perceived to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka or  to  have
         continuing Tamil separatist links". The judge had made no  findings
         in respect of "significant role" played by the  claimant  in  post-
         conflict Tamil separatism within  the  diaspora  or  a  renewal  of
         hostilities within Sri Lanka. As a result, the grounds contend that
         the judge had erred in finding that the claimant falls  within  the
         risk category in head-note 7(a) of  GJ  and  others.  In  addition,
         given that there was no evidence or findings to  suggest  that  the
         claimant posed a threat to the unitary Sri Lankan state due to  any
         activities in the UK, the judge erred in assuming that the claimant
         would be perceived as such.

    i.   (Ground 2, i.e. para 1 g) of the grounds) The judge speculated  as
         to the existence of  an  arrest  warrant  or  court  order  in  the
         claimant's case without any independent evidence  to  suggest  that
         the claimant was subject to any interest from the  authorities.  In
         the absence of such independent evidence, the judge  speculated  in
         finding that the claimant fell within risk category 7(d) of GJ  and
         others.

11. As can be seen, ground 1 concerns paras 7(a) and 8 of the  guidance  in
    the head-note of GJ and others and ground 2 concerns para 7(d)  of  the
    guidance in the head-note.

Submissions

12. Mr Tufan relied upon the grounds and submitted  that,  in  relation  to
    para 7(a) of the head-note in GJ and others, there was no  evidence  at
    all before the judge of  any  involvement  by  the  claimant  with  the
    Diaspora. In relation to para 7(d), he submitted that the judge had not
    done enough to explain why he found that there would be an extant order
    or arrest warrant. He accepted that there was no need for corroborating
    evidence but drew my attention to the fact  that the claimant had  said
    in answer to question 119 of his interview that he would ask his father
    to send the arrest warrant to him but no arrest warrant  was  submitted
    to the Secretary of State. There was no  independent  evidence  of  any
    such arrest warrant. There was no "reliable evidence" before the  judge
    that there was an arrest warrant or an extant court order  against  the
    claimant.

13. I heard briefly from Mr Coleman briefly in reply.

Assessment

14. Mr Tufan submitted that there was no reliable evidence before the judge
    that there was an  arrest  warrant  or  an  extant  order  against  the
    claimant. In my view, Mr Tufan was effectively  attempting  to  suggest
    that the evidence before the judge as to the  existence  of  an  arrest
    warrant or extant court order was unreliable and, to  this  extent,  he
    was attempting to go beyond the grounds. I agree with Mr  Coleman  that
    credibility was not raised in the grounds. In addition, it  has  to  be
    said that the Secretary of State's grounds did  not  contend  that  the
    judge's findings were inadequately reasoned or insufficiently supported
    by reliable evidence.

15. In this respect, ground 2,  as  formulated,  was  that  the  judge  had
    speculated as to the existence of an  arrest  warrant  or  court  order
    without any independent evidence to suggest that the  claimant  was  of
    interest to the authorities. However, as Mr Tufan accepted, it was  not
    necessary for an asylum claim to produce  supporting  or  corroborative
    documentary evidence.

16. Mr Coleman drew my attention to the following evidence that was  before
    the judge:

    i)   In answer to questions 118 and 199 of his  asylum  interview,  the
         claimant said  that,  since  his  departure  from  Sri  Lanka,  the
         authorities had made frequent visits to his home and "also when  my
         father reports they ask him". He said that he did not know when the
         arrest warrant was issued but his  father  called  him  two  months
         before the interview took place (the interview  took  place  on  12
         December 2014) and told him that there was an arrest warrant.

    ii)  In her  witness  statement  dated  26  February  2016  (p53),  the
         claimant's mother  said:  "...  The  police  and  TID  are  without
         information about my son and this has resulted in an arrest warrant
         being issued. He is being sought to  this  day  and  enquiries  are
         continuing."

17. Given the evidence described above and that there is no requirement for
    corroborative evidence, I agree with Mr Coleman that there  is  nothing
    in the argument that there was no independent  evidence  of  an  arrest
    warrant or a court order. The judge had clear evidence before him, from
    the claimant and his mother,  as  described  above,  which  he  plainly
    accepted. He was entitled to accept that evidence and reach his finding
    that there was an arrest warrant against the claimant.  The  judge  was
    therefore entitled to conclude, applying para 7(d) of the head-note  of
    GJ and others, that the claimant is likely to be on  a  stop  list  and
    therefore that he would be at real risk of persecution  if  removed  to
    Sri Lanka.

18. Ground 2 therefore fails. This is determinative of  the  appeal  before
    the Upper Tribunal. It is not necessary for me to consider ground 1.

19. I have therefore concluded that the judge did  not  materially  err  in
    law.

20. As I said at para 1 above, the judge allowed the appeal on  immigration
    grounds, asylum grounds  an  human  rights  grounds  (Article  3).  The
    immigration ground must relate to the fact that the  Immigration  Rules
    make provision for asylum claims because the judge did not consider any
    other independent immigration rule.




    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any error on a point of law. The Secretary of  State's  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal is therefore dismissed.


[pic]

Signed   Date: 5 August 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
