
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11079/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 April 2014                              |                             |
|Delivered Orally at the hearing               |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                zulfiqar ali
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Taylor-Gee, Counsel instructed by Morden
Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox promulgated it appears on 5 February 2014
    in which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of
    the respondent to refuse him  leave  to  remain  and  to  make  removal
    directions against him on the basis that his claim for asylum had  been
    refused.

 2. The appellant's case is that he is an Ahmadi Muslim who  has  practised
    his faith from birth having been brought up in an  Ahmadi  family.   He
    was subject to attacks in Pakistan on account of his  faith  and  as  a
    result he has a well-founded fear of persecution on return to Pakistan.
     The facts of his claim and the basis  of  that  are  set  out  in  the
    refusal letter and they are also set out in the witness  statement  and
    in the determination of Judge Fox.

 3. The respondent's case is set out in the refusal letter of  18  December
    2013.  In summary, she did not accept the appellant's account of  being
    attacked in 2005 in Pakistan.  She did not  accept  that  he  had  been
    identified by three organisations such as  Lashkar-e-Jhangvi,  Khatm-e-
    Nabuwat and Tarikh-e-Taliban nor did she accept that he  was  contacted
    by the Special Branch to warn him  of  attacks.   She  did  not  accept
    either that an attempt had been made in November 2013  to  kidnap  him.
    The respondent did however accept  that  the  appellant  is  an  Ahmadi
    Muslim but did not accept that it was important to his identity  as  an
    Ahmadi to preach his faith as an Ahmadi. She did not accept that he was
    subject to a complaint in relation to his practising of  a  faith  that
    having regard to the country guidance decision MN & Others  (Admadis  -
    country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012]  UKUT  00389,  concluding
    that he would be not therefore be at risk on return to  Pakistan.   The
    appeal was at that stage within the fast track but it was later removed
    and the matter then came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Fox  sitting
    at Hatton Cross on 5 February.

 4. In his determination the judge sets out his  conclusions  and  findings
    from paragraph 55 onwards.  The judge accepted that the appellant is an
    Ahmadi but directed himself that the central issue  was  his  religious
    identity in accordance with MN.  The judge did not accept the  incident
    in 2005 had occurred nor did he accept  that  the  appellant  had  been
    given an advanced warning of a threat being reported to him by  special
    branch.  The judge did not accept the  documentary  evidence  that  had
    been supported and although a letter had been submitted both  from  the
    Ahmadiyya Muslim Association the judge considered this was generic  and
    devoid of any meaningful details of the appellant's  alleged  religious
    practices.  The judge concluded at [69]:

         "It is significant that the appellant has no profile beyond that of
         any  other  Ahmadi  Muslim.   There  is  no  reliable  evidence  of
         paragraph 2(i) activities or any reliable  evidence  of  a  profile
         sufficient to engage the terms of MN.  On the available evidence it
         is reasonable to conclude that the appellant's claim is  false  and
         opportunistic."

    The judge then went on to consider that there was no reliable  evidence
    that the principles of HJ (Iran)  were  engaged  but  even  taking  the
    appellant's claim at its highest  he  enjoyed  state  protection.   The
    appellant sought permission to appeal on three principal grounds:

      a) that the judge had failed to have proper regard to the letter  from
         the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association ("AMA") and had erred in referring
         to  it  as  generic  and  failed  to  take  into  account  that  it
         corroborated certain aspects of the appellant's  claim,  the  judge
         failing to address the contents of the letter properly.

      b) that the judge erred in failing properly to  analyse  the  case  in
         line with MN in that  he  appeared  rather  to  have  followed  the
         decision in KK (Ahmadi - unexceptional - risk on  return)  Pakistan
         [2005] UKAIT, that he erred  in  appearing  to  consider  that  the
         appellant  needed  to  show  an  individual   profile   let   alone
         exceptionality and that he had misdirected himself with regards  to
         HJ (Iran), and

      c) that the judge  appeared  not  to  have  consistently  applied  the
         correct standard of  proof  referring  in  places  to  whether  the
         appellant's case was "reasonable."

 5. Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  14  March  2014  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Simpson.  The matter then came before  me  on  29  April
    2014.  The appellant was present and was represented by  Ms  Taylor-Gee
    of Counsel.  The respondent  was  represented  by  Ms  Isherwood,  Home
    Office Presenting Officer.

 6. Turning to the first ground of appeal Ms Taylor-Gee submitted that  the
    judge had wrongly described the matter as generic, that he did  provide
    corroborative evidence of the  appellant  being  Ahmadi  and  his  role
    within the community although she accepted that he could have  provided
    more detail of his activities.  She did however accept that  the  judge
    had not said that he attached much weight to the letter,  she  accepted
    that weight was a matter for the judge and accepted that it would  have
    to have been perverse or rather she would have  to  show  that  it  was
    perverse and the judge's evaluation of  the  letter  was  perverse  for
    there to have been an error of law established.   She  did  not  submit
    that it was perverse.

 7. Ms Isherwood submitted with regard to the letter that it was lacking in
    detail and could be described as generic given that as the  judge  said
    in full in his determination at [68], "I have considered the AMA letter
    which  is  generic  and  devoid  of  any  meaningful  details  of   the
    appellant's alleged religious  practices.   The  AMA  letter  does  not
    assist the appellant to substantiate his claim".

 8. The first page of the letter contains two detailed paragraphs concerned
    purely with the situation for Ahmadi Muslims in  Pakistan  in  general.
    The third paragraph  headed  'Confirmation  specific  to  your  client"
    states that -

           o checks have  been  made  with  the  relevant  headquarters  in
             Pakistan and confirms that the appellant is an  Ahmadi  Muslim
             by birth;

           o that his contact and co-operation with the community was good;



           o he was good in discharging his financial  obligations  to  the
             community and the duties assigned to him;

           o his general moral condition was good, and

           o he was connected to his auxiliary organisation;

           o the general impression within the community was good, and

           o he has had to resign from a job because of the opposition  and
             threats to his life.

 9. I consider that it is fair to state that these are  lacking  in  detail
    and that it was open to the judge  to  make  that  finding.   There  is
    nothing said here about the  nature  of  the  activities  in  which  he
    participated or how often and whilst there is a reference to  resigning
    from a job, no detail about dates  or  circumstances  are  given.    It
    cannot therefore be said that the judge's consideration of  the  letter
    or the weight attached to it  was  perverse  which,  as  Ms  Taylor-Gee
    conceded, is the correct test.

10. Turning to the second ground Ms Taylor-Gee submitted that the judge had
    failed to conduct an enquiry as to the appellant's wishes on return  or
    as to what he would do on return and why.  She submitted that the judge
    had erred in considering only  the  appellant's  past  persecution  and
    whilst he had made negative credibility findings in respect  of  those,
    he had failed properly to ask the questions which he is compelled by MN
    to ask.  She submitted further that in failing properly to apply MN and
    to ask the questions set out therein he had also failed  to  take  into
    account what was  said  by  the  appellant  in  his  asylum  interview,
    particularly at questions 97 to 130, in respect of his activities as an
    Ahmadi.

11. Ms Isherwood in contrast submitted that the judge  had  acted  properly
    within the terms of MN, drawing my attention to what was  said  in  the
    head note, in particular at paragraphs 8, 9 and 10.  In reply Ms Taylor-
    Gee's point is that the judge simply failed to ask  the  questions  and
    whilst there is no challenge to the negative findings of credibility or
    the finding that the appellant had fabricated  his  claim  and  it  was
    opportunistic, that this  could  not  fairly  be  read  over  into  the
    necessary findings that had to be made in respect  of  the  appellant's
    attitude towards his faith and intentions as to what  he  would  do  on
    return.

12. It is important to look closely at what the Tribunal held in MN  and  I
    set out below the relevant parts of the head note

    2.           (i)  The background  to  the  risk  faced  by  Ahmadis  is
          legislation that restricts the way in which they are  able  openly
          to practise  their  faith.  The  legislation  not  only  prohibits
          preaching and other forms of proselytising but  also  in  practice
          restricts other elements of manifesting one's  religious  beliefs,
          such as holding open discourse about  religion  with  non-Ahmadis,
          although not amounting to proselytising. The prohibitions  include
          openly referring to one's place of worship  as  a  mosque  and  to
          one's religious leader as an Imam. In addition,  Ahmadis  are  not
          permitted to refer to the call to  prayer  as  azan  nor  to  call
          themselves Muslims or refer to their  faith  as  Islam.  Sanctions
          include a fine and imprisonment and if blasphemy is  found,  there
          is a risk of the death penalty which to date has not been  carried
          out although there is a  risk  of  lengthy  incarceration  if  the
          penalty is imposed.  There is clear evidence that this legislation
          is used by non-state actors to threaten and harass  Ahmadis.  This
          includes the filing of First Information Reports (FIRs) (the first
          step in any criminal proceedings) which can result  in  detentions
          whilst prosecutions are being pursued. Ahmadis are also subject to
          attacks by non-state actors from sectors  of  the  majority  Sunni
          Muslim population.

         (ii) It is, and has long been, possible in general for  Ahmadis  to
          practise their faith on a restricted basis either in private or in
          community with other Ahmadis, without infringing domestic Pakistan
          law.

    3.           (i) If an Ahmadi is able to  demonstrate  that  it  is  of
          particular importance to his religious identity  to  practise  and
          manifest  his  faith  openly  in  Pakistan  in  defiance  of   the
          restrictions in the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) under sections  298B
          and 298C, by engaging in behaviour  described  in  paragraph  2(i)
          above, he or she is likely to be in need  of  protection,  in  the
          light of the serious nature  of  the  sanctions  that  potentially
          apply as well as the risk of prosecution under  section  295C  for
          blasphemy.

         (ii) It is no answer to expect an Ahmadi who fits  the  description
          just given to avoid engaging in behaviour described  in  paragraph
          2(i) above  ("paragraph  2(i)  behaviour")  to  avoid  a  risk  of
          prosecution.

    4.           ....

    5.           In light of the above, the first  question  the  decision-
          maker must ask  is  (1)  whether  the  claimant  genuinely  is  an
          Ahmadi . As with all judicial fact-finding the judge will need to
          reach conclusions on all the  evidence  as  a  whole  giving  such
          weight to aspects of that evidence as  appropriate  in  accordance
          with Article 4 of the Qualification Directive.  This is likely  to
          include an enquiry whether the claimant  was  registered  with  an
          Ahmadi community in Pakistan and worshipped and engaged there on a
          regular  basis.  Post-arrival  activity  will  also  be  relevant.
          Evidence likely to be relevant includes confirmation from  the  UK
          Ahmadi headquarters regarding the activities relied on in Pakistan
          and confirmation from the local community  in  the  UK  where  the
          claimant is worshipping.

    6.           The next step (2) involves an enquiry into the  claimant's
          intentions or wishes as to  his  or  her  faith,  if  returned  to
          Pakistan.  This is relevant  because  of  the  need  to  establish
          whether it is of particular importance to the  religious  identity
          of the Ahmadi concerned to engage in paragraph 2(i) behaviour. The
          burden is on the claimant to demonstrate  that  any  intention  or
          wish to practise and manifest aspects of the faith openly that are
          not permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) is  genuinely  held
          and of particular importance to the claimant to  preserve  his  or
          her religious identity.  The decision maker needs to evaluate  all
          the evidence. Behaviour since  arrival  in  the  UK  may  also  be
          relevant. If the claimant discharges this burden he is  likely  to
          be in need of protection.

    7.           The option of internal relocation,  previously  considered
          to be available in Rabwah, is not in general reasonably open to  a
          claimant  who  genuinely  wishes  to  engage  n   paragraph   2(i)
          behaviour, in the light of the nationwide effect  in  Pakistan  of
          the anti- Ahmadi legislation.

    8.            Ahmadis who are not able  to  show  that  they  practised
          their faith at all in Pakistan or that they  did  so  on  anything
          other than the restricted basis described in paragraph 2(ii) above
          are in general unlikely to be able  to  show  that  their  genuine
          intentions or wishes are to  practise  and  manifest  their  faith
          openly on return, as described in paragraph 2(i) above.

    9.           ...




13. Turning first to paragraph 5 of MN the first question that a judge must
    ask is whether the claimant is genuinely Ahmadi.  In this case that was
    not in dispute.  It is here at paragraph 5  of  the  head  note  it  is
    stated that evidence likely to be relevant includes  confirmation  from
    UK Ahmadi Association as regarding the activities relied on in Pakistan
    and confirmation from the local community in the UK with a claim to his
    worshipping.  The latter point does not of course arise in this case as
    the appellant had arrived relatively recently and had  been  placed  in
    fast track detention prior to his appeal.   I  observe  at  this  point
    that,  as  is  noted  above,  the  letter  from  the  Ahmadiyya  Muslim
    Association  does  not  contain  much  if  any  detail  regarding   the
    appellant's activities in Pakistan.

14. The next step that the judge should follow is set out in  paragraph  6.
    That involves an enquiry into the claimant's intentions or wishes as to
    his faith if returned to Pakistan.  It is to  be  emphasised  that  the
    burden is on the claimant to demonstrate that any intention or wish  to
    practice or manifest aspects of the faith openly that are not permitted
    by the Pakistan Penal Code are  genuinely  held  and  are  particularly
    important to the claimant to preserve his or  her  religious  identity.
    That point had been made in considerable detail in the refusal  letter.
    It was therefore incumbent on the appellant to address that point.

15. It is also to be noted from paragraph 8 of the head note  that  Ahmadis
    who are not able to show that they  practise  their  faith  at  all  in
    Pakistan or that they did so on  anything  other  than  the  restricted
    basis described in paragraph 22 above are unlikely to be able  to  show
    that their genuine intentions or wishes are to  practise  and  manifest
    their faith openly on return.  In this case  the  judge  concluded  for
    reasons which are open to him and which  are  not  the  subject  of  an
    effective challenge that the appellant's case had been  fabricated  and
    opportunistic.

16. It is in the circumstances difficult to discern how, having made  those
    findings, the judge could have concluded on  the  evidence  before  him
    that  the  appellant's  intentions  were  nonetheless  genuine.    More
    importantly, whilst the judge does refer to the appellant not having  a
    profile beyond that of any other Ahmadi Muslim, it  appears  from  that
    and although it could have been perhaps more elegantly expressed,  that
    what he is referring to is  the  type  of  activities  referred  to  in
    paragraph 2 and that the judge is in fact referring to  the  fact  that
    there is no reliable evidence of the appellant conducting the  type  of
    activities as set out in paragraph 2(i) and that whilst he  does  refer
    to "profile" that is to be understood as a type of Ahmadi  who  engages
    in these activities or who would wish to do so.  In effect the judge is
    saying that he was not satisfied, given  the  findings  on  credibility
    which were open to him that the appellant had undertaken any  of  these
    activities and given the finding of an opportunistic claim and lack  of
    credibility that he was not satisfied that the appellant would  conduct
    any of those activities or genuinely intended to undertake any of those
    activities which would bring him within the scope of MN  on  return  to
    Pakistan.

17. For these reasons I am satisfied that the judge did give  adequate  and
    sustainable reasons for his conclusions that the appellant did not fall
    within the terms of MN and it is not properly arguable either  that  he
    misdirected himself in all the  circumstances  in  a  material  way  in
    respect of HJ (Iran).

18. Turning to the third ground of appeal,  Ms  Taylor-Gee  submitted  that
    looking at the determination as a whole it is evident  that  the  judge
    had not properly applied the standard of proof.  Ms Isherwood submitted
    that no proper basis on which to make out that ground of appeal.

19. The judge sets out in his determination at [19]  to  [21]  the  correct
    standard and burden of proof and I do not consider that his use of  the
    word 'reasonable' implies or could be taken as indicating that  he  had
    applied any different standard of proof in  assessing  the  appellant's
    claim and I note that he quite properly said, because this was a matter
    for the Secretary of State to  prove,  that  the  claim  is  false  and
    opportunistic, stating that it is more likely than not at paragraph 71.

20. For all these reasons I am satisfied that the determination  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Fox did not involve the making of an error  of  law
    capable of affecting the outcome of  the  decision  and  I  uphold  the
    decision in all respects.



 Signed                                 Date approved:  2 June 2014
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

