
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11485/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Sent           |
|On 15 May 2013                                |On 03 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                             Seada Asrat Tebeka

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms T Hunt, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Harrison, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The nationality of the appellant is in dispute.  It is the Secretary of
    State's case that the appellant was born on  25  July  1985  and  is  a
    national of Ethiopia with the name  Seada  Asrat  Tebeka.   It  is  the
    appellant's case that her name is Kidist Tsegaye Gebregiorgis and  that
    she is an Eritrean national born 4 October 1986.

 2. Under the surname Tebeka, the appellant was issued with a visa  by  the
    British authorities in Beirut on 25 January 2012 in order  to  come  to
    the United Kingdom as a  domestic  worker/visitor  accompanying  Sheikh
    Saud Sherbatly for a period of three months.  She  thereafter  came  to
    this country with her employer's family whom she  left  in  June  2012.
    This was the second occasion the  appellant  has  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom with the family. She had been here before in June 2011.

 3.  According  to  the  application  form  relating  to  the  more  recent
    application, the appellant was born on 25 July  1985  in  Addis  Ababa,
    Ethiopia and is a single female.  In the application  for  her  earlier
    visa, the appellant explained that she had lived at the  address  given
    in Ramlet El Bayda where she was employed by her sponsor on a full-time
    basis as a housemaid since 13 November  2007.   The  passport  produced
    with both applications  on  which  the  appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom is recorded to have been issued  by  the  "Main  Department  of
    Immigration and Nationality" in Ethiopia on 10 April 2007.

 4. After leaving her employer's  household  (which  was  recorded  in  the
    application made in January 2012 as Regent Park House,  105  Park  Road
    Street, London) in June 2012, the appellant stayed with a  person  from
    Sudan whom she had met by chance on the street for  four  months.   She
    cared for his wife during the delivery of her baby.   The  same  person
    walked with the appellant to the  Home  Office  in  Croydon  where  she
    claimed asylum on 31 October 2012.

 5. She explained when she applied that she  was  Eritrean  with  the  name
    given above.  She would try to get her family to send her documents and
    also indicated that her actual date of birth was 4 October  1986.   She
    was Tigrinyan and of the Christian faith and had left Eritrea  in  June
    2004 by car to Sudan which she then left in  July  2006  to  travel  to
    Ethiopia where she obtained an Ethiopian passport and from  there  went
    to Beirut.  She explained in her screening interview  that  she  had  a
    visa to go to Beirut in 2007 and in addition she referred also  to  the
    difficulties that she had had with her employers who made her suffer  a
    lot.

 6. A substantive asylum interview with the use of an  Amharic  interpreter
    took place on 16 November 2012 and in the course of some 154  questions
    the  appellant  was  asked  about  her  background,  circumstances  and
    history.  In summary it is that she was born in Eritrea in Dekemhare in
    the south of the country.  Two years later she moved with her family to
    Debrezeiti, Ethiopia where her father had employment.  He owned a shop.
     Although  her  parents  spoke  Tigrinyan,  Amharic  was  used  in  the
    household.  The appellant has four brothers and one sister.   Three  of
    those brothers are  still  serving  in  national  military  service  in
    Eritrea.  The eldest is living in Asmara after completing his  national
    service.  His sister also lives there.

 7. In 1998 the appellant's father, together with two brothers, returned to
    Eritrea.  The appellant and her remaining family returned in 2000.  Her
    father was initially put under arrest on his return as he  had  earlier
    refused work with the government of Eritrea.  He was released  after  a
    two year sentence.

 8. The appellant was 14 on her return.  It  is  her  case  that  she  left
    Eritrea in June 2004.  She was then  18  and  had  been  sent  national
    service call up papers on 15 June 2004 and she was required  to  report
    at the end of that month.  She was taken to Sudan with  the  assistance
    of an agent where she remained until July 2006.  She  was  in  Ethiopia
    for three months with the assistance of an agent and it was there  that
    she obtained the Ethiopian passport that permitted her to travel on for
    her employment in Lebanon.

 9. The Secretary of State did not accept the appellant's claimed  Eritrean
    identity and maintained that she would be returned to Ethiopia of which
    she is a national.  This was because:

      i) the appellant had been able to travel  on  the  Ethiopian  passport
         which had been accepted as genuine by the Entry  Clearance  Officer
         at the British Embassy in Beirut; and

     ii) although claiming to be an Eritrean national she spoke only Amharic
         and Arabic.

10. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever likewise did not believe the  appellant
    and dismissed her appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human
    rights grounds.

11. In granting permission to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kamara
    observed:

         "In an otherwise well-reasoned  determination  the  judge  arguably
         erred in law in his findings as to  the  reliability  of  both  the
         Eritrean documents submitted by the  appellant  and  the  Ethiopian
         passport used by her to travel to the United Kingdom.  Furthermore,
         I find there is merit  in  the  grounds  relating  to  the  judge's
         finding that it was not reasonably likely that the appellant  would
         be able to speak Tigrinya.  Finally, according to Counsel's note at
         the hearing, there appears to be some dispute as to the appellant's
         oral evidence in relation to her flight from her  employer's  home.
         This evidence relates to an issue regarding which the judge found a
         clear inconsistency."

12. In a letter dated 9 April 2013 the Secretary of  State  indicated  that
    the appeal in the Upper Tribunal was opposed.  It is  argued  that  the
    judge had made a series of carefully-reasoned findings  in  support  of
    his conclusion that the appellant had not given a credible  account  of
    her claim for asylum.  The judge had given good reasons for finding the
    appellant's inability  to  speak  Tigrinya  given  her  background  and
    furthermore had found that the Eritrean identity documents had not been
    subject to the same degree of scrutiny  as  the  appellant's  Ethiopian
    passport.  The judge  had  also  made  clear  findings  concerning  the
    unlikely events relied on by the appellant in enabling  her  to  regain
    contact with her parents.  On  the  facts  before  him  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the appellant's account was not genuine.

13. At the hearing before me on 15 May I heard lengthy submissions from the
    representatives confined to whether the First-tier Tribunal had made  a
    material error of law.  I reserved my determination.

Did the First-tier Tribunal Err in Law

14. The lengthy grounds of application take issue  with  a  number  of  the
    credibility findings of the judge under three headings, being:

      i) the identity documents;

     ii) the issue of language;

    iii) the appellant's account of how she fled her employers.

15. I heard submissions on each of these points in reverse order, beginning
    with the issue of the appellant fleeing the family  for  whom  she  was
    working in London.

16. The judge referred at [45] of his determination that  at  interview  by
    the Secretary of State  she  had  explained  that  her  time  with  her
    Lebanese employers had been a harsh regime where  she  was  essentially
    incarcerated within the buildings in which she lived almost constantly.
     On the first occasion she had travelled to the United Kingdom in  2011
    she had described living with the family in  a  hotel.   He  considered
    that had she genuinely sought to leave their employment earlier it  was
    difficult to see that she did not have the opportunity of doing so.  He
    considered there was also inconsistency over the account given  by  the
    appellant of her escape, contrasting the answers given at interview and
    that in oral evidence before him.  At interview she had said the  other
    (maids) were asleep when she left.  In oral evidence  she  had  claimed
    that she had spoken to them about leaving but they did not wish to  go.
    He considered that this  inconsistency  was  unlikely  to  occur  in  a
    genuine account.

17. It was clear to him from the evidence and the log of a  missing  person
    that the appellant was living in  Central  London.   10  minutes  after
    having left the house she met an unknown Sudanese  man  called  Hassan.
    He had taken her to his house which was 50 minutes walk  away  and  she
    was effectively incarcerated by him inside the house to  care  for  his
    pregnant wife.  The judge found it incredible that she had not found an
    opportunity to leave.  She had claimed that they  had  walked  for  one
    hour from his house  to  the  asylum  centre  in  Croydon.   The  judge
    considered the account of that journey entirely impossible.

18. The challenge by Ms Hunt is on the basis that:

      i) The judge failed to take into account the case in evidence that her
         employers would lock her into the property and when she did abscond
         it was her first opportunity;

     ii) The clear inconsistency referred to by  the  judge  (regarding  the
         role of the other maids) was an inaccurate account of the  evidence
         and did not concur with Counsel's note.

    iii) There was no  basis  for  the  conclusion  regarding  the  distance
         between the appellant's employer's abode and Croydon as  there  was
         no evidence where the employer resided.  The total  of  two  hours'
         walk provided were rough  estimates  and  would  encompass  a  wide
         radius.

19. I find no merit in points (i) and (iii) above.  The judge was  entitled
    to observe that the appellant had previously stayed in  what  had  been
    described as a hotel in the United Kingdom.   Croydon  is  some  twelve
    miles from Central London.  As I  have  noted  above,  the  appellant's
    employer's address was in Regent's Park.

20. I consider, however, there is  some  merit  in  (ii).   At  her  asylum
    interview, after explaining how she had run away when her employers had
    forgotten the key was in the door, the appellant  was  asked  "did  the
    other girls leave?"  She responded "they were asleep at that time".

21. According to the judge's note, under cross-examination:

         "Sleeping with two other house maids.

         All treated badly.

         Discussed it between us.

         They were Eritreans.

         Don't know if they were on false passports.

         Talked about getting away from employers.

         Q137 discovered key and got away.

         I did suggest to others to go with me.

         Q137 - said they were asleep.

         I asked them before they went to sleep.

         They (indecipherable) coming - said no."

22. It is clear that this aspect was not explored  in  any  detail  by  the
    Secretary of State at the asylum interview.  The different accounts  do
    not reveal an inconsistency although it was arguably open to the  judge
    to draw an adverse inference from the appellant not explaining how  she
    had discussed matters with the other maids but they had decided not  to
    leave with her in response to the question at 137.  Even so  I  do  not
    consider this to be an inconsistency and not sufficient  to  disbelieve
    an overall account.

23. It is necessary therefore to  examine  in  the  context  of  the  other
    challenges made by Ms Hunt the other reasons given  by  the  judge  for
    rejecting the appellant's account. I turn to the next issue relating to
    language.

24. The judge observed  that  the  appellant  claimed  to  understand  some
    Tigrinya although the assertion had never been tested, but she accepted
    she did not speak this language.  He considered an expert report relied
    on indicated that her use of Amharic was consistent with her  being  an
    Ethiopia but he also observed that this was not inconsistent  with  her
    being Eritrean given the large number of Eritreans who moved to or  who
    were expelled from Ethiopia.  He then went on to note:

         "What the  expert  does  not  comment  upon,  however,  potentially
         because he did not know about the fact, is that on the  appellant's
         own evidence both parents spoke Tigrinya and spoke Tigrinya to each
         other.  Given that she had spent the  vast  majority  of  her  life
         living with her parents it is not reasonably likely that she  would
         be  unable  to  speak  Tigrinya  herself  in  those  circumstances.
         Further, according to the expert report, Tigrinya is  the  language
         used only in the highland Christian community in  Eritrea.   It  is
         not claimed that the appellant's family is of that  community.   It
         is not something suggested by the experts.  Further, the  appellant
         speaks Arabic, a natural inference being she developed the  use  of
         that language whilst serving as a  domestic  worker  in  Sudan  and
         thereafter with the Lebanese family.  Her account of life with  the
         Lebanese family and indeed in the Sudan does not  suggest  she  had
         much opportunity to interact with others or be involved in  lengthy
         discourse with Arabic speakers.  Accordingly, either the account of
         her life as a domestic worker in Sudan and  thereafter  is  a  less
         than accurate one  or  she  clearly  has  an  ability  to  pick  up
         language.  If the latter,  that  factor  again  detracts  from  the
         concept that she would not speak Tigrinya if that was the  language
         used by her parents over the many years that  she  had  lived  with
         them."

25. The challenge by Ms Hunt is:

      i) The judge failed  to  take  proper  account  of  the  evidence  the
         appellant had only lived with both her parents between the ages  of
         14 and 18 and previously with her mother only.

     ii) There was no specific basis or  expert  evidence  to  draw  such  a
         conclusion about how long it would take an  appellant  to  speak  a
         language that she had overheard her parents speaking over a limited
         number of years.

    iii) The appellant's ability to speak Arabic as  a  domestic  worker  as
         opposed to her inability to speak  Tigrinya  was  an  inappropriate
         comparison to make.

     iv) The expert report that was available in the case makes it clear the
         language skills of the appellant  are  consistent  with  her  being
         Eritrean.

26. The point made  at  (i)  is  without  merit  and  inaccurate.   On  the
    appellant's own account  she  lived  with  her  father  and  mother  in
    Ethiopia until her father left in 1998 and  remained  with  her  mother
    until she travelled with her to Eritrea, by which time her  father  had
    served her sentence and the family lived together  until  she  was  18.
    The explanation given by the appellant at her asylum interview why  she
    could not speak Tigrinyan was a  weak  one.   She  explained  that  her
    father used to leave the house very early in the morning and come  back
    in the evening and her mother was ill.  Her earlier answer was that her
    parents spoke Tigrinyan.  It was reasonable for the judge  to  conclude
    that the appellant would speak this language herself.

27. As to point (iii), the judge was entitled to give some  weight  to  the
    ability of the appellant  to  acquire  Arabic  working  as  a  maid  as
    indicative of her facility in other languages.  As to (iv),  the  judge
    was in error in speculating the expert did not know on the  appellant's
    own account that both her parents spoke Tigrinya  to  each  other.   Dr
    Poole's report indicates that he  had  read  the  reasons  for  refusal
    (letter)  and  witness  statement  dated  23  January  2013.    It   is
    unsatisfactory that he was not provided with a copy of  the  record  of
    interview of the appellant.  However, paragraph  7(b)  of  the  refusal
    letter states:

         "You speak Amharic and Arabic.  You do not speak Tigrinyan but  you
         can listen to it.  You spoke Amharic at the house and your  parents
         only spoke Tigrinyan with each other ..."

28. Dr Poole addresses the issue of Amharic language in Eritrea, in general
    terms  observing  that  the  Eritrean  migrant  community  resident  in
    Ethiopia usually spoke Amharic as  a  means  of  integrating  with  the
    dominant Amhara.  He further observes: "It is quite plausible and quite
    usual that the appellant and  her  family  spoke  Amharic  rather  than
    Tigrinya".  What he does not address is  the  fact  that  the  evidence
    before him indicated that the parents spoke only Tigrinya between  each
    other.  I am satisfied that the  challenge  to  the  judge's  reasoning
    regarding the appellant's language competence  is  a  disagreement  and
    that the adverse inferences he drew were open to him on the evidence.

29. The third challenge relates to identity documents, which  he  considers
    at [31] to [40], both as to the ability of the appellant to  obtain  an
    Ethiopian ID card and a passport  as  a  consequence,  her  ability  to
    travel on that card and his concerns about  the  manner  in  which  the
    identity documents of her family  members  obtained  after  the  asylum
    interview came into being.

30. In her challenge, Ms Hunt argues:

      i) The judge erred in failed to credit the veracity of the appellant's
         account by mentioning that she gave the names of her family members
         in Eritrea at her screening interview, which were  corroborated  by
         the ID documents.

     ii) The expert would have no ability or reason to comment on  the  fact
         that the identity cards were all issued in 1992,  a  similar  point
         being made in respect of the  mother's  ID  card  being  issued  in
         Debrezeit and her father's in Addis Ababa.

    iii) The judge had no evidence on which to find the appellant would  not
         have met an Eritrean in Croydon (through whom contact had been made
         with her parents for their identity documents to be provided).

     iv) The appellant had explained at interview that she did not know  her
         parents' phone number and also that it was a risk for both her  and
         them were she to make contact with them as she had left the country
         illegally.  At the hearing under examination-in-chief the appellant
         confirmed that she had spoken to her brother on the  telephone  and
         that she had got the number from a friend in Croydon.  It is argued
         that there was no basis  or  evidence  upon  which  the  judge  was
         entitled to find that contact with her family did not happen.   The
         appellant was forced to try to substantiate a claim  with  evidence
         and she would be at risk herself had she not done so.

      v) The issue was whether  the  Ethiopian  passport  could  be  readily
         obtained fraudulently or not.  The  expert  report  had  gone  into
         detail on this.  This was in the context of the judge having  noted
         the expert evidence of the potential ease with which  documentation
         could be obtained and the judge's observation that the  expert  did
         not claim or indeed know whether  the  documents  obtained  by  the
         appellant were false or potentially genuine.

     vi) It was entirely illogical and unfair to draw a  comparison  between
         the use of the Ethiopian passport which did not relate  to  whether
         it was fraudulently obtained or not and  the  comparison  with  the
         Eritrean ID cards made by the judge  as  there  was  no  documented
         history pertaining to those who travel outside Eritrea.

31. To my mind, these challenges are no  more  than  disagreements.   I  do
    accept that if it is the appellant's case that her  Ethiopian  passport
    was obtained based on false information but it was a genuine  passport,
    the regular use of that passport would not  necessarily  point  to  the
    reliability of the information that it said about itself.  But that was
    not the  only  basis  on  which  the  judge  was  concerned  about  the
    documents.  He was entitled to be concerned about the  plausibility  of
    the appellant having stated she had not contacted her  parents  because
    of the risks to her and them with the relative ease with which she  was
    able to do so on meeting by chance a  fellow  Eritrean  who  had  their
    telephone number.  Ms  Hunt  confirmed  the  expert  had  not  met  the
    appellant and it is clear that he had not seen the passport.  The judge
    was entitled to make the observations he did, having taken into account
    the evidence before him of the ease with which false documents  can  be
    obtained in Ethiopia.

32. Stepping back from these points of  disagreement  and  considering  the
    determination as a whole, I am satisfied that  the  judge  gave  cogent
    reasons for disbelieving the appellant which were open to  him  on  the
    evidence disclosing neither irrationality nor perversity.  The  reasons
    under challenge were not the  only  reasons  given  by  the  judge  for
    rejecting  the  account.   In  this  context  I  do  not  consider  his
    inaccurate assessment of the evidence regarding the role of the  fellow
    housemates when the appellant made her escape sufficient  to  undermine
    the reliability of his conclusions as a whole.  I am satisfied that the
    determination discloses no material error which requires  the  decision
    to be remade.



33. The appeal by the appellant in the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.






Signed                                  Date 31 May 2013

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

