
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11186/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th October 2015                           |On 16th October 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                          MASTER Kochi Malangkhail
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tettey of Counsel instructed by Halliday Reeves
Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, Master Kochi Malangkhail, date of birth  claimed  to  be
    1st January 1997 is a  citizen  of  Afghanistan.   I  have  considered
    whether or not it  is  appropriate  to  make  an  anonymity  direction.
    Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it  necessary
    to make such a direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge De Haney promulgated on 17th February  2015.   By  that
    decision  the  judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent to remove  the  Appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom as an illegal entrant.

 3. By a decision made on 16th March 2015 leave  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted.  Thus the matter appears before me  to  determine
    in the first instance whether there is an error of law in the  original
    determination.

 4. The first challenge raised to the decision by Judge De  Haney  is  with
    regard to procedural unfairness.  The Appellant asserts that  he  is  a
    minor.  The judge  however  on  the  basis  of  an  assessment  by  two
    qualified and responsible professionals, Karen  Green,  social  worker,
    and Jim Brown, AMP, treated the Appellant as an adult.  It is suggested
    that the judge was  wrong  to  proceed  on  a  basis  of  a  non-Merton
    compliant age assessment.

 5. The Appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom on  14th  August  2013.
    At that stage he was detained and interviewed.  He was claiming  asylum
    and claiming that he was 12 or 13 years old.  He gave a date  of  birth
    of 5th October 1379 (transposed to 25th January 2001).  The  Appellant
    has since claimed that this was a mistake  and  that  his  nearest  age
    verification is on his Tazkira, an identity document from  Afghanistan.
    The Appellant then in his statement had stated that he was 15 years  of
    age according to his Tazkira on 25th August  2012.   At  the  date  of
    hearing that would have put the Appellant as at 17 years of  age.   The
    Appellant accepted however in oral evidence that he did  not  know  how
    old he was.

 6. The Appellant has given an account of having an older brother, who  was
    25 (see A8 question 20).  The Appellant otherwise has claimed that  his
    father and mother are aged 35 and 30 years of age.  Clearly that is not
    possible.  The Appellant has also given ages for other siblings  of  17
    and 20 which again does not fit in with his claims as  to  his  parents
    age, specifically the mother.

 7. When the Appellant was originally interviewed  in  the  United  Kingdom
    because of his claims with regard to age, senior  social  workers  from
    Manchester City Council were contacted and they, Ms Green and Mr Brown,
    attended to carry out an age assessment.  At that point  the  Appellant
    was claiming to be 12 years of age.  Having conducted  an  initial  age
    assessment the social workers came to the opinion  that  the  Appellant
    was not a child of under 18 but was in point of fact over 22.  There is
    then a letter of 17th August 2013 to the Appellant  which  makes  clear
    that the Appellant was found to be significantly over 18 years of  age.



 8. It is suggested that there is a failure to carry out a Merton compliant
    age assessment and that therefore the age assessment itself is  flawed.
    The  appropriate  procedure  for  the  assessment  of   age   in   such
    circumstances was given clear guidance in the case of The Queen on  the
    application of B v London Borough of Merton [2003] EWHC 1689.

 9. Guidance has developed from the Merton case in such matters  as  Asylum
    Processing Guidance on Assessing Age, the procedure to be  followed  in
    assessing the age of a child is set out.  Paragraph 2.2 deals with  the
    assessment of children and Section 55 of the 2009 Act.   Paragraph  2.2
    provides:

         "The assessing age policy has an in-built safeguard to ensure it is
         compliant with the new duty, for example, applicants whose age  has
         not been accepted by the agency, will  initially  be  afforded  the
         benefit of the doubt  and  be  treated  as  children  unless  their
         physical  appearance/demeanour  very  strongly  suggests  they  are
         significantly over 18."

    The policy commences at Section 2 with paragraph 2.1 which indicates:

         "Where there is little or no evidence to  support  the  applicant's
         claimed age and their claim to be a child is doubted, the following
         policy should be applied:

          1. The applicant should be treated as an adult if their  physical
             appearance/ demeanour very strongly  suggests  that  they  are
             significantly over 18 years of age.

         2.   All other applicants should be afforded  the  benefit  of  the
             doubt  and  treated  as  children  in  accordance   with   the
             'processing an asylum application from a child' (sic), until a
             careful assessment of their age has been completed."

10. Here the policy was clearly followed.  The Appellant was claiming  that
    he was 12 years of age but from his physical appearance  and  demeanour
    that was clearly thought not to be the case.  However  out  of  caution
    Manchester City Council were contacted and the Appellant was then  seen
    by two social workers who  having  looked  at  the  Appellant  in  2013
    determined that the Appellant was significantly over 18  years  of  age
    and was at least 22.

11. It is suggested in the Grounds of Appeal that Judge  De  Haney  firstly
    failed to adjourn the hearing  pending  a  proper  translation  of  the
    Tazkira and secondly whilst a proper Merton  compliant  age  assessment
    was carried out.  Judge De Haney was dealing with  this  Appellant  two
    years further on from the initial age assessment,  which  had  assessed
    the Appellant as over 22.

12.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  where  social  workers,  who  take  their
    responsibility to children and the assessment of  age  seriously,  have
    carried out an age assessment  and  come  to  the  conclusion  that  an
    individual is significantly over the age of 18, there is no  obligation
    in the local authority to house and accommodate the minor.  Clearly the
    initial age assessment was carried out and it was  concluded  that  the
    Appellant was four years over the age of 18.

13. That was clearly an issue that  was  evident  on  the  papers  but  the
    solicitors failed to obtain a translation of the Tazkira and failed  to
    obtain any evidence to counter the conclusions of the  age  assessment.
    There comes a point where the physical evidence  is  such  that  it  is
    obvious that a person is not a  child,  equally  where  social  workers
    attend and make an assessment that an applicant is  clearly  well  over
    the age of majority it is an issue for  the  appellant  and  his  legal
    representatives to seek evidence to  confirm  the  Appellant's  claims.
    There was nothing to stop the solicitors seeking an age  assessment  or
    obtaining a translation of the Tazkira.

14. The judge was entitled therefore to take account of the  assessment  by
    the Social workers assessing the Appellant as at 2013 as 22.  The judge
    was then entitled to look further at the evidence presented to  counter
    that.  The solicitors had had ample opportunity to deal with the  issue
    but had not.  That however should be dealt with carefully but  if  this
    was a genuine minor Appellant then clearly he  would  be  much  reliant
    upon his lawyers.  However the evidence given otherwise with regard  to
    the age of his brother and other members of his  family  in  comparison
    with the age of his parents was clear.  The ages were not correct.   It
    was apparent that no reliance could be  placed  upon  the  claimed  age
    presented by the Appellant of any of his family.  The Appellant's claim
    to have been 12 was clearly not true.  It  was  clearly  noted  by  the
    social workers and by the Immigration Officers at the  commencement  of
    the  Appellant's  interview.   In  such  circumstances  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that a proper assessment had been made,  that  the
    Appellant was clearly over 18 at least by four years  as  of  2013  and
    therefore by the time that he was dealing with the matter the Appellant
    could not be said to be a minor.  Accordingly the judge was entitled to
    deal with the issue of age in the manner that he did.

15. It is suggested in the second ground that the judge has failed to  take
    into account a number of documents submitted by the Appellant.  However
    the judge has referred in paragraph 9 of the decision to the fact  that
    he is aware of the documents submitted and that he has taken account of
    them.  The mere fact that the judge does not specifically refer to  the
    documents does not in any way detract from the findings of fact made by
    the judge.  The judge has properly approached  the  evidence  presented
    before him and given sufficient reasons to find  that  the  Appellant's
    account was not credible.  The judge has therefore dealt  with  all  of
    the issues that he needed to deal with.  There was no necessity for the
    judge to deal with each and every document submitted.

16. I have considered the  remaining  Grounds  of  Appeal.   The  remaining
    grounds merely seem to be a challenge to the findings of fact  made  by
    the judge.  The judge was entitled to  approach  the  evidence  on  the
    basis that he did.  He has carefully considered the evidence and  given
    ample  reasons  for  the  findings  of  fact  that  he  made.   In  the
    circumstances there is no error of law in the approach of the judge  to
    the evidence.

Notice of Decision

17. I accordingly find that there is no error of law and that the  decision
    to dismiss the appeal on all grounds stands.

18. No anonymity direction made.

Signed   Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
