

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/11505/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined on the papers              |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2017                   |       On 15 November 2017           |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                  MR F E B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. It is appropriate to  continue  the  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. This appeal came before me first on 16 January 2017 at a hearing  in
       Liverpool.  By  a  decision  promulgated  on  25  January  2017,   I
       determined that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Lloyd-Smith promulgated on 3 May 2016 should  be  set
       aside insofar as it determined the issue relating to  Article  15(c)
       of the Qualification Directive ("Article 15(c)").  That decision  is
       annexed hereto for ease of reference.


    2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge had proceeded to determine the Article
       15(c) issue on the basis of the country guidance decision in AT  and
       others (Article 15(c); risk categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT318(IAC)
       ("AT").  By the time of the hearing before me but after  the  First-
       tier  Tribunal's  decision,  the  Upper  Tribunal  promulgated   its
       decision in FA (Libya: art 15(c)) Libya CG [2016] UKUT  00413  (IAC)
       ("FA").   The  Upper  Tribunal  declined  to  give  updated  country
       guidance in FA due to the fluidity of the  situation  in  Libya  but
       determined that AT was out of date and should no longer be followed.
        I concluded that there was  an  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's decision  for  failure  to  explain  why  the  volume  of
       material produced by  the  Appellant  in  relation  to  the  current
       situation in Libya did not justify a departure from AT.


    3. In accordance with directions given in my error of law decision,  on
       20 February 2017,  the  Appellant  submitted  a  volume  of  country
       information relating to Libya under cover  of  a  skeleton  argument
       dated February 2017.


    4. The appeal came before me next on 30 March  2017  at  a  hearing  in
       Manchester. On that occasion, I drew attention of the parties  to  a
       further country  guidance  case  in  relation  to  Libya  which  was
       scheduled for hearing on 3 and 4 May 2017.  Both parties agreed that
       it would be sensible to adjourn the hearing  on  30  March  2017  to
       await that further country guidance decision and to proceed  by  way
       of written submissions following the promulgation of  that  decision
       with a CMR or decision to follow depending on the outcome.


    5. By a decision  promulgated  on  28  June  2017  the  Upper  Tribunal
       (McCloskey J and UTJ Bruce) determined the appeal  in  ZMM  (Article
       15(c)) Libya CG  [2017] UKUT  00263  (IAC)  ("ZMM").   The  headnote
       reads as follows:-
           "The violence in Libya  has  reached  such  a  high  level  that
           substantial grounds are shown for  believing  that  a  returning
           civilian would,  solely  on  account  of  his  presence  on  the
           territory of that country or region, face a real risk  of  being
           subject to a threat to his life or person."

      Submissions and discussion

    6. On  3  July  2017,  the  Appellant's  representatives  made  written
       submissions.  It is accepted by those submissions that  the  adverse
       credibility and factual findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
       preserved and that accordingly the Appellant could  not  succeed  in
       establishing  refugee  status.   It  is  submitted  however,   that,
       following ZM, the Appellant is entitled  to  subsidiary  protection.
       The submissions draw attention to the  headnote  in  ZMM  as  quoted
       above and also to the following passage at [92] and [93]:-
           "[92]... The  situation  is  complex  and  fast-moving  but  two
           features stand out: there is at present a  manifest  failure  of
           state protection for the  ordinary  citizen  and  indiscriminate
           violence is liable to erupt  anywhere,  at  any  time.   In  the
           context of this extreme volatility we  are  satisfied  that  the
           cumulative effect of the evidence is such that the Article 15(c)
           test is satisfied.
            [93] In light  of  our  findings  we  have  not  considered  it
           necessary to conduct a region by region review.  We do not doubt
           that there are in Libya  today  towns  and  villages  which  are
           relatively calm where, notwithstanding the absence of  effective
           government, people are going about  their  'normal'  lives.   We
           cannot however be satisfied that the peace  in  these  oases  is
           stable or durable, or that the notional returnee to Libya  would
           be able to safely access such  locations.   In  April  2017  the
           Secretary-General of the UN reported the freedom of movement  of
           ordinary Libyans to  be  "severely  affected"  by  violence  and
           lawlessness.   Ms  Pargeter  agreed.   As  her  addendum  report
           illustrates,  travel  across  the   country   is   a   dangerous
           enterprise.  Those few airports that do remain  open  are  under
           the control of various militias.  Even if the arriving passenger
           were able to talk his way  out  of  the  airport  without  being
           robbed, assaulted, detained or worse,  we  cannot  be  satisfied
           that the risks he would face on his  onwards  journey  would  be
           acceptably low.  The  evidence  before  us  indicates  that  the
           situation  throughout  Libya   is   extremely   unstable,   that
           lawlessness and violence are widespread, and that there is not a
           sufficiency of protection for the  ordinary  civilian.   We  are
           satisfied that the Article 15(c) risk is made out."


    7. The Appellant submits therefore that he is  entitled  to  subsidiary
       protection by reason of the levels  of  indiscriminate  violence  in
       Libya and that there is no area  of  Libya  to  which  he  could  be
       expected to relocate in light of the findings of the Upper  Tribunal
       in ZMM.  The Appellant submits that he is entitled to  succeed  also
       on human rights grounds  applying  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
       Immigration Rules on the  basis  that  there  are  very  significant
       obstacles to his integration in Libya.


    8. The Respondent made written submissions  under  cover  of  a  letter
       dated 7 September 2017.  Those accept that the Appellant is entitled
       to  humanitarian  protection  by  reason  of  Article  15(c)   being
       satisfied.  It is pointed out in those submissions that  the  appeal
       in ZMM (where the appellant was similarly found not to be  credible)
       was dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds.


    9. Following those submissions, the Appellant's  representatives  wrote
       on 11 October 2017 indicating that, in  light  of  the  Respondent's
       concession, the appeal should be  allowed  on  the  basis  that  the
       Appellant is entitled to humanitarian protection.


   10. It is agreed between the parties that the Appellant is  entitled  to
       humanitarian protection.  The  Respondent's  concession  is  clearly
       consistent with the  findings  in  ZMM.   The  appeal  is  therefore
       allowed on that basis.  I  gratefully  adopt  the  Upper  Tribunal's
       findings in ZMM. I allow the appeal on that basis.




   11. The Appellant submits that his appeal  should  also  be  allowed  on
       human rights grounds as there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to
       integration in Libya at the present time.  The Respondent points out
       that the appeal in ZMM was  not  allowed  on  that  basis.   I  note
       however that this is because no error of law had been found in  that
       regard as it was not a ground of appeal.  That was not therefore  an
       issue for determination.


   12. At the error of law hearing, it was  accepted  by  Counsel  for  the
       Appellant that the Article 8 claim stood or fell  with  the  Article
       15(c) case (as recorded at [3] of that  decision).  However,  having
       revisited the permission grant in this appeal, I note  that,  as  in
       ZMM, there were no grounds challenging the Article  8  consideration
       by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   Although  UTJ  Kopieczek  when
       granting  permission  did  note  that   "technically"   the   FTTJ's
       conclusions in relation to Article  8  may  need  to  be  revisited,
       depending on the outcome of the Article  15(c)  issue,  since  there
       were no grounds of challenge, I do not consider that I need to  deal
       with this issue. I note also that  the  Appellant's  representatives
       letter dated 11 October makes no mention of this issue as  requiring
       determination (following the  Respondent's  submissions).   For  the
       sake of completeness, however, I repeat my view as expressed at  the
       error of law hearing,  that  an  Article  8  claim  based  on  "very
       significant obstacles" stands or falls with the Article 15(c) issue.
        As such, I would have allowed the appeal on  human  rights  grounds
       also.


      DECISION


   I re-make the decision in this appeal allowing the appeal  on  the  basis
   that the  Appellant  is  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  applying
   Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.


      Signed           [pic]      Dated:  13 November 2017


      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


                        ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11505/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard in Liverpool                            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 January 2017                            |On 25 January 2017           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                  MR F E B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Evans, Counsel instructed by WTB solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. It is appropriate to  continue  the  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                    ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Background

   13. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge  Lloyd-Smith  promulgated  on  3  May  2016  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 13 August 2015  refusing  his  protection  and  human
       rights claims.


   14. The Appellant is a national of Libya.  He arrived in the  UK  on  14
       October 2010 as a visitor with  leave.   He  claimed  asylum  on  18
       February 2015.  The Appellant claimed asylum on the basis of various
       factors particular to his situation.  I do not need to set those out
       because the  claim  was  not  believed  and,  although  the  adverse
       credibility findings were challenged, permission to appeal  was  not
       given in relation to that challenge.


   15. The Appellant challenges the Decision on the basis of  the  findings
       in relation to Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive and  the
       Judge's refusal to depart from the country guidance in  relation  to
       Libya promulgated in  2014  (AT  and  others  (Article  15(c);  risk
       categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT 318(IAC) ("AT and  others")).   The
       Appellant also challenges the Judge's dismissal of his human  rights
       claim on the basis that the Judge was  not  entitled  to  find  that
       there were not "very significant obstacles" to his reintegration  in
       Libya.  However, Miss Evans fairly accepted that the Article 8 claim
       stood or fell with the Article 15(c) case.  Accordingly, the  ground
       with which I am concerned is only that the Judge was not entitled to
       follow the 2014  country  guidance  case  based  on  the  background
       evidence before her and/or failed to provide sufficient  reason  for
       finding that this evidence  did  not  represent  strong  grounds  to
       depart from the country guidance case.


   16. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek
       on 27 June 2016.  That sets out the issue in the following terms:-


           "...I do consider it arguable that the  FtJ  failed  to  explain
           with reference to the country background material provided,  why
           she concluded that she was unable to depart  from  the  guidance
           given in AT and Others in terms of the  potential  risk  to  the
           appellant  with  reference  to  Article  15(c).   There  is   no
           identification of the material to which her attention was  drawn
           and arguably inadequate engagement with that material.  To  that
           extent  only  therefore,  I  consider  that  the   grounds   are
           arguable."


       Judge Kopieczek also identified that the Article 8  issue  may  also
       need to be revisited in the event that the  Article  15(c)  argument
       were found to have merit.


   17. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision  or  remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.


Submissions


   18. Miss Evans accepted that the recent decision of the  Upper  Tribunal
       in FA (Libya: art 15(c)) Libya CG)  [2016]  UKUT  00413  (IAC)  ("FA
       (Libya)") post-dates the Decision and the grant of  permission.   In
       that decision, the Tribunal found that the country  guidance  in  AT
       and others is out of date and  should  no  longer  be  followed  but
       declined to offer updated country guidance on  the  basis  that  the
       situation in Libya is too fluid to offer any lasting guidance as  to
       general risk.  The Tribunal therefore gave guidance that  each  case
       should be determined on the facts and evidence before the  Judge  in
       each appeal.  However, since that decision was not before the Judge,
       she cannot be criticised for not adopting  that  approach,  provided
       she has correctly considered the evidence which was before her.


   19. Miss Evans drew my attention to the volume of background evidence at
       [38] to [162]  of  the  Appellant's  bundle.   She  submitted  that,
       although the Judge indicates at [13] of the Decision  that  she  has
       considered all of the background information, this was not borne out
       by her assessment at [23] of the  Decision.   Miss  Evans  submitted
       that the material in the Appellant's bundle clearly showed a  marked
       deterioration from that recorded in AT and others.  The decision  in
       that case relied on evidence dating back  to  before  November  2013
       when those appeals were heard.  This Appellant's appeal was  decided
       in May 2016.


   20. Miss Evans also submitted that if the Judge had accepted the account
       of the individual risk which  the  Appellant  claimed,  the  Judge's
       finding that he would not be  at  risk  on  that  account  would  be
       inconsistent with the  country  guidance  in  AT  and  others.   She
       accepted that since the Appellant was found not to  be  credible  in
       that regard,  this  did  not  arise.   She  submitted  that  it  was
       nonetheless relevant to the question whether the Judge  should  have
       considered the case on the evidence rather than simply  applying  AT
       and others.


   21. In  response,  Mr  Harrison  relied  on  the  Respondent's  rule  24
       response.  He submitted that there was no material error.  The Judge
       had directed herself appropriately and had considered  the  evidence
       before her.  In relation to Article 15(c), the Appellant  needed  to
       show good reason for departing from what was at  the  time  existing
       country guidance.  There was no error in the  Judge  preferring  the
       country guidance decision over the background evidence  relied  upon
       by the Appellant.


   22. Both parties agreed that, if I found a  material  error  of  law,  a
       further hearing  would  be  required  prior  to  re-making.   It  is
       possible that further limited oral evidence would  be  required  and
       the background material would also need to be updated.  Both parties
       agreed however that the appeal could remain in this Tribunal for re-
       making.


    Discussion and conclusions


   23. The headnote in AT and others reads as follows (so far as relevant):-


            "Article 15(c)
            (2)  There is not such a high level of indiscriminate  violence
           in  Libya  within  the  meaning  of  Article  15(c)  of  Council
           Directive 2004/83/EC ("the Qualification Directive")  so  as  to
           mean that  substantial  grounds  exist  for  believing  that  an
           individual would, solely by being present  there,  face  a  real
           risk which threatens his or her life or person."


   24. The Judge dealt with this issue as follows:-
            "[23]      During submissions my attention was drawn to various
           passages within  the  objective  material.   I  have  considered
           these.  It  is  not  disputed  that  there  are  militia  groups
           operating in Libya and that there are many internally  displaced
           people there and that detention centres are poor.  It is also  a
           fact that there is regular bombing in  Libya.   However,  unless
           there  is  adduced  very  strong  grounds  supported  by  cogent
           evidence (SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940), I am  bound  by
           the current country guidance, which in this case  is  AT.  Sadly
           for the appellant, in the context of this case I have  not  seen
           evidence which would enable  me  to  depart  from  the  guidance
           issued in AT. As can be seen from my findings above,  I  do  not
           accept the appellant's account of why he cannot return to Libya.
            In any event,  if,  which  is  not  accepted,  the  appellant's
           account of his father and brothers' involvement  in  the  regime
           were true, his position is a step removed and would not,  on  my
           assessment of the available  evidence,  place  him  at  risk  on
           return.
            .........
            [25] There are no substantial grounds for  believing  that  any
           harm would come to him on return to Libya.  His return will  not
           breach Article 3 and it does not  entitle  him  to  humanitarian
           protection.  I  reject  the  appellant's  refugee,  humanitarian
           protection and article 3 claim because he  has  not  established
           that there is any truth to his account.  I have  considered  the
           case of AT and Others (Article 15c; risk  categories)  Libya  CG
           [2014] UKUT 318(IAC) in which it was held that in the  aftermath
           of the armed revolution that  brought  about  the  fall  of  the
           dictatorial  and  repressive  regime  of  Colonel  Gadhafi,  the
           central government in Libya has relied on  various  militias  to
           undertake security and policing functions.  Those  militias  and
           the many others that operate within Libya often have  their  own
           interests,  loyalties  and  priorities  which  may  or  may  not
           coincide with the interests of  the  central  government.   That
           case sets out the risk categories  associated  with  the  former
           regime and considers internal relocation.  It stresses  that  "a
           fact-specific enquiry is essential.   An  appellant's  assertion
           that the individual or group that is feared has  links  to  say,
           Tripoli or Benghazi, or another prospective place of relocation,
           will need to be  assessed  in  the  light  of  the  findings  in
           relation  to  overall  credibility".   I  have  found  that  the
           appellant did not  have  problems  associated  with  his  family
           connection or from the militia groups.  Clearly he does not fall
           within one of the  specific  risk  categories  as  such  and  he
           therefore is not at risk upon return to Libya."


   25. As a starting point, the Judge was clearly entitled to  have  regard
       to the country guidance.  Nor is there any error of law in  relation
       to her self-direction that she is bound  by  that  country  guidance
       unless there is strong evidence which suggests  that  it  should  no
       longer be followed.  However, there was  before  her  a  substantial
       volume of material.  I have read carefully that evidence which post-
       dates what was in existence  at  the  time  of  AT  and  others,  in
       particular that which relates to the period after the evidence which
       the Tribunal would have considered in that  case.   I  have  further
       narrowed my reading to that evidence which relates  to  the  general
       country situation as opposed to that which refers to  individualised
       risk.  I have paid  particular  attention  to  the  page  references
       referred to in the Judge's  notes  of  the  Appellant's  submissions
       since the Judge herself says that this is the material to which  she
       had regard.


   26. The material referred to in submissions  includes  an  OHCHR  report
       dated 25 February 2016  which  refers  to  widespread  human  rights
       abuses,  indiscriminate  attacks  on  highly  populated  areas   and
       unlawful killings/ arbitrary detention. A report from the UN support
       mission dated 1  March  2016  refers  to  the  numbers  of  civilian
       casualties in  early  2016,  executions  and  evidence  of  torture.
       Another UN report also dated March 2016 reports on  civilians  being
       caught up in areas of fighting, in particular in Benghazi.   A  news
       article dated June 2015 reports on a "constant  state  of  violence,
       veering close to full-on civil war  and  state  collapse".   Another
       UNHCR report  deals  with  the  substantial  increase  in  displaced
       persons amounting to a doubling between September 2014 and the  date
       of the article in June 2015.  Other reports deal with  the  increase
       in violent attacks by Islamic State.


   27. It is not necessarily the case that a full consideration of all  the
       background evidence would lead to the conclusion that  there  is  an
       Article 15(c) risk in all areas of Libya.  However, on my reading of
       the evidence which was before the Judge, I am satisfied  that  there
       is an error of law by  the  Judge's  failure  to  give  reasons  for
       finding that the evidence before her was not sufficiently strong  to
       justify a departure from a country guidance case which was  by  that
       stage some three years old.  Although there is a  passing  reference
       to what some of those reports show, at [23], that is insufficient to
       deal with the content of the evidence relied upon by the  Appellant.




   28. Based on my reading of the evidence, I am also  satisfied  that  the
       error is a  material  one.   The  evidence  requires  more  detailed
       consideration.  Whilst I  reach  no  conclusion  as  to  whether  an
       Article 15(c) risk is made out by that material, I  cannot  discount
       the possibility that such a  conclusion  could  be  reached.   I  am
       fortified in that conclusion by what is said by the Tribunal  in  FA
       (Libya) in particular at [11] of that decision.


   29. There is an error of law in the Decision.  I set  it  aside  insofar
       only as far as it concerns the Article 15(c)  risk.   I  have  given
       directions below for further evidence to be served and for  skeleton
       arguments to be exchanged.

      DECISION
   I am satisfied that the Decision contains a material error  of  law.  The
   decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd-Smith promulgated  on  3  May
   2016 is set aside. I  make  the  following  directions  for  the  resumed
   hearing:-
    1. The Appellant  shall  file  with  the  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
       Respondent no later than 28 days from the date when this decision is
       promulgated any further evidence on which he relies in  relation  to
       the Article 15(c) issue. He shall also by the  same  date  file  and
       serve a skeleton argument dealing with that issue in the context  of
       his case.
    2. The Respondent shall  file  with  the  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
       Appellant no later than 28 days from the  date  of  service  of  the
       evidence and skeleton argument at [1] above any further evidence  on
       which she relies in relation  to  the  Article  15(c)  issue  and  a
       skeleton argument in reply to the Appellant's skeleton argument.
    3. The resumed hearing of this appeal to deal with  the  Article  15(c)
       issue shall be listed for hearing in Manchester or Liverpool on  the
       first available date after 56 days from the date when this  decision
       is promulgated with a time estimate of 3 hours.  If  an  interpreter
       is required, the Appellant's solicitors must inform the Tribunal  no
       later than fourteen days before the date when the hearing is listed.




      Signed           [pic]      Dated:  23 January 2017


      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

