
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/11993/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                   |        Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On: 11 October 2017                    |        On: 12 October 2017         |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     NO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the appellant:     Ms Brenang, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant.

 1. I have made an anonymity order because  this  decision  refers  to  the
    circumstances of the appellant's minor children.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia.  He fled Somalia in  2003/4  and
    lived in Ethiopia until he left in  February  2015  to  live  with  his
    British citizen wife in the UK.  They have cohabitated with  since  his
    arrival in the UK.  Their three children are British citizens and  were
    born in the UK in 2012, 2015 and 2017 respectively.


 3. In a decision dated 26 June 2017, the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the
    appellant's appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal:


              i) did not accept the appellant's account of being involved in
                 a long-standing clan /  family  dispute  and  rejected  his
                 claim to be at risk of persecution in Somalia;
             ii) accepted that the appellant and his wife cohabitated in the
                 UK  since  2015  and  were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                 relationship;
            iii) accepted that the  appellant's  wife  cares  for  her  sick
                 mother in the UK;
             iv) accepted that  the  three  children  have  a  close  loving
                 relationship with both parents and the appellant undertakes
                 significant day to day care duties;
              v) found that the appellant's wife and children cannot  return
                 with him to Somalia but that he should do so  in  order  to
                 apply for entry clearance, given his  immigration  history.
                 This involved him avoiding immigration control by  entering
                 the UK illegally in 2015 after two failed  entry  clearance
                 applications;
             vi) concluded at [58] that the appellant's "sad position is far
                 from exceptional, and is wholly of his own construction  in
                 his decision to enter illegally" such that there  are  very
                 strong public policy arguments outweighing  the  impact  of
                 any temporary separation  between  the  appellant  and  his
                 family members.

 4. In a decision dated 27 July 2017 Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Shaerf granted permission to appeal, having identified  arguable  legal
    errors in the approach to Article 8 only.  The respondent  submitted  a
    rule 24 notice in which it is asserted that the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings were open to it.

Hearing

 5. At the beginning of the hearing Mr McVeety  fairly  conceded  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal committed a material error of  law  in  failing  to
    address section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 ('the 2002 Act'), in particular the  reasonableness  of  expecting
    the British citizen children to reside in Somalia - see section 117B(6)
    of the  2002  Act.   Mr  McVeety  was  clearly  correct  to  make  this
    concession.  The First-tier Tribunal completely failed to direct itself
    to or apply section 117B(6).  Mr McVeety  also  acknowledged  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal committed other material errors:  (i)  the  finding
    that the appellant could apply for entry clearance in  Somalia  omitted
    to take into account the absence of any such facilities in Somalia  and
    the  appellant's  illegal  status  in  Ethiopia;  (ii)  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  failed  to  take  into  account  the  difficult  humanitarian
    circumstances in Somalia.


 6. Both representatives agreed that I could and should remake the  Article
    8 decision, but the First-tier Tribunal's  factual  findings  regarding
    the genuineness of the relationships ought to be preserved.


 7. Mr McVeety acknowledged that he was in a very  difficult  position  and
    did not make any submissions in defence of the  respondent's  decision.
    He indicated that he was  unable  to  concede  the  substantive  appeal
    without obtaining the approval of a senior caseworker.  I did not  need
    to hear from Ms Brenang and indicated that  I  would  be  allowing  the
    appeal, for reasons contained in this decision.

Re-making the decision under Article 8

 8. The only issue in dispute before me relates to Article 8 and I turn  my
    immediate attention to this.

Best interests

 9.  I  begin  the  Article  8  assessment  by   evaluating   the   primary
    consideration of the interests of the appellant's three British citizen
    children.  I accept that citizenship is a weighty factor.   The  eldest
    child, R, has begun school.  As the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  at
    [43], R is settled in school and there will  be  a  disruption  to  his
    education and friendships if he moves  to  Somalia  with  his  parents.
    They have a grandmother in the UK, who the family is particularly close
    to.  Their circumstances in Somalia are likely  to  be  very  difficult
    indeed in light  of  the  prevailing  political,  economic  and  social
    circumstances.  The country background evidence was  summarised  in  an
    appendix to the skeleton argument before the First-tier  Tribunal.   On
    26 May 2017 the UN independent expert on the situation of human  rights
    in Somalia reported that: "Somalia is experiencing  one  of  its  worst
    humanitarian  crisis  following  three  years  of  drought,  which  has
    affected more than half the population,  creating  an  acute  food  and
    water  shortage,  child  malnutrition  and  mortality,  and   loss   of
    livestock."

10. I conclude, by a significant margin, that the  best  interests  of  the
    children would be best served by  remaining  in  the  UK.   Whilst  the
    children are sufficiently young to be able to adapt to life in  Somalia
    with the support of their parents (both of whom were born  in  Somalia)
    in principle, they are likely to find this  very  difficult  given  the
    prevailing circumstances in Somalia and their particular  vulnerability
    in dealing with the humanitarian crisis given  their  young  ages.   Mr
    McVeety did not dispute this.


Section 117B(6)


11. Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    states as follows:


           "In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
           public interest does not require the person's removal where -


                 (a) the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child; and
                 (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                 the United Kingdom."

12. It is not disputed that the appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    close relationship with his British  citizen  children,  and  therefore
    meets the requirements of (a).  It is agreed that the real question for
    me is the reasonableness of expecting the children to leave the  UK  in
    accordance with (b).  I must take all the relevant factors into account
    when assessing reasonableness and not just the impact upon the children
    - see MA Pakistan v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  Relevant  countervailing
    factors include the appellant's immigration history.


13. When considering reasonableness, it  is  also  relevant  to  take  into
    account the SSHD's policy and its relevance to the reasonableness test.
     This has been addressed in MA (Pakistan) (supra)  and  SF  and  others
    (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC).  In the latter
    case at  [10]  it  was  held  that  the  Tribunal  ought  to  take  the
    respondent's policy into account if it pointed clearly to a  particular
    outcome.


14.  Paragraph  11.2.3.  of  the  IDI  on  Family  Migration  provides  the
    respondent's decision-makers with guidance on cases  involving  British
    children. The August 2015 version states that, save in cases  involving
    criminality, the decision maker must not take a decision in relation to
    the parent or primary carer of a British Citizen child where the effect
    of that decision would be to force that British child to leave the  EU,
    regardless of the age of that child. The decision would not force these
    children to leave the EU because they can remain in the UK  with  their
    British citizen mother, for the reasons set out in detail in VM Jamaica
    v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 255.


15. However, the policy also states that:


           "where a decision to refuse  the  application  would  require  a
           parent or primary carer to return to a country outside  the  EU,
           the case must always be assessed on the basis that it  would  be
           unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child to leave  the  EU
           with that parent or primary carer".


16. The respondent's decision to refuse the application would  require  the
    appellant ('a parent') to return  to  a  country  outside  of  the  EU,
    Somalia.  In such circumstances, the policy states that the  case  must
    be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable  to  expect  the
    British citizen children to leave the EU with  that  parent.   In  such
    cases, the policy states it will usually be appropriate to grant leave,
    provided that there is evidence of a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship.  The policy then states:


          "It may be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the conduct
          of the parent or primary carer gives rise  to  considerations  of
          such  weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
          otherwise stay with another parent or alternative carer in the UK
          or in the EU.  The circumstances envisaged  could  cover  amongst
          others:
          Criminality...
          A very poor immigration history, such as  where  the  person  has
          repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules"


17. The policy clearly envisages that countervailing circumstances may mean
    that it is  appropriate  to  refuse  leave.   I  acknowledge  that  the
    appellant has a poor immigration history.  However, this  needs  to  be
    viewed in context.  The appellant applied to join his sister in the  UK
    in 2004.  This was refused and the appellant respected  this  decision.
    After getting married in 2010  to  a  British  citizen,  the  appellant
    applied to enter the UK as a spouse.  This was  refused  on  the  basis
    that there was no evidence to confirm that they were married  or  in  a
    subsisting relationship. An appeal against this decision was  dismissed
    in 2011.  It has now been accepted that the relationship is genuine.  I
    accept the difficulties  outlined  by  the  appellant  in  his  witness
    statement.   His wife visited him in Ethiopia between  2010  and  2012,
    and their first child was born in 2012.  He did not have  legal  status
    in Ethiopia, in common with many  other  Somalians  living  there,  and
    lived a very difficult and uncertain existence over the course of  many
    years.  He entered the UK illegally in 2015 because he was desperate to
    be with his wife and child.  I acknowledge that such an approach is  to
    be deprecated and is  in  breach  of  the  immigration  laws.   I  also
    acknowledge that the appellant  made  an  asylum  claim,  found  to  be
    incredible.  However, as outlined above, there are  mitigating  factors
    for the appellant's behavior.  When the appellant arrived in the UK  on
    23 February  2015  he  sought  to  bring  himself  immediately  to  the
    attention of the authorities by claiming asylum the next day.


18. Having considered all the relevant circumstances, the Appellant  has  a
    poor immigration history and this is a relevant factor to be taken into
    account when assessing reasonableness.  I have already  concluded  that
    the humanitarian circumstances in Somalia are such that the  children's
    most basic entitlement to food, water and  shelter  are  likely  to  be
    adversely impacted.  Whilst their mother was born in Somalia,  she  has
    not been there for a lengthy period and cares for her own mother in the
    UK.


19. In all the circumstances, even when the appellant's immigration history
    is factored in, it would not be reasonable to expect  the  children  to
    leave the UK and section 117B(6)(b) is not met.

Balancing exercise

20. Proportionality is the "public interest question" within the meaning of
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act. By section 117A(2) thereof  I  am  obliged  to
    have regard to the considerations listed in section 117B.   I  consider
    that section 117B applies to this appeal in the following way:


          (a)  The  public  interest  in  the   maintenance   of   effective
          immigration controls is clearly engaged.  The appellant  has  been
          unable to meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  in
          order to remain as a spouse.


          (b) The  appellant  has  used  an  interpreter  and  there  is  an
          infringement of the "English speaking" public interest.


          (c) The economic interest is engaged.  The appellant and his  wife
          are not employed  and  the  children  benefit  from  education  at
          public expense.


          (d) The private life  established  by  the  appellant  during  the
          entirety of his time in the UK qualifies for  the  attribution  of
          little weight only.


21. In my judgment, when all of the above matters  are  considered  in  the
    round, together with the children's  best  interests,  the  appellant's
    removal constitutes a disproportionate breach of Article 8.    It  will
    be practically impossible for the appellant to obtain  entry  clearance
    in Somalia.  Obtaining entry clearance is  likely  to  involve  serious
    delay.  This is likely to impact upon the children negatively given the
    appellant's day to day care for them and  his  wife's  responsibilities
    for the care of her mother.


22. Having applied the facts to section 117B of the 2002 Act and considered
    the general principles applicable in a case raising family and  private
    life under Article 8 of the ECHR, I find that the  appellant's  removal
    from the UK would constitute a disproportionate breach of Article 8.

Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.


24. I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's  appeal  pursuant  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR.






Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 11 October
2017
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


