
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11802/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Thursday 20 August 2015           |On Tuesday 25 August 2015            |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                 MR ASAD ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Head, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  find  that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case  that  give  rise  to  the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

    1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He arrived in the  UK  with
       leave as a student on 14 March 2011.  His leave expired  on  23  July
       2012.  He was encountered and given a  notice  of  his  liability  to
       removal on 5 April 2013.  He claimed asylum on 2 May 2013.

    2. The basis of the Appellant's asylum claim is as follows.    He  is  a
       Shia Muslim.  He was brought up with his family  in  a  predominantly
       Sunni Muslim village.  His father was a farmer and owned  land.   His
       father was shot and killed on 23 March 2006.  The Appellant  believes
       that the killers were members of the Taliban because his father spoke
       out publicly against the Taliban and the shooting occurred a few days
       after a meeting which his father  had  organised.   He  reported  the
       crime to local police but no-one was arrested  or  prosecuted  as  no
       witnesses would come forward.

    3. Subsequently, the  Appellant  started  making  speeches  at  meetings
       criticising the Taliban, saying they were enemies of the country  and
       of Islam.  After one of those meetings, at the end of  2007,  he  was
       kidnapped and beaten by an extremist group.

    4. In 2008, the Appellant gave a speech at a meeting.  Armed men who  he
       believed to be  Taliban  and  who  he  believed  were  targeting  him
       approached the  stage.   The  Appellant  managed  to  escape  in  the
       commotion and confusion of the crowd fleeing.

    5. The Appellant then went to live in Gujiranwala  with  a  friend.   He
       claims that at some time in 2009, his  friend  was  targeted  by  the
       Taliban who were looking for the Appellant and the  friend  was  shot
       and hospitalised.  The Appellant then moved to Lahore where he  lived
       with relatives along with his mother and sister.  He lived there  for
       eight months.  He claims that, at the beginning of 2010, when  giving
       a speech at Gamay Shah, he saw three men who he thought were  Taliban
       including a man from his village, armed with guns. He escaped.

    6. The Appellant also says that he was a member of Tehbeek Nifaz-E-Fiqha
       Jaffaria party ("TNJ").  The Appellant produced a  document  dated  8
       May 2013 from someone in TNJ stating this and relating  some  of  the
       events on which the Appellant relies.

    7. The Respondent rejected the Appellant's asylum claim  in  a  reasoned
       decision dated 5 December 2014. She accepted the claim so far  as  it
       related to the killing of the Appellant's  father  in  2006  and  the
       kidnap and beating suffered by the Appellant  in  2007  but  did  not
       accept the parts of the Appellant's  claim  recited  at  [4]  to  [6]
       above.

    8. The Appellant appealed to the First-Tier Tribunal and his appeal  was
       heard by Judge Wylie on 10 April 2015.  The Judge accepted  that  the
       Appellant's father had been shot and killed  in  2006  and  that  the
       Appellant had been  kidnapped  and  beaten  in  2007  but  found  the
       Appellant generally not credible.  I will return to this below as  it
       is the Appellant's case that the Judge reached inconsistent  findings
       on credibility.  The  Judge  also  found  that  the  Appellant  could
       relocate to another part of  Pakistan  and  that  there  would  be  a
       sufficiency of protection on return.

    9. In a decision promulgated on 10 June 2015 ("the Decision") the  Judge
       dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  Permission to appeal  was  granted
       by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox on 3 July 2015 on the basis that the
       Judge may have made contradictory findings in relation to credibility
       and may have erred in her assessment  of  sufficiency  of  protection
       given his acknowledged past problems which may have been at the hands
       of the Taliban.  The  matter  comes  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
       determine whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Decision  involved  the
       making of an error of law.

   Submissions

   10. The Appellant's first ground focuses  on  the  Judge's  treatment  of
       credibility.   Ms  Head  submitted  that  there  were   contradictory
       findings in the Decision at [28] where the  Judge  accepts  that  the
       Appellant's father was shot and killed and  that  the  Appellant  was
       kidnapped and beaten by an extremist group and [29] where  the  Judge
       notes that the Appellant did not claim asylum for two years after his
       arrival in the UK, after his leave expired and he was  served  notice
       of liability to removal and says that "I did not find  the  appellant
       to be generally a credible witness".  I pointed out to Ms  Head  that
       these  two  paragraphs  were   not   necessarily   contradictory   or
       inconsistent if one looks at the Appellant's claim as a whole.   What
       the Respondent rejected as not credible was events after 2007 and the
       Appellant's membership of TNJ.  If one reads [28] to [39] as a whole,
       the Decision could be read in the same way.  Ms  Head  accepted  that
       this might be the case but submitted that this was  not  clear.   She
       accepted also that the findings in those paragraphs were open to  the
       Judge on the evidence.

   11. She submitted however that it was not open to the Judge to reject the
       Appellant's case that the targeting of his father and the kidnap were
       the actions of the Taliban.   Even  if  the  Judge  was  entitled  to
       disbelieve the targeting by the Taliban thereafter, it was  incumbent
       on her to make a finding whether the Taliban was behind the events in
       2006 and 2007 since those were relevant to  the  Appellant's  profile
       when it came to assessing internal flight alternative and sufficiency
       of protection.  If she did not accept that  the  Taliban  was  behind
       these events, then it was incumbent on her to give  reasons  for  not
       accepting the Appellant's claim in that regard.

   12. Mr Walker in response submitted that the Judge was entitled  to  take
       into account the Appellant's immigration history and the lateness  of
       the claim for asylum.  The  Judge  had  summarised  the  reasons  for
       rejecting the credibility of the majority of  the  Appellant's  claim
       and those findings were open to her.

   13. The Appellant's second ground focuses  on  the  Judge's  findings  in
       relation to internal flight and sufficiency of protection.   Ms  Head
       referred me to the case of AW (sufficiency of protection)  (Pakistan)
       [2011] UKUT 31 (IAC) and  to  the  expert  report  produced  for  the
       Appellant's case.  She referred in particular to [2] of the  headnote
       in AW and [35]  and  [37]  of  the  decision  as  authority  for  her
       proposition that the Judge was required to carry out an evaluation of
       the Appellant's individual profile  in  order  to  determine  whether
       protection on return would be sufficient.

   14. It is in this context, she submitted, that the Judge was required  to
       make a finding whether the targeting which she did accept was at  the
       hands of the Taliban.  Even if the Judge was entitled not  to  accept
       events post 2007, she submitted, the fact that  the  Appellant  is  a
       Shia muslim coupled with the fact of being targeted by the Taliban in
       the past was enough to suggest that protection may not be sufficient.
        She pointed in this regard  to  page  24  onwards  of  the  expert's
       report.  She also  referred  me  to  [35]  of  that  report  and  the
       indication from the Respondent's own country information report  that
       levels of violence against Shia muslims in  Pakistan  have  increased
       from 2011 levels.  Ms Head submitted that the  Judge's  treatment  of
       sufficiency of protection by  reference  to  AW  at  [44]  is  simply
       insufficient even based upon the guidance in  AW  itself  because  no
       consideration has been given to the Appellant's individual profile.

   15. Mr Walker submitted  that  the  Judge's  finding  on  sufficiency  of
       protection had to be read in the context of her findings on  internal
       flight.  This Appellant had moved within Pakistan and even on his own
       case had lived in Lahore for a number of months before coming to  the
       UK, apparently without being targeted by the Taliban  (if  indeed  it
       was the Taliban who had targeted him and his father earlier).   Those
       findings were open to the Judge on the evidence.

Error of Law Decision and reasons

   16. Having heard the submissions, I indicated that I reserved my decision
       on error of law.  The representatives agreed that if I found an error
       of law, the case should be remitted to the First-Tier  Tribunal.   Ms
       Head indicated that if I found an error of law only  on  ground  two,
       there would still need to be further evidence because the  Judge  had
       made no clear finding whether  the  Appellant  was  targeted  by  the
       Taliban in 2007 in the events which were accepted  and  that  finding
       was central to the consideration of  sufficiency  of  protection  and
       internal flight.  Mr Walker asked that, if I did not find an error of
       law in ground one, the credibility findings should  be  preserved  on
       remittal.

   17. After considering the grounds  of  appeal  and  the  submissions  and
       evidence, I am satisfied that there is an error of law in relation to
       ground two.  The Judge has not made any  clear  finding  whether  the
       targeting which she did accept was by the Taliban or given reasons to
       which she was entitled for rejecting the Appellant's  assertion  that
       it was.  The Judge may have been  entitled  to  discount  the  expert
       report's findings  in  relation  to  sufficiency  of  protection  and
       internal flight to other areas of Pakistan  based  on  that  historic
       persecution particularly if  she  was  entitled  to  the  credibility
       findings in relation to events after 2007 and the findings  therefore
       that the Appellant had suffered no  further  difficulties.   However,
       she has not considered the individual profile of the Appellant  as  a
       Shia muslim who has (or may have) been targeted by the Taliban in the
       past.

   18. If the Appellant's only ground had been ground one, I  would  not  on
       that basis alone have found there to be an error of law.  Whilst  the
       findings on credibility are not clear, I consider that  the  Decision
       can reasonably be read as the Judge accepting the events in 2006  and
       2007 but rejecting the Appellant's credibility in  relation  to  what
       happened thereafter.  However, the  findings  are  not  clear  and  a
       finding will be required in relation to who was responsible  for  the
       events in 2006 and 2007. I have therefore decided, since  the  appeal
       is to be remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal in  relation  to  ground
       two, that the Decision should be set aside in its  entirety  with  no
       credibility findings preserved. I make clear that this includes  also
       the positive credibility findings in relation to the events  in  2006
       and 2007.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did involve the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law.

I set aside the Decision.  I remit the appeal  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
for re-hearing. No findings are preserved.


Signed      [pic]      Date 21 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

