

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11149/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11th November 2014                         |On 11th November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     S H
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Hussain of Lei Dat Baig solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwyncz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant appeals a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  which
        dismissed his appeal against a decision to remove him and  his  wife
        and child from the UK subsequent to the refusal to recognise him  as
        being in need of international protection.


     2. Permission to appeal had been granted  on  the  basis  that  it  was
        arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  take  into
        account or have adequate regard to evidence put  before  her,  which
        went to the core of the credibility of his  account.  In  particular
        that she failed to have regard to


        a. The appellants explanation that he enabled the carriage of anti-
           regime material because of inter alia the abuse by  the  Iranian
           leaders and their extended families of the VIP service  at  Iran
           Air and the general abuse of the system by the leaders;
        b. The upsetting nature of the poverty that young people and  girls
           were in, given the abuse of the system by the leaders;
        c. The article on the web which she  incorrectly  characterised  as
           having only one reference to a man by the same name;
        d. The appellant's rebuttal statement as regards the  existence  or
           otherwise of the claimed arrest warrant.


     3. The judge asserts that the activities the appellant claimed to  have
        been involved in were so dangerous as to  make  it  highly  unlikely
        that  he  would  have  engaged  in  such  activities  without  being
        politically  active.   She  found   the   website   article   lacked
        credibility because it was unsourced and disjointed and it  was  not
        apparent who edited the website or who provided information; that he
        escaped capture relatively easily; that it was incredible  that  the
        security forces would not  have  found  him  at  his  mother-in-laws
        house; that it was significant that he changed his story  about  the
        arrest warrant at the hearing.


     4. The judge did find  it  credible  on  the  basis  of  the  extensive
        evidence produced that the appellant was and had  been  employed  as
        claimed. There was no challenge to those findings by the respondent.


     5. The First-tier Tribunal, although finding the appellant credible  as
        to his employment and his attendance at two demonstrations proceeded
        to make adverse findings  as  to  his  involvement  in  anti  regime
        activity on the basis  that  he  would  not  have  engaged  in  such
        activity because he lived a comfortable  lifestyle  and  would  have
        known how dangerous it was. The judge  placed  no  weight  upon  the
        website because it was unsourced and no indication of who edited was
        given, despite also referring  to  the  extensive  Iranian  security
        apparatus and the dangers of engaging in anti regime  activity.  The
        judge appears  to  consider  political  activity  is  restricted  to
        declaiming publicly rather than the activity the appellant claims to
        have undertaken.


     6. There is a failure on the part of  the  judge  to  engage  with  the
        appellant's evidence of the reasons why he did the things he claimed
        to be. Although the challenge to the determination of the First-tier
        Tribunal has a high threshold to cross it is clear that the  adverse
        credibility findings made by the  judge  were  predicated  upon  his
        findings that the appellant led a comfortable life (contrary to  his
        evidence) and the dangers  of  engaging  in  anti  regime  political
        activity. The judge gave no reasons for her findings in the light of
        his evidence. Her blanket assumption that dangerous activities would
        prevent political involvement require reasons - it  is  the  essence
        and core of the claim that he has engaged in  dangerous  activities.
        It is perhaps trite to say that the very essence of asylum claims is
        that those claiming asylum claim to do so on the basis of activities
        they undertake or are perceived to undertake which lead them to be a
        real risk of being persecuted. If there were no  danger  they  would
        not be able to mount a successful claim for asylum. The  failure  to
        engage with  the  appellant's  account  and  the  lack  of  adequate
        reasoning amount to errors of law such that I set aside the decision
        to be remade.


     7. There has been a failure by  the  judge  to  engage  with  and  make
        adequate findings on the  core  of  the  appellant's  claim  despite
        having made positive credibility findings as regards his employment.
        In accordance with the Practice Direction dated 25th September  2012
        for the Immigration and Asylum Chamber First-tier Tribunal and Upper
        Tribunal I remit the appeal to be heard by the  First-tier  Tribunal
        afresh.


Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  to
be heard by a judge other than Judge Foudy.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I  make  an  anonymity  order  despite  one  not  having  been  specifically
requested in the light of the nature and extent  of  the  appellant's  claim
for asylum.


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker              Date 11th November 2014

