
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA119272015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 16 May 2017                        |On 12 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                   A T V G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Williams instructed by Qualified Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam who was born on [  ]  1988.   She
    arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely  in  August  2005.   On  24
    March 2015, the appellant claimed asylum.  Her application was  refused
    by the Secretary of State on 21 August 2015.

 3. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Her  appeal  was
    dismissed by Judge O'Rourke  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
    human rights grounds.  The judge made an  adverse  credibility  finding
    and did not accept the appellant's claim to be at risk because  of  her
    anti-Vietnamese government activities  before  leaving  Vietnam  or  on
    account of her sur place activities in the UK.  He also  dismissed  the
    appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal on  two  grounds.   First,
    the judge had erred in law in finding that  she  was  not  at  risk  on
    account of her sur place activities.  Secondly, the judge had failed to
    consider the appellant's claim under Art 3 of the  ECHR  based  on  the
    fact that she would be destitute on return to Vietnam.

 5. On 28 November 2016, the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Shimmin)  refused
    the appellant permission to appeal on ground 1 but  granted  permission
    to appeal on ground 2.  The appellant did not renew her application for
    permission on ground 1 to the Upper Tribunal.

 6. On 19 December 2016, the Secretary of State filed a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

 7. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Error of Law

 8.  Ms  Williams,  who  represented  the  appellant  submitted  that   the
    appellant's (then) Counsel had relied upon Art 3 and the  risk  to  the
    appellant of becoming destitute as a result of her  loss  of  permanent
    residency (or Ho Khau status).  She submitted that Judge  O'Rourke  had
    misunderstood the submissions on behalf of the appellant  when  he  had
    stated at para 3:

         "While she also considers that her lack of national registration/ID
         documentation will lead also to  persecution,  that  issue,  I  was
         informed  by  her  Counsel,  is   the   subject   of   a   separate
         application/appeal and I do not therefore consider it further."

 9. Ms Williams referred me to the appellant's witness statement at para 17
    where the appellant states that she would be destitute  and  vulnerable
    because she would lack a Ho Khau booklet on return  and  so  could  not
    access public services etc. in Vietnam.  Ms Williams also  referred  me
    to the expert report of Dr Anh, in particular Part  V  at  paras  16-23
    which dealt with the 'Ho Khau' issue.  Further, she referred  me  to  a
    number of documents from the Immigration and Refugee  Board  of  Canada
    (at pages 168-173) similarly dealing with  the  'Ho  Khau'  issue.   Ms
    Williams informed me that there was no separate application made by the
    appellant in respect of  Art  3  and  the  judge,  in  misunderstanding
    Counsel's submission,  had  materially  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
    consider the distinct claim under Art 3 made  by  the  appellant  based
    upon the risk to her of being destitute.

10. Mr Mills accepted that there appeared to be a misunderstanding  by  the
    judge.   During  the  course  of  his  submissions  I   drew   to   the
    representatives attention a line in the judge's Record  of  Proceedings
    which, recording the appellant's (then) Counsel's  submissions,  stated
    "resident status - breaches Art  3  (Part  5)  P112".   The  latter  is
    clearly a reference to the section in Dr Anh's report dealing with  the
    'Ho Khau' issue and that the appellant's Counsel relied upon Art  3  in
    relation to it.

11. Although there do not appear to have been detailed submissions,  it  is
    clear that the basis upon which Ms Williams now relies was relied  upon
    by the appellant's (then) Counsel and the judge erred in law in failing
    to consider whether the appellant's removal would breach Art 3  on  the
    basis of her becoming destitute  because  she  would  lack  a  Ho  Khau
    residency booklet.

12. Although Mr Mills raised the issue of whether  the  judge's  error  was
    material, he accepted that in substance that  was  the  same  issue  as
    whether the appellant could establish a breach of  Art  3  which  would
    arise if the Tribunal were to remake the decision.

13. In those circumstances, I set aside the judge's decision to the  extent
    that the Tribunal must remake the decision in respect of Art 3  on  the
    basis put forward by Ms Williams which was unfortunately overlooked  by
    the judge.

Re-making the Decision

     1. Article 3

14. The claimant relies upon Art 3 of the ECHR which provides:

         "No one shall be subjected  to  torture  or  inhuman  or  degrading
         treatment or punishment."

15.  The  burden  is  upon  the  Appellant  to  establish  that  there  are
    substantial grounds for believing that, on her return to Vietnam, there
    is a real risk of a breach of Art 3 (see e.g. Saadi v Italy  (2008)  24
    BHRC 123).

    2. The Submissions

16. Ms Williams submitted that there was a real risk of a breach of  Art  3
    because the appellant would be destitute on return without  a  Ho  Khau
    permanent registration record.  Ms  Williams  relied  upon  the  expert
    report of Dr Tran Thi Lan Anh  (at  pages  100-127  of  the  bundle  in
    particular Part V at paras 16-23.  She  submitted  that  the  appellant
    would, as a result of her absence from Vietnam, return in circumstances
    where  her  Ho  Khau  registration  had  been  revoked  (see  also  the
    Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada document dated 24 February 2009
    at pages 168-169 of the  bundle).   Relying  on  Dr  Anh's  report,  Ms
    Williams submitted that it would take up to three years to  obtain  re-
    registration.  During that period there would be a breach of Art  3  as
    the appellant, returning as a 25 year old with a young child, would  be
    deprived of essential services such as housing,  employment,  schooling
    for her child and state benefits.

17. Ms Williams relied upon the  decision  of  the  House  of  Lords  in  R
    (Limbuela) v SSHD [2005] UKHL 68 at [8] per Lord Bingham and  [78]  per
    Baroness Hale that she would be destitute as she would face a  prospect
    of "serious suffering caused or  materially  aggravated  by  denial  of
    shelter, food or the most basic  necessities  of  life".   Ms  Williams
    submitted that, judged "by the standards of  our  own  society  in  the
    modern world", the appellant would be destitute and  her  circumstances
    would reach the minimum degree of severity required under Art 3.

18. Ms Williams placed reliance upon Pretty v UK (2002) 12 BHRC 149 at [52]
    where it was stated that:

         "Where treatment humiliates or debases and  individual,  showing  a
         lack of respect for, or diminishing, his or her human  dignity,  or
         arouses  feelings  of  fear,  anguish  or  inferiority  capable  of
         breaking an individual's moral or physical resistance,  it  may  be
         characterised as degrading and also fall within the prohibition  of
         Article 3".

19. Ms Williams also placed  reliance  upon  the  respondent's  Country  of
    Origin Information Request dated  26  March  2015  which,  although  no
    longer available on the internet, was  referred  to  in  an  anonymised
    decision letter at  para  47.   In  particular,  she  relied  upon  the
    conclusion that:

         "Therefore spontaneous migrants who do not have ho khau  in  places
         where they live and work are exposed to multiple  institutionalised
         vulnerabilities and risks."

20. Mr Mills submitted that it had not been established that the  appellant
    would be destitute so as to breach Art 3 on return.  He submitted  that
    the threshold was a "high  threshold"  as  the  present  case  did  not
    involve the deliberate act by a state or non-state actor.  He submitted
    that what was said in Limbuela, in particular about UK  standards,  was
    said in the context of a domestic case rather than, as in  the  present
    case, a foreign case.

21. Mr Mills submitted that the appellant's claim had to  be  seen  in  the
    light of the underlying findings of fact by the  judge  which  had  not
    been challenged.  He did not accept that she had any  problems  arising
    from politics which had led  to  her  father's  death.   She  would  be
    returning with her partner and not as a lone woman and it had not  been
    shown that she would not have family and friends in Vietnam  from  whom
    she could seek support.   Mr  Mills  submitted  that  Dr  Anh's  report
    dealing with the implications for the appellant if she lacked a Ho Khau
    did not take into account those underlying facts.

22. Mr Mills submitted that it had not been established that the  appellant
    (or her partner) would be unable to obtain employment.  Mr Mills placed
    reliance upon  a  January  2011  report  from  the  Centre  for  Social
    Protection in  Vietnam  entitled  "Social  protection  for  rural-urban
    migrants in Vietnam:  current situation, challenges and opportunities".
     He submitted that this report, which was quoted in  the  COI  Request,
    focused on the  barriers  to  employment  in  the  public  sector.   He
    submitted, relying upon passages in the report, that  employment  could
    be available in the informal sector and  large  numbers  (he  mentioned
    "millions") in Vietnam  migrate  to  cities  without  having  permanent
    registration and live there.  He submitted that it was  not  clear  why
    the expert took the view that it would be up to three years before  the
    applicant could obtain Ho Khau.  He referred  me  to  another  document
    from the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada dated 26 February 2009
    (at page  172-3  of  the  appellant's  bundle)  that  referred  to  the
    processing of "household registration" that was "within less  than  ten
    working days for cities [and] towns and  less  than  fifteen  days  for
    other areas from the dates of the dossier submission".

23. Mr Mills submitted that on the evidence, in any  event,  the  appellant
    had not established she did not have family and  friends  to  whom  she
    could return whilst  the  registration  process  continued.   Mr  Mills
    submitted that there was no barrier to the appellant's return  and  she
    would return with documents necessary to re-register, in  particular  a
    "Vietnamese passport or transport document which has a stamp  verifying
    entry ... at the border gate" (see page 172 of the bundle).

    3. Scope of Article 3

24. It was only, as a result of my raising the matter  during  submissions,
    that either representative addressed the issue of how Art 3  should  be
    applied where an individual claims that his or her removal or expulsion
    from the UK would result in  them  facing  impoverished  conditions  of
    living.

25. It is at least  arguable  that  such  a  claim  falls  outside  of  the
    "paradigm" protected by Art 3 and, like the 'health  cases',  a  higher
    test recognised by the Strasbourg Court in those cases  apply  (see  GS
    (India) and others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40).  That was, at least, the
    tentative view expressed by Burnett LJ (with  whom  Christopher  Clarke
    and Sharp LJJ agreed) in SSHD v Said  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  442  at  [31].
    Whilst the so-called N test threshold has somewhat been lessened by the
    Strasberg Court in Paposhvili v Belgium (application no  41738/10)  (13
    December 2016), it remains more onerous.

26. However, by contrast in cases concerning the Dublin Regulations and the
    removal of asylum seekers or recognised refugees to other EU countries,
    the Strasbourg Court has, in assessing the  application  of  Art  3  to
    living and social conditions in those countries, applied the 'ordinary'
    standard under Art 3 albeit recognising  that  it,  itself,  imposes  a
    minimum level of severity (see, e.g. MSS v Belgium and Greece (2011) 53
    EHRR 2; Tarakhel v Switzerland (2015) 60 EHRR 28; and Saadi).

27. As I have said, neither representative dealt initially with this  issue
    and neither referred me to the relevant case law.

28. In the line of cases beginning with  MSS  v  Belgium  and  Greece,  the
    Strasbourg Court was, in  part,  influenced  by  the  vulnerability  of
    asylum seekers on being returned to an EU country where it  was  argued
    the reception, living and social conditions were potentially  a  breach
    of Art 3.  Of course, those cases  involved  claimed  failures  by  the
    relevant state  to  which  the  individuals  were  to  be  returned  in
    providing an environment  to  live  as  asylum  seekers  or  recognised
    refugees.  The cases had, therefore, as Laws LJ recognised  in  GS  and
    others, features which  were  considered  to  align  it  close  to  the
    paradigm (see [57]-[62]).  The point is,  perhaps,  analogous  to  that
    made by Burnett LJ  in  Said  at  [31]  where  he  noted  that  if  the
    impoverished condition were "the direct result of  violent  activities"
    then a claim would be analogous to where the risk suggested  rose  from
    "direct violence itself", i.e. the paradigm.

29. For the purposes of this appeal, I am content to apply the approach set
    out in the paradigm cases as I accept that, to the  extent  it  can  be
    established, the appellant's 'impoverished'  circumstances  in  Vietnam
    will arise as a result of the legal provisions of the state.   Although
    not falling within categories of asylum-seeker or  refugee  as  in  the
    Dublin cases, I am content to apply  the  approach  of  the  Strasbourg
    Court to Art 3 in the  line  of  cases  dealing  with  removals  to  EU
    countries where a claim is made that Art 3 will be breached  on  return
    (see also the approach of the Supreme Court in EM (Eritrea) and  others
    v SSHD [2014] UKSC 12).

30. That test, however, recognises that a "minimum level of severity"  must
    be reached before Art 3 is engaged.  I accept that,  if  the  appellant
    would be destitute in the sense used in Limbuela at [8] and  [78]  such
    that she would be denied "the most basic necessities of life" and  that
    would breach Art 3 of the ECHR.

    4. Discussion

31. The background to Vietnam's Ho Khau policy of residential  registration
    is set out in the report of Dr Anh at paras 16-20 as follows:

         "16.     'Ho Khau' is Vietnam's policy of residential  registration
             in which a person is registered in the area in which he or she
             was  born.   A  household   registration   record   officially
             identifies a person as a resident  of  an  area  and  includes
             identifying  information  such  as  name,   parents,   spouse,
             children, address and date of birth.  This registration system
             entitles citizens to receive social services  like  healthcare
             and public education in their specific registered  area.   The
             'Ho Khau' registration for children is done by the parent just
             after the baby was born.  This procedure has to be  done  just
             after the birth registration procedure.

         17.  This registration is made under the form  of  small  notebook,
             similar as a  passport,  named  'So  Ho  Khau  -  Registration
             Booklet'.  Citizens need to present their Registration Booklet
             in most of their principle daily life activities.   There  are
             around 20 official procedures in Vietnam which require the  Ho
             Khau registration, these  include:   Renting/buying  a  house;
             Buying a vehicle; School enrolment  application;  health  care
             insurance registration; Open bank  account,  Job  application,
             National ID card application; National insurance  application;
             Birth registration/death registration; Marriage  registration;
             Marriage Status certificate;  CV  form  and  personal  profile
             approval from local  authority;  Child  adoption  application;
             Mortgage contract; Money borrow contract; application for  the
             state  benefit;  Phone/Fax  contract;  Business  Registration;
             Electric/Gas/Water contracts with suppliers;  Driving  licence
             application; scholarship  application  and  many  other  daily
             activities

         18.  Possession of the Ho Khau then is a significant matter and has
             many implications for instance a person cannot be employed  by
             a local authority or local public service if they do not  have
             a permanent Ho Khau registration in this area.  Indeed, the Ho
             Khau Booklet is been considered the  most  important  official
             paper in Vietnam.  People have to keep it very  carefully.   A
             proverb  illustrates  this  -  when  a   person   looks   very
             dishevelled or anxious they might be told: 'you look like  you
             lost the Ho Khau booklet'.

         19.  The household registration system has a long history  in  Viet
             Nam from 1950s.  There are four  categories  of  the  Ho  Khau
             registration status:  The KT1 is the  permanent  register  for
             the principal area in which a person resides.   The  KT2,  KT3
             and KT4 are different kinds of temporary registered residents.
              Residents holding one  of  these  are  limited  to  receiving
             health, schooling  and  other  social  services  within  their
             district  of  residence.   In   addition,   those   with   KT4
             registration status are registered as  individuals  without  a
             family and can only hold a  three-month  extendable  residence
             permit and cannot own land titles.

         20.  If a citizen does not have a permanent registration  it  would
             be very difficult for them to acquire and access many of their
             principal rights and facilities.  They  are  considered  as  a
             'second citizen' in Vietnam.  Due to the compulsory nature  of
             Ho Khau  registration  in  many  activities  as  discussed  at
             paragraph 17 above, the temporary Ho Khau registration citizen
             have  to  offer  the  bribery  to  local  policemen  or  local
             authorities due to their Ho Khau status."

32. At para 22 Dr Anh adds this:

         "If her name is not in the Registration Record Book,  it  would  be
         very difficult for  her,  not  only  in  seeking  the  support  and
         protection of her local authority,  but  also  in  finding  a  job,
         accommodation, and registering with a doctor.   In  addition,  [the
         appellant]  will  face  with  significant  obstacle  in   accessing
         education and health care service for her daughter due  to  her  Ho
         Khau status."

33. In large measure, that history is reflected  in  the  report  from  the
    Centre for Social Protection dated January 2011 where at page  5  there
    is the following:

         "Ho khau as an  institutional  barrier  to  social  protection  for
         spontaneous migrants

         Any discussion about migration,  migrants'  well-being  and  social
         protection in Vietnam should take into account the ho khau, or  the
         household registration system.  Imported from China, ho khau system
         was formally implemented in  urban  areas  in  1955,  and  extended
         throughout  the  countryside  in  1960.   Under  the  system,  each
         household is given a household registration booklet  (so  ho  khau)
         which records the  names,  sex,  date  of  birth,  marital  status,
         occupation of all household members and their relationship with the
         household head.  In principle, no one can  have  his  or  her  name
         listed in more than one household  registration  booklet.   The  ho
         khau of a person is intimately tied to their  place  of  residence.
         If a person changes their place of residence, his or  her  ho  khau
         should follow.

         During war time and  the  period  when  the  national  economy  was
         centrally planned and managed, ho khau was an  effective  mechanism
         that  helped  the  government  to  mobilise  people  for   national
         objectives and  to  ensure  relatively  efficient  distribution  of
         resources and welfare. During this period, people had to depend  on
         the government subsidies and rationing for their daily necessities,
         especially in urban areas.  It was only with household registration
         booklets that a household or an individual could claim their rights
         to food provisions and other commodities,  as  well  as  access  to
         social services, including education and  health  care.   In  other
         words, the ho khau was used not only as a system of  identification
         but also for controlling access to rights and services.

         In addition, the ho khau regime, together with employment policies,
         played an important role in  regional  economic  planning  and  for
         population redistribution.  In particular, the government  strictly
         directed migration into two main streams  to  rural  areas  and  to
         upland provinces in the North - the so-called new  economic  zones.
         This was in order to decrease  population  density  and  ease  food
         shortages in more  populated  areas.   The  policy,  based  on  the
         regulations of the household registration, made it  very  difficult
         for people from rural and mountainous areas to move to large cities
         and the plains (unless they were assigned employment by  the  state
         or reunited with their family) and therefore limited  opportunities
         and livelihoods choices (Dang 2005; Le 1998; Hardy 2001).

         Since the market reforms, often known as doi moi, initiated in  the
         mid-1980s, the function of ho khau in controlling the  mobility  of
         people has gradually declined, due largely to the rapid  growth  of
         employment opportunities in the non-state sector.  Yet, the ho khau
         of any person remains the prerequisite for his  or  her  access  to
         housing ownership and key public social services.  As described  by
         Hardy (2001); 'During the heyday  of  Vietnam's  centrally  planned
         economy, people often joked that there was no fear like the loss of
         your so gao, a person's individual book of food ration coupons  ...
         That fear no longer exists [with Doi moi] but there are new worries
         over another kind of book; the so ho khau (a household registration
         book) that contains rights of a citizen ...   To  buy  a  house  or
         land, to get married, to be employed, to register  for  a  training
         course, to borrow from a bank, to register your child's  birth,  to
         get a motorbike license, to go abroad, or to install a  phone  line
         if you are Vietnamese, you need a so ho khau.'  In the view of  the
         government, as stated in the Decree No. 51/CP issued on 10 May 1997
         and the Circular 06/TT/BNV issued in the same year by the  Ministry
         of Internal Affairs,  ho  khau  is  considered  as  'a  measure  of
         administrative management of the State to determine  the  citizens'
         place of residence,  ensure  the  existence  of  their  rights  and
         obligations, enhance  social  management,  and  maintain  political
         stability,  social  order  and  safety.'    Therefore   spontaneous
         migrants who do not have ho khau in places where they live and work
         are  exposed  to  multiple  institutionalised  vulnerabilities  and
         risks.

         It should be noted that at the highest level  of  legislation,  the
         Constitution of Vietnam confirms the freedom  of  all  citizens  to
         move with their equal economic, social and political rights secured
         regardless of their whereabouts (Vietnam Constitution, 1946,  1959,
         1980).   Nonetheless,  at  the   lower   level,   different   laws,
         ordinances, decrees, decisions and circulars create strong barriers
         to spontaneous migrants accessing critical resource,  services  and
         support programmes.  A shared feature of social protection policies
         in Vietnam is their residence-based principle, by which a person is
         entitled to housing  ownership  and  various  economic  and  social
         entitlements  only  when  they  are  permanent  residents  of   the
         locality."

34. The document then refers to categories of citizenship KT1, KT2, KT3 and
    KT4.  Categories KT1 and KT2 are those who  have  "permanent  household
    registration".  KT3 and KT4 are those who do not  have  permanent,  but
    only temporary,  registration  respectively  for  6-12  months  with  a
    possibility of extension or 1-6 months.   The  former  has  "access  to
    public facilities and  social  services"  but  lack  access  to  "legal
    housing" and their children may  only  attend  public  schools  to  the
    extent that there is not full capacity by children falling  within  the
    KT1 and KT2 categories.  Those falling within category KT4 do not  have
    access to the right to purchase land and access to public services  and
    financial loans.

35. The report continues at page 6 to  identify  "five  critical  problems"
    with those in category KT3, and in particular category KT4:

         "As can be seen,  spontaneous  migrants  (categorised  as  KT3  and
         particularly KT4 residents) face a number  of  vulnerabilities  and
         risks.  It should be noted that this table  does  not  reflect  the
         deprivation of some important entitlements  of  these  migrants  by
         institutional practices at the local level.  Five critical problems
         severely affecting spontaneous migrants are employment, housing and
         living conditions, health care, education for  migrants'  children,
         and social participation in the host community.  Indeed, without ho
         khau, some other rights of the migrants are also blocked,  such  as
         voting in the local community, registration for a marriage licence,
         birth certification for their newborns, and military  service.   In
         the following section, these five problems and their impact on  the
         livelihood and well-being of the rural-urban migrants are discussed
         with evidence drawn from the empirical studies conducted under  the
         project."

36. Although this document was produced at the hearing and I  was  referred
    to it, neither representative made submissions as to which category the
    appellant would fall into on return, in particular whether it  was  KT3
    or KT4.

37. It is clear, however, from reading the report that there are  indeed  a
    number of "vulnerabilities and risks" that temporary residents  without
    Ho Khau face.  Access to employment may well be restricted.  At  least,
    and I accept Mr Mills' submission on this, access to formal  employment
    in particular in the public sector.  The  report  refers  to  temporary
    residence  without  Ho  Khau  facing  "severe  obstacles  in  obtaining
    employment in the formal sector in urban areas"  (see  page  7  of  the
    report).  However, equally, it is clear that large numbers of temporary
    migrants do obtain work, albeit in reduced working  condition,  not  in
    the public formal sector.  I do not  accept,  as  was  implicit  in  Ms
    Williams' submissions, that the appellant (and her partner)  on  return
    would simply be unable to work without a Ho Khau.  Dr Anh in her report
    (at para 22) does not suggest that employment will  be  impossible  but
    simply "very difficult for her".

38. I accept also, on the basis of Dr Anh's report and the report from  the
    Centre for Social Protection,  that  there  will  be  disadvantages  in
    obtaining housing but, as the latter report makes clear  (at  page  9),
    spontaneous  migrants  are  not  unable  to  obtain  accommodation  but
    encounter difficulties together with higher charges  for  utility  (see
    page 9 of the report).  Likewise, access to  healthcare  and  education
    may well involve cost  or  greater  cost  to  the  appellant  (and  her
    partner).

39. It is, however, important to note what is said in the report  from  the
    Centre for Social Protection at page 10 of the report:

         "As temporary residents with no ho khau, migrants' access to  local
         community institutions and activities are severely limited.   Their
         general social exclusion and isolation is evident in several  ways:
         difficulties finding employment,  low  and  unstable  income,  poor
         living arrangements, home sickness, poor health, money defraud  and
         labour exploitation (see Table 6).  Yet, when asked, half  of  them
         took no action to address these problems,  and  most  of  the  rest
         relied on the pre-existing social network of kin  and  friends  for
         some sort of support.  Almost no migrants sought help from official
         sources, even about their  safety,  which  was  one  of  their  key
         concerns (Table 7)."

40. I accept on the basis of the evidence to which Ms Williams referred  me
    that it is likely that the appellant (and her partner) as a  result  of
    their absence from Vietnam will have lost their Ho Khau on return.

41. Further, I accept that there is likely to be a delay in obtaining a new
    Ho Khau.  Mr Mills' reference to the Immigration and Refugee  Board  of
    Canada document at pages 172-173 of the bundle,  cites  the  length  of
    time for "processing" an application as less than ten working  days  in
    cities and less than fifteen working  days  elsewhere.   On  the  other
    hand, Dr Anh at para 22 of her report states that it is "very  unlikely
    that she would be able to register the Ho  Khau  within  two  or  three
    years". Although on the face of it a contradiction, in my  judgment  it
    is not.

42. The requirements for seeking a Ho Khau are helpfully  set  out  in  the
    Centre for Social Protection  report  at  pages  12-13.   The  Canadian
    report  is  clearly  referring  to  the  time   for   "processing"   an
    application.  However, to be successful  an  application  will  require
    residence (or employment) for a period of time as the Centre for Social
    Protection report makes plain at page 12.  Whilst that  was  previously
    "at least three years", it has since 2007 been  reduced  to  a  shorter
    period, of "at least one year".  Dr  Anh  footnotes  a  "Residence  Law
    Code" dated 11 July 2013 and  which,  therefore,  post-dates  the  2011
    report from the Centre for Social  Protection.   The  relevant  law  to
    which Dr Anh refers is not set out in her report and it clearly, if  it
    has the effect said by Dr Anh in para 22, reverses the trend since 2005
    set out in considerable detail in the report of the Centre  for  Social
    Protection at page 12.  However, the solution may lie in the fact  that
    Dr Anh is,  without  making  specific  reference  to  it,  placing  the
    appellant in category KT4.  The  report  from  the  Centre  for  Social
    Protection refers to  the  reduction  in  length  of  residence  and/or
    working as applying "mostly [to] people belonging to the K3  category".
    In relation to those in category KT4, the report states that  they  are
    still  denied  permanent  household  registration  unless   they   have
    continuously resided for at least three years.

43. Without specific argument on the issue, and without further elaboration
    by Dr Anh, it is not  clear  to  me  whether  the  appellant  (and  her
    partner) would fall within category KT3 or category KT4 on  return.   I
    am content to accept,  given  the  low  standard  of  proof,  that  the
    appellant (and her partner)  would  fall  in  category  KT4  and  that,
    therefore, potentially their ability to register for Ho Khau might take
    "two or three years" as set out in Dr Anh's report.

44. I accept on the basis of Dr Anh's report and the  background  material,
    in particular the report from the Centre for Social Protection that the
    appellant and her partner will face a number of difficulties on  return
    for the  period  it  takes  in  order  to  obtain  a  Ho  Khau.   These
    difficulties will include,  employment,  accommodation  and  access  to
    education and health services.  The latter two are likely  to  only  be
    available on a private basis.  Dr Anh's view at para 23 is that:

         "The private service is very expensive in Vietnam and  it  is  very
         unlikely that she could afford the cost if  she  used  the  private
         service in healthcare and education for her daughter."

45. However, Dr Anh's report in Part V and her conclusion at para 23, makes
    no reference to the fact that the appellant has a  partner,  himself  a
    Vietnamese national who could return to Vietnam with  her.   Employment
    is obtainable even for temporary residents.  The report of  the  Centre
    for Social Protection makes  plain  that  large  numbers  of  temporary
    residents live without Ho Khau and survive in that environment  without
    seeking to address the problems or relying instead on  social  networks
    of kin and friends for support.

46. I accept Mr Mills'  submissions  that  on  the  basis  of  the  judge's
    unchallenged findings (permission to  appeal  having  been  refused  in
    relation to them) the appellant has not established  that  she  has  no
    family or friends to whom she could turn to for support  on  return  to
    Vietnam whether that support would be provided in her home area  (where
    on the judge's findings she has failed to establish  her  international
    protection claim) or on relocation to a city.  Her partner  can  return
    with her and seek employment even though, as a couple, they will have a
    young child which logically would have  created  enhanced  difficulties
    for the appellant if she had returned alone.

47. The whole tenor of the Centre for  Social  Protection  report  is  that
    temporary residents are presented with a number of difficulties in  the
    social context in which  they  live  without  Ho  Khau  but  that  they
    nevertheless exist in large numbers in Vietnam.   I  am  not  satisfied
    that the return of the appellant and her partner to  Vietnam  -  and  I
    emphasise that he can be expected to  return  to  Vietnam  with  her  -
    creates a real risk that they would be destitute on return.  Any short-
    term problems, based on lack of financial or  accommodation  resources,
    can in my judgment be overcome by support from family of the appellant.
     I should add that there was no evidence that the  appellant's  partner
    does  not  have  family  who  could  provide  support.   That   cannot,
    therefore, be excluded as an additional  support  mechanism.   Despite,
    therefore, the evident difficulties identified in the  expert's  report
    and background material, I am not satisfied that there is a  real  risk
    of the appellant (and her partner and  son)  returning  to  Vietnam  as
    temporary residents without, for a period of two to three  years  being
    without  Ho  Khau,  living  in  impoverished  conditions  amounting  to
    destitution such as to reach the minimum level of  severity  to  breach
    Art 3 of the ECHR.

Decision

48. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law by  failing  to  consider
    the appellant's claim under Art 3 of the ECHR.

49. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds stands.

50. I remake the decision also dismissing the appellant's appeal under  Art
    3 of the ECHR.

51. I note that the appellant did not rely upon Art 8 of the  ECHR  in  the
    appeal before me.



                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Dated  9 June 2017
