
[pic]
st

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11481/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At  Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
| On: 3rd July  2015                  |On: 27th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MR A.O.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Gilbert, Counsel, instructed by Turpin and
Miller, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms Julie Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 1. The proceedings before the First  tier  Tribunal  were  anonimised.  No
    application has been  made  to  change  this  and  so  this  should  be
    maintained.

 2. The appellant is 34 years of age and a national of Nigeria. He came  to
    the United Kingdom as a student  in  2004.  He  returned  home  for  an
    arranged marriage in 2008 and returned with his bride.  They  have  two
    young children.

 3. He had various leaves up until 2009. He then made an unsuccessful claim
    to asylum. He remained in the United Kingdom and in 2011  made  further
    representations in respect of his asylum  claim  but  the  refusal  was
    maintained.

 4. On 20 March 2013 he made further representations on  a  completely  new
    basis, namely, that he was bisexual with a preference  for  males.  The
    respondent accepted this amounted to  a  fresh  claim  which  was  duly
    considered. On 17 December 2014 that claim was refused.

The claim

 5. He claimed that from an early age he realised he was attracted to males
    and had sexual relations. When he went to university he campaigned  for
    homosexual rights but met with resistance.

 6. Whilst in the United Kingdom he was leading a double life, keeping  his
    homosexuality secret from his wife. He had various partners whom he met
    through Internet chat rooms; clubs; areas  frequented  by  homosexuals;
    and through his church.

 7. He was in a relationship with a  Mr.  T  but  he  did  not  reveal  his
    circumstances nor where he lived. Later on he revealed his address  and
    Mr. T came to his home unannounced in December 2012. He did not realise
    the appellant was married and when he met his wife a row developed. His
    wife had suspicions about his sexuality and their relationship had been
    deteriorating. She had found details of homosexual  activities  on  his
    mobile phone. Subsequently, his wife left the matrimonial home with the
    children. Mr. T also was annoyed because the appellant had not told him
    he was married.

 8. The appellant continued to see his children at the weekend. He said his
    wife indicated she intends to divorce  him.  She  has  also  spoken  to
    members of the church about him. He claimed  he  has  received  threats
    from his relations in Nigeria following on this revelation. Since  they
    separated he is open about his sexuality.

 9. In refusing his claim the respondent did not accept the  appellant  was
    homosexual or bisexual. He had not mentioned issues about his sexuality
    in his earlier claims. The respondent concluded he was making  this  up
    in a last bid to remain in the United Kingdom.  His  estrangement  from
    his wife was also questioned

The First-tier Tribunal

10. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Anthony.  The  judge
    heard from the appellant and had statements from the  appellant's  wife
    and Mr. T; Judge Anthony stated:

         "25. I find the appellant has sought to bolster the account he gave
         ... I do not find  that  the  appellant  tried  to  put  forward  a
         campaign for gay rights to the committee at  University  whilst  he
         was living in Nigeria ...

         27. I have had regard to Mr. Swaby's submission that little  weight
         can be afforded to  the  appellant's  own  evidence  regarding  his
         sexual orientation because he posted Facebook pictures  of  himself
         and  his  wife  in  January,  July  and  August  2013,  after   his
         relationship with  his  wife  allegedly  ended  in  December  2012.
         However, I find the appellant has provided a reasonable explanation
         for this and accept his explanation  that  he  did  so  because  it
         reminded him of the good moments a shared together.

         30. My assessment of credibility is that  whilst  I  have  rejected
         parts of the appellant's account, including his claim regarding the
         campaign for gay rights in Nigeria, having had full regard  to  the
         evidence and arguments, I am satisfied on  the  lower  standard  of
         proof that the appellant is a bisexual man with  a  preference  for
         same-sex relationships."

11. The judge then went on to have regard  to  the  objective  material  on
    Nigeria and concluded at paragraph 33:

         "... I am satisfied that  someone  who  is  openly  in  a  same-sex
         relationship in Nigeria would face persecution."

12. Reference was made to paragraph 82 of Lord  Rodger's  judgement  in  HJ
    (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) -v- SSHD [2010] UKSC  31  with  Judge  Anthony
    paraphrasing:

         "... how will the appellant conducted himself on return?  Would  he
         live openly on return?  If  so,  he  qualifies  as  a  refugee.  If
         discrete, then; i) is it only because of family or social pressure?
         If it is, then he does not qualify  as  a  refugee;  or  ii)  is  a
         material reason for being discreet the fear of persecution?  If  it
         is, then he qualifies as a refugee ..."

13. At paragraph 34 Judge Anthony said:

         "The next question is how the appellant would  conduct  himself  on
         return. At paragraph 54 of his  witness  statement,  the  appellant
         states that he would be forced to live in secret due to a  fear  of
         persecution on  account  of  his  sexuality.  However,  I  have  to
         consider his conduct whilst in the UK and whether he has  lived  as
         an openly bisexual man. In this regard, I find  the  appellant  has
         not lived openly. Matters relating to his sexuality would still  be
         a secret if not for the fact that (Mr. T) came  to  his  house  and
         told his wife he was the appellant's boyfriend. If that  event  had
         not taken place, the appellant would still  be  living  discreetly.
         This is despite the fact that he would have no fear of  persecution
         on account of his sexuality in the UK. I  find  that  he  would  be
         discreet on return to Nigeria.

         35. The next HJ (Iran) question requires me to ask  why  would  the
         appellant be discreet on return to Nigeria. In this regard, I  have
         considered why he has been discreet in the UK. .. I find  that  the
         only reason he has lived discreetly is because of family and social
         pressures. His reason for wanting to remain discreet has nothing to
         do with a fear of persecution ...

         36. ... I find that on return to  Nigeria,  he  would  continue  to
         behave discreetly because of family and social pressures ...  There
         is no evidence to indicate  that  he  would  conduct  any  same-sex
         relationships openly. He certainly has not done so in the safety of
         the UK..."

The Upper Tribunal

14. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  Judge  Anthony  arguably
    materially erred in law in concluding the appellant did not have a well-
    founded fear of persecution. This was in light of her findings that  he
    was bisexual with a preference  for  same-sex  relationships  and  that
    someone who is openly in a same-sex relationship in Nigeria would  face
    persecution. It was arguable the judge erred in concluding there was no
    evidence he would openly have a same-sex relationship because of how he
    behaved in the United Kingdom. He had given evidence that  he  attended
    gay bars and so forth in the United Kingdom. Consequently he  had  only
    concealed his sexual preferences when it affected his  wife  or  church
    activities. It was argued that the appellant had hid his sexuality from
    his wife but away from her was expressing his  sexuality  openly.  This
    point was argued further at hearing.

Error of law

15. It is my conclusion that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination  of  Judge  Anthony.  The  decision  has  been  carefully
    prepared and is balanced and concise. However, it does  not  adequately
    explore the  question  posed  by  Lord  Rogers  in  HJ  (Iran)  and  HT
    (Cameroon) -v- SSHD [2010] UKSC 31 as to what the appellant would do if
    returned to his home country. It was over simplistic to  conclude  that
    he would not be at risk because he had concealed  his  activities  from
    his wife. The appellant's case was that he had been  leading  a  double
    life, hiding his sexuality from his wife and leaving  an  open,  second
    life in situations  where  she  would  not  be  aware.  Lord  Roger  at
    paragraph 62 stated:

         "Having examined the relevant evidence, the Secretary of  State  or
         the tribunal may conclude, however, that the  applicant  would  act
         discreetly partly to avoid upsetting his parents, partly  to  avoid
         trouble from his friends and colleagues and partly due  to  a  well
         founded fear of being persecuted by the state authorities. In other
         words, the need to avoid the  threat  of  persecution  would  be  a
         material reason among a number of complimentary  reasons,  why  the
         applicant would act discreetly. Would the existence of these  other
         reasons make a crucial difference? In my view it would not..."

16. His claim is that he is now  estranged  from  his  wife  following  her
    discovery of his sexuality. He states that if returned he would express
    his sexual preference openly. The judge did  not  have  regard  to  the
    appellant's claim that on return the constraints of his wife and family
    would no longer apply as they are now estranged. The assessment must be
    in the context of the situation on return.



Disposal

17. The decision of Judge Anthony is set aside and the appeal  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal. Ms Isherwood does not seek  to  challenge  the
    judge's finding that the appellant is a bisexual man with a  preference
    for same-sex relationships. The task of the new  tribunal  will  be  to
    make a finding as to what the appellant would do on return to his  home
    country. I appreciate this is a very difficult  fact-finding  exercise,
    particularly as Judge Anthony found the appellant had sought to bolster
    his account and fabricated some aspects. Lord Hope  at  para.23  of  HJ
    (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) -v- SSHD said  `Concealment  due  to  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution is one thing. Concealment  in  reaction  to
    family or social  pressures  is  another.  So  one  must  ask  why  the
    applicant will  conduct  himself  in  this  way.  A  carefully  nuanced
    approach is called for, to separate out those who are truly in need  of
    surrogate protection from those who are not'.

18. It will be necessary for the next Tribunal to  investigate  the  double
    life the appellant said he had been  leading  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    including consideration of the up-to-date position.  At  the  rehearing
    the appellant should be in a  position  to  give  evidence  as  to  his
    domestic circumstances in the United Kingdom  and  whether  he  remains
    estranged from his wife. He should also be in a position to set out his
    family position in Nigeria.

19. An additional challenge to Judge Anthony's decision related  to  mental
    health problems and  treatment  available  in  Nigeria.  In  the  Upper
    Tribunal Mr Gilbert did raise the question of the risk of  suicide.  Ms
    Isherwood referred me to paragraph 17 the decision which indicates  the
    judge had regard to the medical report provided. The  medical  evidence
    was referred to  obliquely  in  relation  to  assessing  the  appellant
    sexuality. At paragraph 55 the judge does give reasons as  to  why  his
    mental health should not be at risk by  returning  to  Nigeria.  It  is
    correct that the judge does not refer to what  medical  facilities  are
    available in Nigeria. However, the thrust of the appellant's claim  had
    been in relation to his sexuality. Given this approach I  do  not  find
    the absence  of  a  detailed  analysis  of  health  issues  would  have
    constituted a material error of law.

Decision

20. The decision of Judge Anthony contains a material error of law  and  is
    set aside. The appeal was referred back to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    a rehearing, preserving the finding that the appellant is bisexual with
    a preference for same-sex relations.

Anonymity is maintained.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11481/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MR A.O.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

 1. The proceedings before the First  tier  Tribunal  were  anonimised.  No
    application has been  made  to  change  this  and  so  this  should  be
    maintained.

 2. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier tribunal for a rehearing.  The
    finding that the appellant is bisexual with a preference  for  same-sex
    relations is maintained.

 3. The focus in the rehearing should be upon what the appellant is  likely
    to do if returned to Zimbabwe in line with the  guidance  given  in  HJ
    Iran -v- Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010]  UKSC,  para
    82.

 4. The appellant should be in a position to provide evidence as to how his
    same-sex preference was demonstrated whilst he was with his wife in the
    United Kingdom.

 5. He should also be in a position to provide evidence as  to  the  up-to-
    date position in terms of his domestic situation  and  connection  with
    his wife and family. He should  seek  to  demonstrate  if  he  has  had
    further same-sex relations in the interval.

 6. He should also provide evidence as to the current position in  relation
    to his family in Nigeria.

 7. It remains open to the appellant to include in  his  claim  any  issues
    arising from his mental health. However, if this is not  being  pursued
    as a specific claim his representative should advise the respondent.

 8.  There  is  no  need  for  an  interpreter   unless   the   appellant's
    representatives advise.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly
