
[pic]
IAC-HX-DML-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/11194/2013
                                                               AA/11195/2013
                                                               AA/11196/2013
                                                               AA/11197/2013
                                                               AA/11198/2013
                                                               AA/11206/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 August 2015                    |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge conway
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KNOWLES QC


                                   Between

                          MR SNE (FIRST APPELLANT)
                          MRS SE (SECOND APPELLANT)
                          MR SYE (THIRD APPELLANT)
                         MISS RE (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                          MISS HE (FIFTH APPELLANT)
                          MISS HE (SIXTH APPELLANT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Bazini
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy


                            DECISION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Afghanistan.  The First Appellant  (born
    1950) is the husband of the Second Appellant (born 1967).  They are the
    parents of the rest of the Appellants who were born,  respectively,  in
    1984, 1992, 1999 and 1993.

 2. The immigration history is that the Third Appellant travelled to the UK
    on his own passport in October 2011 with leave to enter as a student.

 3. The Second, Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Appellants travelled to the  UK  in
    November 2011 also on  their  own  passports.   The  purpose  of  their
    journey was to visit the Third Appellant.

 4. The First Appellant entered the UK in December 2011  travelling  on  an
    Afghani Diplomatic passport.  This had been endorsed with  a  UK  visit
    visa granted to him by the British Consulate  General  in  Istanbul  in
    June 2011.  He claimed asylum in December 2011.

 5. The First Appellant's  claim  (hereafter  simply  "the  Appellant")  is
    summarised as follows: he was appointed as Minister of Internal Affairs
    in  1980  for  one  year;  from  1989  he  was  the  Deputy  Leader  of
    Communications for two  years.   In  that  role  he  was  part  of  the
    Mujahadin's Transitional Government  outside  Afghanistan;  during  the
    anti-Soviet war waged in Afghanistan from 1980 to 1992 he  was  primary
    based in Afghanistan on behalf of the Jamiat; when the Jamiat  came  to
    power in 1992 he held the position of  Minister  of  Agriculture  until
    1996.  From 1991 onwards  he  was  a  member  of  the  Council  of  the
    Mujahadin in government.

 6. He also held the position of Director of the Jamiat Islami  Council  in
    Iran and was charged with resolution of the party's problems with Iran.
     In 1999 he was appointed to the Political  Office  of  the  Leadership
    Council of the Islamic State of Afghanistan.  The Chair of this Council
    was Burhanuddin Rabbani and Ahmad Shah Massoud.

 7.  In  1999  President   Rabbani   described   the   Appellant   as   "my
    representative" in letters to Hussainpoor Hefzullah and  Mehdi  Karodi.
    In the same year, Rabbani wrote to the President  of  Iran  introducing
    the Appellant as the head of a "Combination Council"  of  a  number  of
    parties and areas within Afghanistan.  Rabbani elected him to the  role
    of "Chairman of the western part of Aghanistan in charge of  security".
    He was also involved in work relating to Afghan  refugees  during  this
    period.

 8. In a letter addressed to  Brigadier  Saraj  of  the  Pakistani  "Inter-
    Services Intelligence" ("ISI"), he was described as a  "member  of  the
    Political  Office  of  the  High  Council  of  the  Islamic  State   of
    Afghanistan".  He was Rabbani's "special envoy" tasked with helping  to
    resolve issues between Afghanistan and Pakistan.

 9. He returned to Afghanistan from Iran in 2001.

10. He believes he was targeted by the Taliban in 2010.  His  brother  (who
    acted as his driver and guard) was shot dead by unknown assassins  when
    he was driving the Appellant.  He reported the murder to the police but
    no investigation took place.  After this incident  he  did  not  travel
    much in Afghanistan and only to provinces that were secure.

11. He never received any threats by phone or letter or email  from  either
    the Taliban or the ISI.  However, he  claimed  that  due  to  incidents
    which happened daily in Afghanistan it was difficult  to  predict  what
    would happen particularly as the ISI are  active  in  Afghanistan.   He
    believed that the ISI and the Taliban have published a list  of  people
    who they wish to kill.  President Rabbani and General  Dawood  were  on
    the list and have since been killed in suicide attacks.  He believes he
    is on the list although he has never seen it.

12. He left Afghanistan in early December 2011 to visit his student son  in
    the UK.  A few days later he received calls from different  people  who
    were in different locations, including his office.  He  was  told  that
    "they are after you".  Additionally, the  Interior  Minister  contacted
    his office and sent him an oblique  message  which  he  interpreted  as
    advice from the Minister of the Interior that he should not  return  to
    Afghanistan.  Fearing that his life was at risk he claimed asylum.

13. He believes that were he to return to Afghanistan he would be  at  risk
    from the government of Afghanistan,  the  Taliban,  the  ISI  and  from
    others within his party.

THE RESPONDENT'S CASE

14. The detailed reasons  for  the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the
    Appellant's application are set out in a Home Office letter  dated  6th
    December 2013 ("the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter").   In  essence,  the
    Respondent argued that:-

      i) there were serious reasons for considering that, during the  period
         in which  the  Appellant  held  ministerial  posts  in  the  Afghan
         government and during which he was also the deputy  leader  of  the
         Jamiat, the forces under the command of the Afghan  government  (in
         particular units of the  Jamiat  and/or  Shura-e-Nazar  (fighters),
         were responsible for  the  commission  of  war  crimes  and  crimes
         against humanity.  In particular, there were  serious  reasons  for
         considering that the Afghan government's artillery and rocket units
         either deliberately fired on civilian occupied areas  of  Kabul  or
         indiscriminately used weapons in such a  manner  as  to  result  in
         civilian casualties that would have otherwise  been  avoidable  had
         the  weapons  been  effectively  targeted  on  opposition  military
         positions;

     ii) the evidence showed that significant war crimes and crimes  against
         humanity had been committed by all factions in the Afghan Civil War
         during the period between 1992-1996.  Although it  was  noted  that
         the primary blame for these crimes was usually apportioned to Hizb-
         i-Islami, under the leadership of Gulbuddin  Hekmatyar,  which  was
         accused of causing a larger proportion of the destruction of  Kabul
         (and  as  such  the  large  proportion  of  civilian   casualties),
         notwithstanding that the  First  Appellant  was  a  member  of  the
         country's legitimate government which had  come  under  significant
         attack from Hizb-i-Islami and  other  factions,  international  law
         does not allow the commission of war crimes/crimes against humanity
         in any circumstances;

    iii) research had shown  that  the  Appellant  was  a  high-ranking  and
         significant figure within the Mujahadin, having been  appointed  to
         an important ministerial position as the Interior Minister  in  the
         shadow government established  in  1988  and  as  the  Minister  of
         Agriculture following the collapse of the PDPA regime in 1992.   He
         was also a member of the Council for the Mujahadin Government  and,
         whilst holding ministerial office, he had continued to serve as the
         deputy party  leader  to  President  Rabbani.   Moreover,  research
         showed that the  First  Appellant  had  taken  part  in  high-level
         negotiations during 1992/1993 during  the  civil  war  between  the
         rival Mujahadin factions.  He had attended  those  negotiations  as
         the Representative of President Rabbani and Jamiat;

     iv) there was evidence to show  that  the  attacks  on  civilians  were
         carried out in various locations within Kabul  at  different  times
         which indicated that the attacks were not isolated events and  thus
         gave serious reasons for considering that they were carried out  on
         a widespread  basis.   This  identified  those  actions  as  crimes
         against humanity perpetrated against  civilians  by  Jamiat  and/or
         Shura-e-Nazar military units;

      v) whilst it was not argued on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  that  the
         Appellant had been an active participant  in  the  war  crimes  and
         crimes against humanity  perpetrated  by  the  Afghan  army  and/or
         Jamiat/Shura-e-Nazar military units, there were serious reasons for
         considering that he had made  a  significant  contribution  to  the
         commission of these crimes;

     vi) the Respondent relied on the case of KJ (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ
         292, a case in which the Court of Appeal held that, "the higher  up
         in the organisation a person  is,  the  more  likely  will  be  the
         inference that he agrees with and promotes all of its activities";

    vii) the Appellant met the criteria set out  in  the  case  of  JS  (Sri
         Lanka) [2010] in which the Supreme Court set out the factors to  be
         considered when assessing what more  than  mere  membership  of  an
         organisation that committed international crimes  was  required  to
         exclude a person from the  protection  of  the  Refugee  Convention
         under Article 1F(a).  The Appellant met the criteria for  exclusion
         for a number of reasons which are set out in paragraph  76  of  the
         Reasons for Refusal Letter.  These included the conclusion that the
         First Appellant must have been aware of the nature of the  conflict
         in and around Kabul and the actions  of  the  Jamiat  party  and/or
         Shura-e-Nazar.  Nevertheless, he had failed to disassociate himself
         from that party and the actions of its military wing nor had  those
         actions been challenged by President Rabbani's government;

   viii) given the Appellant's proximity to President Rabbani and the extent
         to which he shared President Rabbani's  responsibilities  and  took
         part in high-level discussions regarding military actions, such  as
         (allegedly) the planning of the Afshar offensive during  which  the
         military  forces  of  the  Jamiat   and   Shura-e-Nazar   committed
         international crimes, the Respondent  was  of  the  view  that  the
         Appellant had made a significant and  substantial  contribution  to
         the government's ability to commit these crimes.  Accordingly,  the
         Respondent concluded that the provisions of the Refugee  Convention
         did not apply to the Appellant pursuant to  Article  1F(a)  of  the
         Geneva Convention.  This was because, for  the  reasons  summarised
         above, there were serious  reasons  for  considering  that  he  had
         committed a crime against peace, a war crime  or  a  crime  against
         humanity, as defined in the international instruments drawn  up  to
         make provisions in respect of such crimes.

15. Since the Respondent had found  that  the  provisions  of  the  Refugee
    Convention did not apply to the Appellant, because  Article  1F(a)  was
    applicable to him, the Respondent  issued  a  certificate  pursuant  to
    Section 55 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006  stating
    that the Appellant was not entitled to the protection of Article  33(1)
    of the Geneva Convention and his asylum claim was refused  accordingly.



16. As regards the Appellant's  eligibility  for  Humanitarian  Protection,
    this was considered under the criteria set out in paragraph 339C of the
    Immigration Rules and for similar  reasons  as  those  upon  which  the
    Respondent relied  for  finding  that  Article  1F(a)  applied  to  the
    Appellant, it was concluded  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  that  the
    Appellant did not qualify for Humanitarian Protection.

17. Notwithstanding the Respondent's conclusion that the Appellant's  claim
    did not qualify for consideration for asylum or Humanitarian Protection
    and a Certificate had been issued against him to this effect, according
    to paragraph 89 of the Reasons for Refusal Letter, consideration had in
    fact been given to  the  question  of  whether  or  not  the  Appellant
    qualified for asylum or Humanitarian Protection.

18. The Appellant's  claim  for  asylum  and  Humanitarian  Protection  was
    considered in conjunction with Article 3 of the ECHR  in  paragraph  93
    onwards of the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter.   Although  much  of  the
    factual basis of his account was accepted by the Respondent, his  claim
    to be at real risk of persecution or other serious harm from the Karzai
    government, the Taliban, the ISI and those others he  claimed  to  fear
    was challenged because of the inconsistency and lack of cohesion in his
    evidence, which was not substantiated by any objective means.  In  view
    of these factors, the Respondent concluded that the Appellant had never
    been, nor would he  in  the  future  be  of  adverse  interest  to  the
    authorities or those others he claimed to fear in Afghanistan.  Removal
    of the Appellants, in accordance with the removal directions, would not
    be in breach of the UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention,  the
    Qualification Directive or the ECHR.

19. The Appellant stated that he did not leave Afghanistan in December 2011
    due to any fear of persecution or of serious harm, and he  claims  that
    he was in such fear after he had received information since he came  to
    the UK that  his  life  would  be  in  danger  were  he  to  return  to
    Afghanistan.  Accordingly, the Respondent assessed his case as a person
    who had claimed to be a refugee 'sur place'.

20. Since the Second and Fourth Appellants' applications were  assessed  as
    dependants of the First Appellant, their applications  were  considered
    with his claim and as such, they were not issued with separate  Reasons
    for Refusal Letters.  As regards the Third, Fifth and Sixth Appellants,
    their applications were based on the assertion that their father was  a
    prominent politician and that he had been a former deputy leader of the
    Jamiat party and also an Interior Minister in the former  regime.   The
    Third Appellant confirmed that he was happy for  his  Asylum  Interview
    Record to be read and considered with his father's interview record and
    the Fifth and Sixth Appellants also confirmed that  they  were  content
    for their Asylum Interview Records to be considered with that of  their
    father and their other family members.  Accordingly, their applications
    were refused in line with the reasons given  for  the  refusal  of  the
    First Appellant's application.  However, it  was  not  alleged  by  the
    Respondent that their applications were excluded from the protection of
    the Refugee Convention or from Humanitarian Protection  on  account  of
    their commission and/or participation in the  international  crimes  of
    which, it was alleged, the Appellant was guilty.

21. The detailed reasons for the Respondent's Decision to refuse the Third,
    Fifth and Sixth Appellants' applications are set  out  in  Home  Office
    letters dated 18th December 2013, 19th December 2013 and 16th  December
    2013 (respectively).

22. They appealed.

THE DECISION OF THE FIRST TIER TRIBUNAL

23. Following a hearing at Richmond on 16 July 2014 Judge of the First-tier
    (FtT) Morris did not uphold the  Respondent's  certificate  made  under
    Section 55.  She also dismissed the appeals on asylum and human  rights
    grounds.

24. On the former the judge's analysis is  at  paragraphs  30-  40  of  her
    determination.  In summary she found that the Jamiat could not be  said
    as  a  party  to  be  "predominantly  terrorist  in  character"  or  an
    "extremist international terrorist  group"  and  that  the  Appellant's
    voluntary membership of the Jamiat did  not  amount  to  "personal  and
    knowing participation or at least acquiescence amounting to  complicity
    in the crimes in question".  [30]

25. She found that the military wing of the Jamiat under the leadership  of
    Ahmad Shah Massoud was autonomous.  Also that  although  the  Appellant
    was a "high-ranking member of the Jamiat ... his  role  was  allied  to
    that of President Rabbani (in respect of whom the documentary  evidence
    amply testifies to his peace-making aim) and not to Massoud". [35]

26. She found that  the  Appellant  was  not  involved  in  the  atrocities
    detailed in the refusal letter.  It was the military forces  of  Jamiat
    that were responsible for the  commission  of  war  crimes  and  crimes
    against humanity in the Kabul area between 1992 and 1996 [36].   Rather
    the Appellant was "associated" with  seeking  a  peaceful  solution  by
    negotiation rather than military force. ..." [37]

27. She concluded (at [39]) that "notwithstanding his position and rank  in
    the Jamiat the Appellant's influence in this  organisation,  especially
    insofar as it is related to Ahmad Shah Massour was very  limited"  with
    the result that there were "no serious  reasons  for  considering  that
    (he) contributed voluntarily in  a  significant  way  to  the  Jamiat's
    ability to pursue its purpose of committing war crimes, aware that  his
    assistance would in fact further that purpose."

28. On the asylum claim the judge considered this at paragraph [42 ff].

29. Dealing first with his claim to have been involved in  politics  giving
    interviews critical of the Karzai government and the Taliban since  his
    arrival in the UK, the judge did not  consider  that  he  would  be  at
    greater risk than before he left Afghanistan.   Similar  interviews  he
    had given there shortly after the assassination  of  Rabbani  "did  not
    result in any harm or threat of  harm"  to  him.   Also  there  was  no
    evidence that the alleged suicide bombers  carried  out  their  threat.
    Indeed, he remained in Afghanistan for another three months. [42]

30. Further, Karzai had been in power since 2004 and it had not been  shown
    that the Appellant had had any problems as a result.  Moreover, members
    of the Jamiat also work for the  current  Afghan  (Karzai)  government.
    There was no evidence  that  the  Appellant's  position  would  be  any
    different from theirs particularly as he does not claim to have  had  a
    military profile.  In addition, he could  rely  on  the  bodyguards  or
    others who had protected him and his family before he left. [45]

31. Moreover, the fact that he was contacted by  his  secretary  after  the
    Minister of the Interior phoned his office and asked them to inform the
    Appellant that he should not return to Afghanistan  suggested  that  he
    has "influential contacts" who would be able to aid his security.  [46]

32. As for his claim to be at risk from the Taliban/the  ISI  his  evidence
    was   "vague and unsubstantiated" including the claim that his  brother
    had been killed by the Taliban. [47]

33. The judge also found  it  significant  that  the  Appellant  had  never
    received any letters or threats from the Taliban/ISI.  It was usual for
    "collaborationists" to be threatened  initially  [48].   They  had  had
    ample time to "either threaten and/or assassinate him, but  they  never
    did so". [49]

34. As for threats from  the  Jamiat  the  judge  appeared  to  accept  the
    Respondent's position which noted that he was no longer  deputy  leader
    of the party.  Also "numerous other persons associated with the  Jamiat
    still live and operate safely  in  Afghanistan".   Further,  the  judge
    considered, any perceived threat "must to some extent  be  lessened  by
    his health difficulties".  [50]

35. The judge found no merit in the claim that the  Third  Appellant  might
    face risk not only because of his association with the First  Appellant
    but because he too was a politician in his own right.

36. As  regards  the  fears  expressed  by  the  Fourth,  Fifth  and  Sixth
    Appellants because of the status as  women  in  Afghanistan  the  judge
    found that as the Appellants would be returned as  a  family  unit  the
    female Appellants would not be lone women in Afghanistan.  [53]

37. The judge also found that there would be a  sufficiency  of  protection
    [54].  Further, having wealth the Appellant would not have to seek work
    and would thus be able to keep a low profile.  They would  be  able  to
    live safety in Kabul where they had lived for many years.  [56]

APPEAL TO THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

38. The Appellants sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier White on 4 November 2014.

39. Following an error of law  hearing  on  8  January  2015  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chana concluded at [32] "The judge  fell  into  material
    error as she failed to consider all the evidence in the appeal and come
    to sustainable conclusions.  I therefore set aside the determination of
    the First-tier Tribunal in  its  entirely  and  preserve  none  of  the
    findings of the First-tier Judge in the determination.  All  issues  in
    the appeal will be reargued including the Respondent's certification".

40. Following further procedure the matter came before Upper Tribunal Judge
    Kebede.  In a Notice dated 19  May  2015  she  stated  "...  it  is  my
    provisional view that the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge in setting  aside
    the  entire  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   including,   the
    (unchallenged) decision on the Article  1F(a)  certificate,  overlooked
    the  provisions  in  Section  11(3)  of  the  Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007 as well as the  reported  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in EG & NG (UT rule 17: withdrawal; rule 24:  scope)  Ethiopia
    [2013] UKUT 143 in relation to the scope of the challenges to the First-
    tier Tribunal decision which were before her".

41. UTJ Kebede proposed in the  absence  of  objection  to  set  aside  the
    decision of DUTJ Chana.

42. There was no objection with the result that UTJ Kebede on 5  June  2015
    issued a decision to set aside under Rule 45 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 with the further result  that  "the  appeal
    will now be set down for an oral hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
    determination of the error of law, pursuant to the grant of  permission
    on 4 November 2014".

43. Thus, the matter came before us.  Parties agreed that  our  first  task
    was to decide whether the  FtT  Judge's  determination  was  materially
    flawed.  It was also accepted in that regard that  all  the  Appellants
    stood or fell on the decision in respect of the  First  Appellant.   It
    was further agreed that if an error of law was found the issue was risk
    on return.

44. Mr Bazini sought to  rely  on  the  grounds  seeking  permission.   The
    credibility of the Appellant's historical account was not challenged by
    the Respondent.  He was a serious player  politically  in  Afghanistan.
    The judge had not dealt adequately with the  expert's  report  and  the
    evidence concerning the targeting of other prominent Jamiats.   It  did
    not follow that because nothing had happened to the Appellant such  led
    to the conclusion that he might not be at risk on return.  The  judge's
    approach overall showed inadequate analysis.

45. The judge also failed to deal with the  expert's  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant as a high profile and thus priority target would not be  safe
    in  Kabul  and  that  there  was  likely  to  be  an  insufficiency  of
    protection.

46. In reply Mr Duffy submitted that the reasons given by the FtT Judge had
    been adequate.  She had referred to the expert's report.  Whilst  there
    would be no guarantee of protection she was entitled to find that there
    is a sufficiency of protection.

OUR DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

47. It is important to note that there  is  no  appeal  by  the  Respondent
    against the FtT findings or  decision  with  respect  to  certification
    under Article 1F(a) of the Geneva Convention and thus  we  uphold  that
    part of the FtT's decision for the reasons it gave.

48. However in relation to the analysis of the asylum claim we  found  that
    there had been material error. We concluded as follows:

         "In paragraph 44 the FTT stated that the Respondent's  reasons  for
         refusal letter set out a cogent and detailed  explanation  for  her
         decision that the Appellants  were  not  at  risk  of  persecution.
         However there  was  no  separate  evaluation  of  the  Respondent's
         reasons in the FTT's decision as the FTT merely stated that it  had
         come to the same conclusions for the same reasons.  Though the  FTT
         said it had  reached  its  decision  independently  and  gave  some
         supplemental reasons,  its  approach  to  these  important  factual
         matters represented something of an abdication of responsibility by
         failing  to  scrutinise  with  care  the  Respondent's   reasoning.
         Unfortunately that approach led the FTT  into  material  errors  of
         law.

         First, the report of Dr Giustozzi was unequivocal in its conclusion
         that there was an insufficiency  of  protection  available  to  the
         Appellant from the police.  This expert  evidence  was  essentially
         unchallenged in circumstances where the Respondent  had  failed  to
         provide any evidence to make good her assertion  that,  because  of
         his political prominence, the First Appellant would receive a level
         of protection unavailable to others.   The  FTT  simply  failed  to
         address this material adequately.  The suggestion made by  the  FTT
         in paragraph 54 that the existence of a police force  coupled  with
         evidence of some police activity in response to the  violent  death
         of  the  First  Appellant's  brother  was  enough  to   demonstrate
         sufficiency of protection flew  in  the  face  of  the  conclusions
         reached by  Dr  Giustozzi.   If  the  FTT  was  unpersuaded  by  Dr
         Giustozzi's report, it should have explained why this was the case.
          It did not and thereby materially erred in law.

         Second Dr Giustozzi's report provided a  careful  analysis  of  the
         risks of assassination faced by even lower profile members  of  the
         Jamiat.   His  report  also  concluded  that,  due  to  the   First
         Appellant's continued attacks in the media on  the  current  Afghan
         Government, it would be more difficult  for  him  to  obtain  state
         protection.  In circumstances where apparently the Minister of  the
         Interior considered that he could not protect the First  Appellant,
         the FTT failed to explain what it made of this material in reaching
         its decision.  It thereby once more fell  into  material  error  of
         law.

         For these reasons, we conclude that the FTT materially erred in law
         and we set aside its decision."

49. Mr Bazini wished  to  lead  oral  evidence.   He  was  able  to  do  so
    immediately.  We heard briefly from  the  Appellant's  son,  the  Third
    Appellant, Mr SYE.  He sought to rely  on  his  statement  and  several
    photographs.  These, he said, showed  his  involvement  in  the  Global
    Afghan Forum.  This is an organisation which he founded in Turkey  when
    he was a student there and now active in London and Afghanistan.  It is
    a  non-profit  organisation  which  works  to   deal   with   extremism
    particularly amongst the young who in Afghanistan are often  unemployed
    and make up most of the suicide bombers.

50. He was asked if he and the family would have bodyguards  were  they  to
    return to Afghanistan.  He said that in the  past  they  had  paid  for
    bodyguards privately but now they would have no money to pay for such.

51. In cross-examination the witness agreed that as well as having a  house
    in Kabul they have an ancestral property in Herat.

OUR ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSIONS

52. In light of the voluminous amount of  material  in  this  case  parties
    agreed that the most appropriate way to proceed was by way  of  written
    submissions by both parties.  There was some delay on the part  of  the
    Respondent but both sets were received by early October 2015.   We  did
    not begin our consideration of this matter until we had received them.

53. We refer to the submissions in the course of our analysis below.

54. As well as the submissions we had  before  us  statements  and  various
    documents and background material.   Also  an  expert's  report  by  Dr
    Giustozzi.

55. There is no dispute that the  Appellant  was  a  senior  politician  in
    Afghanistan for a number of decades  and  indeed  served  as  a  senior
    minister in government.  It is clear from the  background  material  he
    was one of the leading members of Jamiat Islami together with  Rabbani,
    to whom he was allied and a deputy.

56. It suffices to note of  Jamiat,  a  2012  report  referred  to  by  the
    Respondent which refers  to  the  National  Front  of  Afghanistan  and
    National Coalition of Afghanistan -  both  of  which  comprised  Jamiat
    leaders.  "Jamiat is a former Mujahedin  party  that  always  had  been
    characterised by an extremely diversified - some might say;  fragmented
    - organisational structure.  Many of their leading  personalities  have
    been closely allied with each other over long years.  Politically, both
    alliances support Afghanistan's shift to a  parliamentary  system,  the
    decentralization of power and electoral reforms as well as  talks  with
    the Taliban."

57. The issue before us has narrowed to risk on return from the Taliban.

58. It is noteworthy that the Respondent appears to have accepted that  the
    Appellant was and is at  risk  but  considers  that  the  risk  is  not
    sufficient.  Thus, in his oral submissions resisting the error  of  law
    challenge Mr Duffy conceded that "I accept that he was always at risk".
     Further, "The Taliban would kill him if they could".  In  his  written
    submissions he writes "In relation to the Appellant's professed fear of
    the Taliban, as a senior and founding member of Jamiat-i-Islami, it  is
    probable that the Taliban would have an adverse interest in him ...".

59. Mr Duffy noted the report by Dr Giustozzi dated  28  April  2014  which
    identifies several other high profile figures from Jamiat who have been
    assassinated or have had attempts on their lives.   However,  Mr  Duffy
    suggests these have "significantly different profiles" to the Appellant
    in essence that they are "more active and  more  likely  to  come  into
    direct conflict with the Taliban due to their roles outside of Jamiat-i-
    Islami".

60. We do not find this persuasive.  In the  context  of  the  Respondent's
    acceptance that the Taliban would  have  an  adverse  interest  in  him
    simply on the basis that he was a senior and founding member of  Jamiat
    consideration needs to be  given  to  the  specific  matters  that  the
    Appellant claims amount to a real future risk of persecution.

61. The Appellant points out in his witness statement [26-28] that  he  was
    an outspoken critic of  Karzai's  government's  talk  of  bringing  the
    Taliban into government. He opposed  negotiations  and  compromise.  He
    articulated his disregard for the Taliban leader  Mullah  Omar  on  BBC
    radio pointing  out  his  distrust  of  the  Taliban's  ideologies  and
    activities.  He continued to express his ideas and views in  the  media
    and at conferences.

62. We note that the Respondent does not challenge the Appellant's evidence
    in respect of these activities and we see no reason to do so.

63. We agree  with  Mr  Bazini  that  this  open  criticism  increased  and
    increases the risk over  and  above  his  position  and  membership  of
    Jamiat.

64. The Appellant claims that during this period his vehicle  was  attacked
    in Nimroz and his brother who was the driver as well as  his  bodyguard
    was killed.  The Appellant believes he was the intended target  as  his
    brother was not  political  and  the  manner  of  the  attack  strongly
    suggested that the Taliban was likely to be responsible.  Therefore  he
    took precautions, avoiding travelling at night, going to the  provinces
    and attending conferences only when absolutely necessary.

65. In the refusal letter the Respondent  states  that  the  attack  was  a
    random one or did not take place "in the manner" suggested.  It is  not
    clear to us what the alternative means.

66. In our judgement bearing in mind the  context  we  find  it  reasonably
    likely that it was an attempted attack on the Appellant.   We  note  Dr
    Giustozzi's comment that it was "plausible" that  the  Appellant  might
    have been targeted for assassination.  "The Taliban had at the time  of
    the attack a significant presence in south-western Afghanistan  ...  so
    the capability to carry out such attacks was certainly there.  The fact
    that (he) appeared in the media to oppose negotiations  and  compromise
    with the Taliban would certainly have contributed to make a  target  of
    him  -  all  the  political  leaders  targeted  were  known  for  their
    uncompromising position towards the Taliban ..." [11]

67. In Mr Duffy's written submissions it is asserted  for  the  first  time
    that the failure to provide media reports about the attack casts  doubt
    that the event took place.  We see nothing to  support  the  contention
    that the media would necessarily  have  reported  this.   Further,  the
    point was not put in the refusal letter or indeed  to  the  Appellant's
    son who gave evidence.

68. The Respondent makes the observation that even though  there  had  been
    such an attack the Appellant did not seek to flee Afghanistan.

69. We agree with Mr Bazini that this misses  the  point.   First,  as  the
    Respondent acknowledged, the Appellant was of adverse interest  to  the
    Taliban and was always at risk.  Second, as the Appellant stated it was
    part and parcel of his life, as for many others in  the  country,  that
    they knew they were potential targets but nonetheless  simply  accepted
    this and got on with the job they had to do.  It follows that they  did
    not simply flee at the first opportunity.  The fact that an  individual
    does not flee does not mean that they are not at risk.

70. The Respondent continues by suggesting that apart from the  killing  of
    the brother in 2010, which was  not  accepted  as  having  occurred  as
    claimed, nothing adverse happened to the Appellant. Such must mean that
    either the Appellant was  not  at  risk  of  real  harm  or  enjoyed  a
    sufficiency of protection.

71. We disagree.  The fact that a person goes unharmed for  a  period  does
    not necessarily mean that there is not a real risk or that there  is  a
    sufficiency of protection.  People can be at  risk  for  years  without
    coming to harm as is plainly  the  case  with  many  persons  currently
    occupying positions hostile to the Taliban.  There may be many  reasons
    why  an  individual  who  is  at  risk  is  not   attacked,   including
    opportunity, luck, location, priorities, resources.

72. The assassination  of  Rabbani  took  place  in  September  2011.   The
    Appellant was deputy leader.  As such it is reasonable to conclude that
    he was the next most prominent member/leader of the party.

73. Mr Duffy argues that the fact that Rabbani was the leader of Jamiat was
    irrelevant to the attack on him and so by implication this  attack  had
    no bearing on the risk to the Appellant.

74. We do not agree.  The Respondent has already accepted that the  Taliban
    would have an adverse interest in the Appellant.  It seems to  us  that
    it must follow that they must have had an adverse interest in  Rabbani.
    It may well be that Rabbani's involvement in  the  High  Peace  Council
    brought about additional risk, but it cannot be said that  Rabbani  was
    not in any event at risk from the Taliban.

75. Further, we note that Rabbani was killed by the Taliban at a time  when
    he was trying to make peace with them as opposed to the  Appellant  who
    had taken a harder stance against the Taliban publicly announcing  that
    peace should not be made with what he regarded as a treacherous  group.



76. We note that following the assassination of Rabbani the  Appellant  was
    interviewed by 1TV.  In  his  statement  he  makes  it  plain  that  he
    expressed his position not to talk to the Taliban as they did not  want
    peace.  He also refers during the televised interview  to  his  meeting
    with the Vice President's Office in respect of the information received
    concerning the security threat from suicide bombers  to  him  (he  also
    refers to this at [37] of his statement).  This clearly  gives  support
    to his claim that the highest office in the land considered in light of
    their own information that  the  Appellant  and  others  were  at  risk
    following the Rabbani assassination and saw fit  to  specifically  warn
    the Appellant about it.

77. Mr Duffy does not comment on this evidence but  it  is  clear  that  in
    light of particularly the contemporaneous TV  interview  given  by  the
    Appellant  the  government  of  Afghanistan  had  information  that  it
    believed placed the Appellant at risk.

78. The Appellant claims that in December 2011 while visiting  his  son  in
    London he received a call from his secretary in Kabul  who  related  to
    him a call he had received from the Interior Minister, Bismillah  Khan,
    who had advised him that his life was at risk.  The background material
    indicates that Khan is also a Tajik and a former high-ranking member of
    Jamiat who later became Minister of Defence.

79. Mr Duffy submits that little weight should be attached to the email  of
    the Appellant's secretary as it is not on headed paper and  he  is  not
    impartial as he is in the employ of the Appellant.

80. We note that the Appellant's narrative as set out in his interview  and
    statement together with the statements  of  his  family  have  remained
    consistent on this point which we find to be a factor in his favour.

81. Mr Duffy further suggests that it was  convenient  that  the  Appellant
    received the warning call shortly after arrival in the UK and only then
    became a higher profile target.  However, we find that  that  assertion
    ignores the evidence of the killing of Rabbani, the interview  he  gave
    on TV concerning the information received as to the  risk  to  him  and
    others in Jamiat given to him by the President's Office that took place
    only a matter of a couple of months before that.  It also  ignores  the
    Respondent's own  acceptance  of  risk  and  adverse  interest  to  the
    Appellant.

82. Mr Duffy suggests that there may be other reasons for the asylum  claim
    namely the Appellant's ill health or  his  being  surpassed  by  a  new
    generation.  We note that his ill health  arose  after  his  stroke  in
    January 2013.  The asylum claim was made in December 2011  and  so  ill
    health had nothing to do with his asylum  claim.   We  also  take  into
    account that much of his life was occupied  with  activities  which  he
    perceived to be for the good of his country and we do not find that  he
    would readily give up  the  private  life  which  accrued  during  this
    period.

83. Looking at the evidence in the round and applying  the  lower  standard
    for the reasons given we accept the Appellant's historical  account  on
    all material matters.

84. The next issue in light of our findings is the degree of risk on return
    and sufficiency of protection.

85. In respect of Kabul, Mr Duffy relies on PM and Others (Kabul -  Hizb-i-
    Islami) Afghanistan CG [2007] UKAIT 00089 and the OGN (February  2015).
    It is clear from the OGN that every case will be fact sensitive and the
    individual facts will need to  be  considered.   Mr  Duffy  appears  to
    acknowledge this and therefore asserts that because of the  Appellant's
    status he will receive a level of protection not available to others.

86. The Respondent's comments ignore those of Dr Giustozzi that many senior
    figures have been targeted and many killed.  He states clearly that the
    Appellant "would not be safe in Kabul".  Moreover, the  Respondent  has
    failed to refer to any background material  to  support  the  assertion
    that because of his previous positions the Appellant  would  receive  a
    level of protection unavailable to others.  Indeed, Dr Giustozzi in his
    unchallenged evidence states at [23] that the  Appellant  "clearly  has
    the profile of a typical Taliban target  and  his  isolation  from  the
    current leadership of Jamiat makes him more exposed  to  risk  than  it
    would otherwise have been the case."

87. Mr Duffy asks us not to accept the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  son
    about the employ of bodyguards but gives no reason  why  this  evidence
    should not be accepted.  The opportunity to challenge the son about the
    ability to employ bodyguards was not taken at the hearing.  We  see  no
    reason not to accept the explanation given by the son.

88. We find that there would not be a sufficiency of protection.

89. As for internal relocation Mr Duffy submits that there is no reason why
    the Appellant could not  relocate  to  Herat  where  the  Taliban  have
    "limited influence".  He notes Dr Giustozzi's description of  Herat  as
    one of the "safest cities".

90. In fact what Dr Giustozzi actually states is:

         "...  aside  from  assassinations  the  Taliban  target  government
         officials, workers of  NGOs  and  international  organisations  and
         Afghans working for foreign countries in an intimidation  campaign,
         again in areas of Kabul where the Taliban are active.

         The same applies to the rest of the country; even the safest cities
         of Mazar-i-Sharif and Herat do suffer occasional attacks and  given
         his high profile (the Appellant) would rank  among  their  priority
         target.  Even the modest human resources the Taliban have in  these
         cities could be assigned to this type of target, while  they  would
         be considered wasted for low profile collaborationists". [13]

91. We conclude that the  (unchallenged)  expert  evidence  is  clear  that
    internal relocation for the Appellant and his family even in  Herat  is
    not an option.

92. Mr Duffy raised the issue of the Third Appellant (Mr SYE), stating that
    he does not have a "significant profile independently  of  his  father,
    and if his father is not at risk, then neither is he".

93. We would simply note the oral evidence given at the hearing  (supported
    by photographic and documentary evidence) and that he too is  a  target
    of the Taliban on account of his activities  and  speeches  which  have
    been broadcast in Afghanistan was not  challenged  at  the  hearing  or
    subsequently.  We find that the Taliban are very likely to be aware  of
    who his father is and this combined with his pro-western  approach  has
    led him to become a target. Such is also the opinion  of  Dr  Giustozzi
    (at [10]). We note, further, in that regard the letter from the General
    Department of Anti-Terrorism Affairs dated 1 July 2015.

94. In conclusion, for the reasons given and applying the  lower  standard,
    we find that the Appellant and his son have established a  well-founded
    fear of persecution for a Convention reason if returned to Afghanistan.
    The Respondent accepts that in such case his wife  and  daughters  also
    succeed.

95. Their appeals succeed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained errors of law and  is  set
aside.  It is remade as follows:

    The appeals are allowed under the Refugee Convention.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
Upper Tribunal Judge Knowles QC

