
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
aa/11464/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5th July 2016                         |  On 27th July 2016                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE WARBY
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                     N S
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Slatter instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
(Balham
      High Road)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appeal, with permission, was made by the Secretary  of  State,  but
    nonetheless we shall refer to the parties as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal, that is, the Secretary of State as the respondent and Mr
    N S as the appellant.

 2. The Secretary of State asserts that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    law in finding that the appellant was  not  to  be  excluded  from  the
    Refugee Convention under Article 1F(a) and  1F(b).   The  Secretary  of
    State contends that the judge failed to analyse properly  the  role  of
    the appellant in  the  LTTE,  when  allowing  the  appeal  against  the
    decision by the Respondent dated 29th July  2015.  The  judge,  it  was
    asserted, applied too high a  threshold  for  considering  whether  the
    appellant was excluded or materially failed to properly listen  to  the
    evidence advanced by the Secretary of State.  In  relation  to  Article
    1F(b) the judge's findings were perverse.

Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka and his date of birth is  14th
    June 1979.  He claimed asylum and the respondent decided that  he  fell
    to be excluded from the protection  of  the  Refugee  Convention  under
    Articles 1F(a) and (b) but nonetheless considered that he would  be  at
    risk of treatment that would amount to a breach of Article 3 if he  was
    returned and therefore he was granted  leave  in  line  with  the  Home
    Office Asylum Policy Instruction.

Secretary of State's Reasons for Refusal

 4. The reasons for refusal in summary set out that the LTTE had  no  legal
    right to arrest or detain people in the Jaffna area and  transfer  them
    from territory under control of the  Sri  Lankan  government  to  areas
    under the control of the LTTE.  Similarly the LTTE had no  legal  right
    to administer punishment to people it  believed  had  informed  against
    them.  The respondent stated there were serious reasons for considering
    that the people were taken against their will.  The respondent advanced
    that owing to the widespread and systematic basis upon which  the  LTTE
    carried out actions against people  regarded  as  traitors  meant  that
    those could be classed as crimes against humanity.  In respect  of  the
    appellant's own actions the respondent  concluded  that  the  appellant
    gathered and transmitted information  or  transmitted  intelligence  on
    informers to the LTTE and did this in the knowledge that  people  would
    be detained, taken to LTTE controlled areas for imprisonment or as  the
    appellant described, severe punishment.  The respondent thus  concluded
    the appellant was part of the joint enterprise.

 5. In respect of Article  1F(b)  the  respondent  took  into  account  the
    appellant's claim that he transmitted messages to his superiors in  the
    LTTE requesting the supply of weapons and as a result weapons were sent
    from LTTE controlled areas into government controlled areas.  This  the
    respondent considered was contrary to the law of Sri  Lanka.   Although
    the appellant stated he was  unaware  of  the  purpose  for  which  the
    particular weapons could be used  the  respondent  concluded  that  the
    circumstances gave serious reasons for considering that  the  appellant
    committed a serious non-political crime.

 6. The Secretary of State issued a certificate under  Section  55  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  It was accepted that the
    appellant would be afforded protection under Article 3 of the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.





Appeal to First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant appealed that decision. The  grounds  asserted  that  the
    appellant had not committed any war crimes or crimes against  humanity.
    It was stated that he "associated with the LTTE to  protect  the  Tamil
    community and  his  nation.   He  has  never  shot  anyone  during  his
    membership with the LTTE no  intentional  shootings  or  killings  took
    place".

 8. The issue in the appeal was in essence whether the appellant  fell  for
    exclusion from the Refugee Convention.

 9. The appellant was allowed in relation to the exclusion point.

Application for Permission to Appeal

10. The legal tests are enunciated in JS (Sri Lanka) R in  the  application
    of v The Secretary of State for the Home Department Rev 1  [2010]  UKSC
    15.  The legal test for the Secretary of State is whether there are

         "serious grounds for considering that the appellant has voluntarily
         contributed in a significant way to the organisation's  ability  to
         pursue its purpose  for  committing  war  crimes,  aware  that  his
         assistance will in fact further that purpose".

11. The Secretary of State asserted that :-

    (i) The judge erroneously "embarked" on a search for an  actual  number
    of informers and concluded that because the appellant "could be one  of
    thousands of people" considered that "he had in fact a very low profile
    within the LTTE".  This was  materially  wrong  as  it  was  immaterial
    whether one or 10,000 others did this role.  It was incumbent upon  the
    judge to consider what the  appellant  did  himself  and  come  to  the
    conclusion whether there were serious grounds for considering that  the
    appellant had voluntarily contributed towards crimes against  humanity.
    That he had a low profile was  an  immaterial  basis  for  the  judge's
    conclusion.  However low a profile, that role could still be one  which
    engaged Article 1F.

    (ii) The judge misstated the concern of the  author  of  the  exclusion
    report over the appellant's credibility.  In fact  the  conclusion  was
    that his links were broadly consistent with  his  activities  with  the
    LTTE.  The judge noted at paragraph 60 of his decision that the  author
    of the report acknowledged that there were potential credibility issues
    as to whether the appellant had exaggerated his role in the LTTE or  if
    he was a member at paragraph 60 of his decision.  At paragraph  65  the
    judge stated that "I consider that he embellished what he actually  did
    in his first interview and I note the credibility issues raised by  the
    respondent in the report also".  There were, however, no reasons  given
    by the judge for finding that the appellant  had  embellished  what  he
    actually did.  The  exclusion  decision  raised  the  possibility  that
    equally the appellant could be distancing himself from what he said  in
    his role and the judge does not consider this position.

    (iii)  The judge had materially erred by failing to  properly  consider
    the background material as to  the  appellant's  role.   The  exclusion
    report highlighted the actions of the LTTE in Sri Lanka at the relevant
    time and the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to  consider  that,  in
    conjunction with the appellant's role.

    As such the judge materially erred by relying on immaterial matters and
    failing to give reasons for concluding the  appellant  had  embellished
    his role and failed to engage with the Secretary of State's case.   The
    background material showed people being taken  and  mistreated  by  the
    LTTE as a result from intelligence.  That was the nexus  to  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge said was missing but was not in fact missing.
     The threshold  was  not  high  and  the  Secretary  of  State  clearly
    demonstrated that there were serious reasons for considering  that  the
    appellant voluntarily contributed towards  the  LTTE's  crimes  against
    humanity and/or war  crimes.   The  fact  that  not  every  person  the
    appellant informed on was detained did not mean that he should  not  be
    excluded as the First-tier Tribunal Judge seem to suggest in  paragraph
    63.

    (iv)   in relation to Article 1F(b)  the  judge  stated  there  was  no
    evidential  basis  to  show  that  the  weapons  concerning  which  the
    appellant sent messages were illegally obtained (paragraph  35).   This
    was perverse. The LTTE organisation was a terrorist organisation  which
    had no lawful basis for having any weapons.   Whether  they  were  used
    against the army or civilians for 1F(b) purposes  was  immaterial.   It
    was a serious non-political crime for the appellant to  assist  in  the
    transportation of weapons for the LTTE. There was no evidence cited  by
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that  the  LTTE  ever  lawfully   had
    possession of firearms or had licences for them under  Sri  Lankan  law
    (see page 35 of the exclusion letter).  Therefore the weapons could not
    be said to have been lawfully obtained, let alone lawfully obtained  by
    the LTTE.  This was a serious crime given that  the  transportation  of
    the weapons contravened the Sri Lankan law.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge failed to engage with this issue at all.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before us, Mr Tufan effectively relied  on  the  written
    submissions which we have outlined above and emphasised that the  judge
    had not looked at the appellant's role in particular  that  there  were
    people that the appellant informed upon who were punished.  It was  not
    clear why the judge had stated that the appellant was not a  member  of
    the intelligence wing of the LTTE. Mr Slatter disputed this and pointed
    out that the judge had made findings  in  relation  to  that  point  at
    paragraph 61, and those finding were supported by and  consistent  with
    the exclusion analysis report.  Mr Tufan emphasised that the  judge  in
    particular had not dealt with the point that the appellant was supposed
    to have exaggerated his claims.

13. Mr Slatter argued there was no material  error  of  law  and  this  was
    merely a disagreement with the facts and a request for further  reasons
    given for his findings.  The judge directed himself  appropriately  and
    in line with JS.  He made findings he was entitled to  make  such  that
    the appellant had not been part of the intelligence service because  he
    had not engaged in training for six months.  The judge had  found  that
    he had a very low profile in the LTTE.  There was conflicting  evidence
    as to whether he stated that he was  important  as  evidenced  and  the
    judge had set out that he found his role was more of  a  foot  soldier.
    The judge had appropriately directed himself to the extent of his role.

14. In relation to Article 1F(b) the judge had specifically stated that the
    respondent relied on the claim that he sent  coded  messages  but  that
    there was no evidential basis to show that the  weapons  the  appellant
    sent messages about were illegally obtained and it was  not  clear  how
    many hands the information passed through.

15. Mr Slatter submitted in the event that we found  a  material  error  of
    law, that we needed to  reassess  the  appellant's  evidence  with  new
    findings of fact as there was a conflict between the parties.

Our Conclusions

16. We did find that the judge took  into  account  immaterial  matters  in
    reaching his decision in relation to the Article 1F(a) case as outlined
    by the Secretary of State.  Further the judge failed  to  give  reasons
    for concluding that the appellant had embellished his role.

17. Ground (i) At paragraph 58 the judge states

         "I have also carefully considered the report provided by  the  Home
         Office (special cases analysis report).   I  would  note  that  the
         report provides details of incidents and events which  occurred  in
         Sri Lanka said to be committed by  the  LTTE  in  the  Jaffna  area
         between 2004 and 2007.  However, even if the appellant was aware of
         some of these incidents it does not mean  he  was  aware  that  his
         actions would lead to the particular incidents identified or to war
         crimes."

18. The judge set out the relevant law and burden  and  standard  of  proof
    between paragraphs 39  and  42  but  needed  to  assess  the  role  and
    contribution of the appellant  to  war  crimes.  The  judge  took  into
    account immaterial factors such as the number of other people who  were
    active.  That does not necessarily diminish the role of the  appellant.
    There were contradictory findings. On reaching paragraph 63 it is clear
    that he acknowledged that the appellant's role was important  but  also
    stated

         "I  have  carefully  looked  at  the  appellant's  evidence.    The
         appellant has never said that he was in command  over  any  person.
         He stated his role was important though.  However, this comment has
         to be seen in context.  The number of people passing information to
         the LTTE has not been stated or established.  The  appellant  could
         be one of thousands  of  people.   It  is  clear  to  me  that  the
         appellant is not  a  member  of  the  intelligence  wing  from  the
         information he provided.  I consider that he had in fact a very low
         profile role within the LTTE.  I also consider that  there  is  not
         sufficient nexus between any information that the  appellant  might
         have given and any mistreatment of individuals.  There  could  have
         been thousands of pieces of information given, by a great number of
         individuals.  It has not  been  established  that  the  person  who
         ultimately decided  if  action  was  taken  against  a  person  was
         connected to the appellant directly, or to the information that the
         appellant provided.  The appellant was asked to speculate about the
         results of passing on this information but I accept he did not know
         in each case, and the decision as to what will happen was taken  by
         others higher up the chain.  The appellant  described  that  people
         could get a warning.   That  is  clearly  not  a  war  crime.   The
         appellant did not state that he was  aware  that  every  person  or
         people he provided information about would be abducted.   What  the
         appellant meant by severe punishment was  not  established  in  the
         interview, and at the hearing the appellant did not  describe  this
         to mean death, or torture or anything of that nature."

19. At paragraph 64 the judge  states  "I  have  looked  carefully  at  the
    appellant's role and the  credibility  of  what  he  said  he  did.   I
    consider that the appellant's contribution  was  a  small  one  by  the
    information  that  he  passed,  if  he  did  pass  such   information".
    Specifically it is stated  by  the  judge  in  paragraph  63  that  the
    appellant described people could get a warning and that was not  a  war
    crime.  But that is not what the appellant stated.  The appellant  gave
    his own evidence.  The appellant's case is that he  was  important  and
    passed information  such  that  persons  would  be  detained  [see  the
    appellant's recorded evidence below].

20. In response to ground (ii), at paragraph 65 the judge  states  that  he
    considered the appellant  embellished  what  he  actually  did  in  his
    interview and noted the credibility issues raised by the respondent and
    considered that the appellant's role was "much more of a foot  soldier"
    and concluded that he did not have a sufficient role to  be  attributed
    with criminal responsibility.  The exclusion report states that he  may
    have been deliberately distancing himself.

21. Ground (iii) Although the  judge  said  there  was  insufficient  nexus
    between  the  appellant  and  events  and  that   the   appellant   was
    insufficiently aware of events that does not chime with his  membership
    of the LTTE, his self professed role as important  and  the  wealth  of
    background material produced by the Secretary  of  State  of  the  well
    documented events in Sri Lanka regarding the activities of the LTTE.

22. Nor when considering ground (iv) did the judge allude to  the  evidence
    produced by the Secretary of State in relation to the laws of Sri Lanka
    governing the possession of arms.

23. For the reasons  given  above  we  are  therefore  satisfied  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains material  errors  of
    law.

24. We, however, preserve the paragraphs in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    oral evidence given at paragraphs 45 to 55;

         "45.     The appellant asserts that he was required by orders given
             by higher ranks within the LTTE  and  had  no  choice  but  to
             follow them.  I should state at  this  point  that  Ms  Parker
             stated that she did not rely  upon  the  defence  of  superior
             orders and hence I do not consider this  aspect  further.   In
             any event I consider that the appellant is an intelligent  man
             and he had a choice to relocate within the southern  parts  of
             Sri Lanka and avoid the LTTE.

         46.      The appellant in  oral  evidence  stated  that  he  passed
             information mainly about the army and  the  movements  of  the
             army.  He explained that the collection of information was  to
             warn people not to do what they were doing.  It was  done  for
             safety and security.  He stated he did not  know  what  others
             would decide in respect of those individuals.  His instruction
             was to pass the information on.  He agreed he  had  stated  to
             the Home Office that he was aware that if the people had  been
             warned before they were likely  to  be  punished.   He  stated
             though that at the time he passed on information  he  was  not
             actually aware they would be punished as it was a ceasefire at
             the time.  He explained that as  the  LTTE  were  involved  in
             peace talks they would not be able to punish individuals.   He
             stated that the LTTE usually punished people  but  during  the
             ceasefire they did not do such things.

         47.      In respect  of  the  weapons  information,  the  appellant
             stated he was providing an example of information.  He  stated
             that he did not have any direct involvement with weapons.   He
             stated that  there  wasn't  a  direct  need  to  pass  weapons
             information.

         48.      In respect of the  answers  that  the  appellant  gave  at
             interview, he stated that he simply passed on the  information
             and didn't have an in depth knowledge of the kinds  and  types
             of weapons, or how many the LTTE had.  He  stated  he  thought
             the use of claymores and grenades was for attacks against  the
             army.  He stated that the weapons were used to stop the war on
             the Tamil people.

         49.      He explained that he did not know the details of the  LTTE
             killing people.  He stated he had helped  provide  hiding  for
             LTTE fighters and in getting them accommodation.  He explained
             that he was confused during his interview with the Home Office
             and that was why the  change  to  communications  office  from
             intelligence officer.

         50.      He stated that the Tamil community considered the LTTE  to
             be freedom fighters.  He explained that he only knew that  the
             LTTE was banned in the UK when he arrived in the UK and during
             the asylum process.

         51.      The appellant first joined the LTTE in 2004.   He  stated,
             at question 40 of his first interview, that he was working for
             the political wing but was gathering information about  people
             who passed information  to  the  army  or  other  paramilitary
             groups.  He stated he arranged for places  to  stay  for  LTTE
             members  and   arranged   food   and   gathered   intelligence
             information.  He explained in interview that although  he  was
             an ordinary member he  was  important.   He  stated  later  in
             interview that  he  was  given  training  for  14  days  which
             included physical training and  gathering  secret  information
             and exchanging it.

         52.      The  appellant  stated  that  in  August  2006  the  peace
             agreement broke down and the fighting escalated.  He stated he
             continued to help by gathering information for the  LTTE.   He
             stated  the  information  included  about   people   who   had
             connections to the army.  He explained that  the  people  were
             given a warning and if they did not heed the warning they were
             taken to the LTTE controlled areas and imprisoned  there.   He
             stated that he did not know what else happened  to  them.   He
             stated though that  he  suspected  that  they  may  have  been
             punished,  some  severely.   Later  he  stated  his  functions
             gradually reduced and in February 2008 he decided to leave Sri
             Lanka.

         53.      In his later interview in 2013 the appellant stated he had
             never identified informers but was with other people  who  had
             done that.  He further explained that  he  passed  information
             given to him and this is what  he  had  stated  in  his  first
             interview.  He stated that others would write reports  and  he
             would pass the information on.  He  stated  that  he  did  not
             gather the information.

         54.      In relation to the coded messages the appellant sent,  for
             bombs to be sent to Jaffna, he was asked what  type  of  bombs
             there were and he answered that there were  claymore,  grenade
             and pistols.  (See question 72).  The  appellant  also  stated
             that he had no awareness of the attacks by the LTTE  on  other
             groups.

         55.      The appellant explained that he was at risk in  Sri  Lanka
             because he organised Pongu Tamil events.  The  appellant  also
             stated that the LTTE are not a terrorist group but are freedom
             fighters."

25. Throughout this we have taken  into  account  that  the  appellant  has
    subsequently had a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder  and  he
    has been suffering from a moderate depressive episode.  That  said  his
    evidence  in  his  interviews  was  relatively   consistent   and   his
    representations  at  that  time  were  that  he  was  of  good  health.
    Nonetheless we have  considered  the  evidence  in  the  light  of  the
    Guidelines for Vulnerable Witnesses.


26. The law is set out clearly in  AS  (Section  55  exclusion  certificate
    process) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 00571 (IAC).  This makes reference to JS
    (Sri Lanka), which we have set out above, and the case of  MT  (Article
    1F(a) aiding and abetting) Zimbabwe and also sets out the  standard  of
    proof:


    War Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity

    35.    Article 1F(a) of the Refugee Convention states:


         The provisions of this Convention shall not  apply  to  any  person
         with respect to whom there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering
         that:


         (a)      He has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or  a
             crime  against  humanity,  as  defined  in  the  international
             instruments drawn up to make
             provision in respect of such crimes;

    36.    The terms of Article 1F are reflected in Article 12 (2)  of  the
         Qualification Directive, the provision under  which  the  appellant
         seeks to be recognised as a refugee.


    37.    In R (JS) (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 15 Lord Brown said that
         when considering whether an applicant is disqualified  from  asylum
         by virtue of  crimes  against  humanity  under  Article  1F(a)  the
         starting point should be the  Rome  Statute  of  the  International
         Criminal Court ("the ICC Statute").


    38.    Article 7(1) of the ICC Statute defines crimes against  humanity
         as follows:


         1.       For the purpose of this Statute "crime  against  humanity"
             means any of the following acts when committed as  part  of  a
             widespread or systematic attack directed against any  civilian
             population, with knowledge of the attack:


             (a)       Murder;


             (b)       Extermination;


             (c)       Enslavement;


             (d)       Deportation or forcible transfer of population;


             (e)       Imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical
                  liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international
                  law;


             (f)       Torture


             (g)       Rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution,  forced
                  pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any  other  form  of
                  sexual violence of comparable gravity;


             (h)        Persecution  against  any  identifiable  group   or
                  collectivity  on  political,  racial,  national,   ethnic,
                  cultural, religious, gender as defined in paragraph 3,  on
                  other  grounds  that   are   universally   recognized   as
                  impermissible under international law, in connection  with
                  any act referred to in this paragraph or any crime  within
                  the jurisdiction of the Court;


             (i)       Enforced disappearance of persons;


             (j)       The crime of apartheid;


             (k)        Other  inhumane  acts  of   a   similar   character
                  intentionally causing great suffering, or  serious  injury
                  to body or to mental or physical health.


    Joint Criminal Enterprise and Aiding and Abetting


    39.    Art 12(3) of the Qualification Directive provides  that  someone
         does not have to personally commit the  excluded  act  and  can  be
         excluded  if  they  "instigate  or  otherwise  participate  in  the
         commission of [crimes against humanity]". Article 25(3)(b)  of  the
         ICC Statute sets out the different levels of  involvement  that  an
         individual must have to be criminally responsible. Article 25(3)(c)
         establishes individual criminal responsibility if a  person  "aids,
         abets  or  otherwise  assists..."   as   a   subsidiary   form   of
         participation.


    40.    The case of MT (Article 1F (a) - aiding and  abetting)  Zimbabwe
         [2012] UKUT 00015 (IAC) explains at [119] that:


             "Aiding   and   abetting   differs   from    joint    criminal
             responsibility (jce) in that whilst the former generally  only
             requires the knowledge that the assistance contributes to  the
             main crime,  participation  in  jce  requires  both  a  common
             purpose and an intentional  contribution  of  the  participant
             (Triffterer,  pp.  756-758)  to  a  group  crime.  Aiding  and
             abetting   encompasses    any    assistance,    physical    or
             psychological, that has a substantial effect on the commission
             of the crime.  Article 2 para 3(d)  of  the  1996  Draft  Code
             requires that  aiding  and  abetting  should  be  "direct  and
             substantial", i.e.  the  contribution  should  facilitate  the
             commission of a crime in "some  significant  way".  The  Trial
             Chamber in Tadic II, the Trial Chamber  in  the  Prosecutor  v
             Naletilic and  Martinovic  (IT-98-34)  cases  and  the  Appeal
             Chamber in Prosecutor v Akeyesu (Case No. IT-95-14/l-T), paras
             484,  706)  interpreted  "substantial"  to   mean   that   the
             contribution has an effect on the commission, that is  have  a
             causal relationship with the result and it included within the
             concept "all acts of assistance by words  or  acts  that  lend
             encouragement or support". In Prosecutor v Furundzija  (IT-95-
             17/1-T, 10 December 1998), paras 199, 232,  273-4,  the  Trial
             Chamber said that assistance  need  not  be  tangible:  "moral
             support and encouragement" can suffice, albeit it must "make a
             significant difference to the commission of the  criminal  act
             by the principal": see also Prosecutor v Brdanin  (IT-99-36-A,
             Appeal Chamber, 3 April 2007) and Prosecutor v Perisic (IT-04-
             81-T, 6  September  2011).  The  requisite  knowledge  may  be
             inferred from all  relevant  circumstances,  i.e.  it  may  be
             proven by circumstantial evidence (Prosecutor  v  Tadic,  para
             689; Prosecutor v Akeyesu para 498)."


    Duress


    41.    Article 31 of the ICC Statute provides:


         Article 31


         Grounds for excluding criminal responsibility


         (1)  In  addition  to  other   grounds   for   excluding   criminal
             responsibility provided for in this Statute,  a  person  shall
             not be criminally responsible if, at the time of that person's
             conduct:
             ...


             (d)       The conduct which is alleged to constitute  a  crime
                  within the jurisdiction of the Court has  been  caused  by
                  duress resulting from a threat of  imminent  death  or  of
                  continuing or imminent serious bodily  harm  against  that
                  person or another person, and the person acts  necessarily
                  and reasonably to avoid this  threat,  provided  that  the
                  person does not intend to cause a greater  harm  than  the
                  one sought to be avoided. Such a threat may either be:


                  (i)  made by other persons; or


                  (ii)       constituted by other circumstances beyond  that
                      person's control.


    42.    Article 33 of the ICC Statute  operates  to  exclude  the  "only
         following orders"  defence  as  orders  to  commit  crimes  against
         humanity are by reason of their subject matter  deemed  "manifestly
         unlawful".

    Standard of Proof

    43.    There was agreement between the parties  that  the  standard  of
         proof when deciding exclusion was for there to be "serious  reasons
         for considering" which imported a higher test than what is commonly
         referred to as the "lower  standard"  of  "reasonable  grounds  for
         suspecting" used in asylum and Article 3 substantive claims.


    44.    The Supreme Court indicated at [75] of Al-Sirri v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home  Department  [2012]  UKSC  54  that  although  a
         domestic standard of proof could not be imported into  the  Refugee
         Convention:


             "...if the decision-maker is satisfied that it is more  likely
             than not that the
             applicant has not committed the crimes in question or has  not
             been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles of
             the United Nations, it is difficult to see how there could  be
             serious reasons for considering  that  he  had  done  so.  The
             reality is that there are unlikely to be sufficiently  serious
             reasons for considering the applicant to be guilty unless  the
             decision-maker  can   be   satisfied   on   the   balance   of
             probabilities that he is."


    45.    We applied  this  guidance  in  reaching  our  findings  on  the
         exclusion issue, bearing in mind  also  that  the  burden  in  that
         regard falls on the respondent.

27. We have added our own emphases in the above to draw  attention  to  the
    factors we consider specifically pertinent in this case.  As  indicated
    in AS, key requirements of Article 7(1) include  that  the  appellant's
    act must have been committed "as part of  a  widespread  or  systematic
    attack directed against any civilian population and the appellant  must
    have had "a knowledge of that attack".

28. The appellant accepts that he worked for the LTTE between January  2004
    and June 2007.  That he accepts that is confirmed  at  AIR  2  question
    112.  The exclusion report at pages 7 to  18  identifies  the  evidence
    which supports the assertions and identifies the  methods  employed  by
    the LTTE that led to its emergence as an effective insurgent force.

29. The evidence of Dr Chris Smith dated 11th May 2008, an  expert  on  Sri
    Lanka, was cited in the country background material.  Dr  Smith  stated
    that the LTTE continued to engage in  human  rights  abuses.   He  has,
    himself, specifically cited the report of the United  Nations  Economic
    and Social Council Commission on Human Rights  dated  27th  March  2006
    which identifies that the LTTE identified those Tamils opposed to  them
    as  traitors  and  their  opponents,  and  often  murdered  to  enforce
    obedience within the Tamil population.

30. Further reports, such as the Information Bulletin  Number  47  of  17th
    April 2009 University Teachers for Human Rights  Jaffna  monitored  the
    situation in Sri Lanka following the 2002 ceasefire during the time  of
    the appellant's involvement with the LTTE and evidenced that  the  LTTE
    continued to commit international crimes on a widespread and systematic
    basis, and noted for example that the

         "LTTE has no excuse for killing of any civilians"

    As noted by one human rights group

         "the LTTE went on targeting their perceived opponents and increased
         forcible child recruitment amidst the ceremony of peace  talks  ...
         The peace process became meaningless without any mechanism in place
         to restrain the LTTE or the government  from  human  rights  abuses
         targeted killings and all like rhetoric."

31. Jane's Intelligence Review 1st March 2006 states that by  January  2006
    there had been a total of 3,500 ceasefire violations committed  by  the
    LTTE.

32. Finally, the University Teachers for Human  Rights  Bulletin  38  dated
    21st July 2005 recorded that

         "the  LTTE  were  holding  hundreds  of  civilians  for   suspected
         political dissent within  a  large  bunker  prisons  in  Vanni  and
         Batticoloa  and  indeed  the  UN  Special  Rapporteur  on  judicial
         executions reported in 2005 that the 'LTTE's classification of  its
         political opponents within the Tamil community as traitors and  its
         efforts to enforce obedience with killings constituted  fundamental
         violation of human rights ... the government and the LTTE had  both
         engaged  in  the  targeted  killing  of  individuals  suspected  of
         collaborating the other party  ..  the  LTTE  has  stepped  up  its
         indiscriminate attacks on civilians for  the  apparent  purpose  of
         terrorising the population"

    and in a special reference to Jaffna, which  is  the  locality  of  the
    appellant, the Special Rapporteur noted

         "the LTTE also commits extrajudicial executions  against  suspected
         informants and that "there are no exact statistics on the number of
         extrajudicial executions in  Jaffna.   In  part,  this  is  because
         enforced  disappearances  are  common  and  while   many   of   the
         disappeared are ultimately executed many others are not."

33. During 2007 and 2008 the International Crisis Group reported  that  the
    LTTE had systematically violated civil and political  rights  and  were
    responsible for killings in Jaffna and  other  areas  of  northern  Sri
    Lanka and described the LTTE as a ruthless terrorist organisation.

34. In the light of the above, we accept that  during  the  period  of  the
    appellant's claimed involvement with the LTTE its actions  fall  to  be
    characterised as a widespread  and  systematic  attack  directed  at  a
    civilian population.

The Appellant's Knowledge of the Widespread of Systematic Attacks

35. For the appellant's actions to be characterised as war crimes or crimes
    against humanity Article 7(1)  of  the  ICC  Statute  requires  serious
    grounds to consider that he committed  them  "with  knowledge"  of  the
    "widespread or system attack directed against any civilian  population"
    for example the Tamil population. In his first interview at question 40
    the appellant was asked about this role in the LTTE, and he stated

         "I  was  working  with  the  political  wing  that  was   gathering
         information about people who passed information to the army  or  to
         either paramilitary group.  Arranging places for  LTTE  members  to
         stay  when  they  visit,  arranging  food  supplies  for  them  and
         gathering intelligence information".

    He stated, when asked if he was high up in  the  LTTE  structure,  "you
    can't say that I was an ordinary member but  I  was  considered  to  be
    important".  When asked what kind of information he  gathered  he  said
    "information is about  people  who  have  connections  with  the  army,
    location of army camps, movements of the army like when they are coming
    or going into Tamil area" (question 54) and he was asked

         "What happened to the people you gave information about"

    and he responded

         "They were given warning by the LTTE not to work with the  army  or
         the paramilitary.  If they continued  to  do  without  heeding  the
         warning they were taken by LTTE to the LTTE controlled areas."

    When asked

         "What happened to them there."

    He responded

         "They were imprisoned there.  What else happened to  them  I  don't
         know."

    What else do you suspect may have happened to them?

         "Depending  on  the  crimes  they  committed  they  may  have  been
         punished."

    Question 58: What sort of crimes do you refer to?

    He answered

         "If they identified  any  LTTE  supporters  or  sympathisers  which
         resulted in those people being killed by the  army  then  they  may
         face severe punishment.

36. The appellant then went on to attempt to qualify that by  stating  that
    they would be given work to do in  the  LTTE  area  and  then  released
    afterwards but we do not accept that that would be classified as severe
    punishment.

37. It is inconceivable that the appellant would not know of the widespread
    or systematic attacks that took place in relation to those on  whom  he
    informed if he classified himself as important.  Not only did he  state
    that he was important within the LTTE organisation, he also stated that
    he had undergone fourteen days training as a fighter.   He  worked  for
    the LTTE for a considerable amount of time, that is  between  2004  and
    2007 and appeared to have engaged voluntarily with them.   Specifically
    the appellant gave evidence himself of the fact that he would inform on
    people and that they would be removed to other areas.  He was  able  to
    state when the ceasefire broke down in Sri Lanka,  which was in  August
    2006.  He  was  also  able  to  give  detailed  information  about  the
    movements of the army (AIR 2 question 38).

38. At question 41 AIR 2 he stated that he was not engaged  in  identifying
    informers but when asked "why did you say in your first interview  that
    part of your role was to identify informers"

    he responded,

         "So my role was to pass the  information  which  was  given  by  my
         friend to the LTTE beyond that I don't know who  the  informer  is,
         that's what I had mentioned in my first interview.  The information
         is given to you by your friend, you have to pass it to the LTTE,  I
         had even helped in giving them their parties and  collecting  their
         money, that is my main role"

    and in response to question 44, he said

         "If my colleague or friend gives me certain names then I will  pass
         the names on to the LTTE that my job finishes."

39. In response to question 44 "during the ceasefire period I travelled  to
    Killinochi very frequently so I passed the information to them  that  I
    had collected in Jaffna".

40. He, therefore,  confirmed  at  question  44  that  he  was  aware  that
    information was going from the informers to the LTTE.

41. When asked at question 53 AIR 2 what punishments would  informers  get,
    he said

         "As far as I know they would be taken to Killinochi and subject  to
         an enquiry some of them given a first time warning, sometimes  they
         may imprison them.  After that process I am not aware."

42. During this period the LTTE had no right to arrest or detain people  in
    the Jaffna area and transfer them from territory under the  control  of
    the Sri Lankan government  to  areas  under  the  LTTE  control  or  to
    administer punishment or detention particularly people he believed  had
    informed against them.  That people were subject to  forcible  transfer
    and/ or imprisonment, which the appellant knew about  is  considered  a
    war crime under Article 7(1) of the ICC Statute.

43. We turn to the  factors  to  be  considered  when  addressing  criminal
    complicity as set out in JS (Sri Lanka).  As JS paragraph 36 states

         "Put simply I would hold  an  accused  disqualified  under  Article
         1F(a) if there are serious reasons for considering him  voluntarily
         to have contributed in a  significant  way  to  the  organisation's
         ability to pursue its purpose of committing  war  crimes  of  where
         that his assistance will in fact further that purpose."

44.  The  key  question  is  whether  the  appellant  made  a   significant
    contribution to an organisation's ability  to  pursue  its  purpose  of
    committing war crimes or other crimes contrary to Article 1F(a).

45. The relevant various considerations include:

      1) the nature and size of the organisation;

      2) whether and by whom the organisation was proscribed;

      3) how the asylum seeker was recruited;

      4) the length of time spent in the organisation;

      5) his position, rank, standing and influence in the organisation;

      6) his knowledge of the organisation's war crimes activities; and

      7)  his  own  personal  involvement  and  role  in  the   organisation
         particularly whatever contribution he made to the  commissioner  of
         war crimes.

46. The appellant worked voluntarily for the LTTE between  2004  and  2007.
    The activities of the LTTE have been cited above.  As can be identified
    from the information above, the  asylum  interviews,  specifically  the
    second interview, and his oral evidence the appellant's position,  rank
    and standing and the influence in the organisation were  such  that  he
    stated he was important.  He was in a position to hand over information
    leading to a person's forcible removal, detention and punishment.  This
    he accepts he knew as indicated in Article 30 of the ICC  Statute.   It
    is plain that if a person is aware  that  in  the  ordinary  course  of
    events a particular consequence will follow  from  his  actions  he  is
    taken to have acted both with knowledge and intent.

47. It is quite clear from the responses given by the appellant  in  either
    of his asylum interviews that he was voluntarily  contributing  to  the
    LTTE's ability to pursue its purpose of war crimes  as  it  extended  a
    regime of fear and intimidation particularly of removing and  detaining
    those it considered to be informants or those assisting with the  army.



48. As seen from Article 7(1)  of  the  ICC  Statute,  the  deportation  or
    forcible  transfer  of  population,  imprisonment   or   other   severe
    depravation of physical liberty, and violation of the fundamental rules
    of international law, are defined as crimes against humanity. It is  on
    the appellant's own evidence that he contributed to that by passing  on
    messages as to the identity of those informants which led and  here  is
    the nexus to their transfer, detention or punishment.

49. Individual criminal responsibility extends to lesser participants;  see
    SK [2010] UKUT 327 and although  KJ  (Sri  Lanka)  made  clear  a  foot
    soldier would be excluded, the key test is as set out in JS.   To  that
    end the appellant has accepted his own personal involvement and role in
    the organisation and accepted that he made a contribution  towards  the
    apprehension and detention and removal of people from Jaffna.

50. With regard to aiding and abetting the question is whether a given  act
    constitutes substantial assistance to a crime.  This  requires  a  fact
    based enquiry.  Practical assistance can be given before or  after  the
    act.  In international  criminal  law  aiding  means  knowingly  giving
    assistance to someone. Passing the names to higher authorities  in  the
    knowledge that those persons would be  punished  must  fall  into  this
    category.  Had he not passed on the  name  the  information  relay  and
    connection would be broken such that a person would not be identified.

51. In our view the  appellant's  work  passing  on  information  regarding
    suspects between 2004 and 2007 made a significant contribution  to  the
    detention and punishment of such persons and he knew  this  to  be  so.
    Reference is made to the credibility of the appellant and we have noted
    carefully his oral evidence as given to the First-tier Tribunal.

52. We can accept that simply being a member of the LTTE is not sufficient,
    but there is a significant difference between just being a member, and,
    passing information up a chain such that civilians will be  identified.
    Reliance on the defence of superior orders was  specifically  abandoned
    at the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  although  the
    appellant in oral evidence stated that  he  passed  information  mainly
    about the army and the movements of the army it was quite clear, on his
    own evidence, that this was not all that he did.  Although he stated in
    oral evidence he did not know what others would decide  in  respect  of
    the individuals his instruction was to pass  the  information  on.   He
    agreed that he had stated to the Home Office that he was aware  if  the
    people had been warned before they  were  likely  to  be  punished  but
    claimed that at the time he was not actually aware that they would  be.
    That is entirely inconsistent with his asylum interviews as  identified
    above. It is no explanation to say that the LTTE were involved in peace
    talks that they would not be able to punish individuals and  that  they
    did not do so during the ceasefire.  Indeed,  that  is  not  consistent
    with the evidence either his own or the background evidence.

53. He maintains that he was confused during the interview  with  the  Home
    Office and that is why he changed his role  to  communications  officer
    from intelligence officer but he confirmed that he was in  good  health
    during the interview.  Whatever the name of the role and whether he was
    intelligence officer or communications officer  is  irrelevant,  as  he
    identified what he had actually undertaken as described above.  Indeed,
    as recorded in the oral evidence at  paragraph  52  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision

         "He stated he continued to help by gathering  information  for  the
         LTTE.  He stated the information  included  about  people  who  had
         connections to the army.  He explained that the people  were  given
         warnings and if they did not heed the warning they  were  taken  to
         the LTT controlled areas and imprisoned there.  He stated  that  he
         did not know what else happened to them.  He stated though that  he
         suspected they may have been punished some severely."

54. In respect of Article 1F(a) it  is  clear  that  the  subject  gathered
    information and transmitted intelligence on informers according to  his
    first interview or transmitted intelligence on informers  to  the  LTTE
    according to the second interview.  He did this  in  the  knowledge  of
    what would happen to them.  This gives serious reasons for  considering
    that the subject was part of a joint criminal enterprise to commit  the
    war crimes and/or crimes against humanity  as  identified  above.   The
    other members of this  joint  criminal  enterprise  included  the  LTTE
    personnel who gathered intelligence and informers, the  LTTE  personnel
    who detained informers and then the senior LTTE officers  to  whom  the
    subject transmitted intelligence reports.

55. The question of the credibility of the appellant was raised but bearing
    in mind the information that the appellant was able to give,  and  that
    he has voluntarily and willingly described his role  in  the  LTTE  and
    produced a credible account of serving with the LTTE, we find that  his
    first interview reflects more accurately as to  his  knowledge  of  and
    involvement in LTTE activities. The second interview is an  attempt  to
    distance himself from those crimes.  This is an  intelligent  appellant
    who confirmed that he studied at the University of Jaffna in  2002  and
    then became involved  in  politics  and,  in  2005  in  demonstrations.
    Following that in 2005 he engaged in military  training  for  the  LTTE
    albeit for only 14 days.  On completion of his training he returned  to
    university in Jaffna.

56. We note that in joint  criminal  enterprise  the  participant's  mental
    state can amount to recklessness  and  even  negligence  but,  in  this
    instance, because the appellant volunteered in his interviews and  oral
    evidence (see the oral evidence recorded  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision paragraph 52 and recited above) that he knowingly  engaged  in
    the execution of a  common  criminal  purpose.   The  gravity  of  such
    participation is no less than that of carrying out the act in question.
     He continued with his work after the ceasefire ended in  August  2006.
    He stated that he worked in the Jaffna area until  2007  and  left  Sri
    Lanka in 2008.

57. We thus  conclude  that  he  knew  what  he  was  doing  and  knew  the
    consequences.  We find that the evidence as we have set it out  is  not
    consistent with a finding that he embellished his role.  The  exclusion
    report toys with the possibility that he was not credible but  in  view
    of the extensive evidence he has given both in his role  in  the  LTTE,
    the time spent, the training given and the work he did we find that  he
    was credible and consistent with regards his actual work.

58. There are indeed "serious grounds for considering  that  the  appellant
    has voluntarily contributed in a significant way to the  organisation's
    ability to pursue its purpose for committing war crimes, aware that his
    assistance will in fact further that purpose".

59. With regard to Article 1F(b) the appellant stated that  whilst  serving
    under cover in a communications role for the LTTE in Jaffna in 2004  to
    2007 he transmitted messages from  fellow  LTTE  members  to  his  LTTE
    superior officers in the Vanni region requesting the supply of weapons;
    and that as a result of these requests weapons were sent from the  LTTE
    controlled  territory  into  government  controlled   territory.    The
    appellant claims that he was not aware of how any of the weapons  whose
    transfer he facilitated were used once they reached Jaffna.  As set out
    in the Exclusion Report the importation,  possession  and  transfer  of
    weapons in Sri Lanka  was  regulated  under  the  Sri  Lankan  Firearms
    Ordnance No. 33 of 1916.  The appellant confirmed that he was operating
    undercover, and communicated in code, and arranged the  procurement  of
    weapons on behalf of the terrorist organisation.  That  in  turn  gives
    serious reasons for considering  that  the  weapons  in  question  were
    illegally imported or that those who requested the  supply  of  weapons
    did not hold the requisite documentation to own  or  transfer  weapons.
    It was accepted the appellant had not personally  handled  the  weapons
    but he sent coded messages requesting arms and  ammunitions.   He  thus
    made a significant contribution  to  the  process  by  which  the  LTTE
    members in the Jaffna area were able to acquire arms and ammunition. In
    both of his asylum interviews he referred  to  his  passing  of  secret
    messages for the movement of weapons (AIR 1 Qs  119  and  AIR  2  Q72).
    Although he did not handle the weapons those weapons included  claymore
    mines.  This gives serious reasons for considering that  the  appellant
    committed  serious  non-political  crimes,  that  is  the  movement  of
    unauthorised weaponry  and  as  such  fell  to  be  excluded  from  the
    protection of the Refugee Convention under Article 1F(b).

60. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.   We  set  aside
    the decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007) and remake the decision  under  section
    12(2) (b) (ii) of the TCE 2007.

61. We therefore allow the appeal of the Secretary of State and dismiss the
    appellant's appeal against the revocation of his refugee status.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                             Date 27th July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                             Date 27th July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington





