
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11877/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23 May 2016                           | On 16 June 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [S K]
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Jaisri, Counsel, instructed by VJ Nathan
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease of reference, I shall hereafter refer to the parties  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal: the  Secretary  of  State  is  the
    Respondent and the Appellant is once more the Appellant.

 2. This is the remaking of the decision on the Appellant's appeal  against
    the Respondent's decision of 17 August 2015,  refusing  his  protection
    and human rights claims. By a decision promulgated on 27 April 2016,  I
    found that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had materially erred in law in
    respect of his assessment of the Appellant's Article 8 claim.  On  this
    basis alone I set his decision aside.

 3. The Judge had dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  in  respect  of  the
    protection claim, and that aspect of his decision was not challenged. I
    specifically preserved the findings on the protection claim,  and  this
    issue is no longer live.

The Appellant's Article 8 case in summary

 4. The Appellant's case is based upon claimed  medical  conditions  which,
    when taken in the context of the evidence as whole,  would  render  his
    removal to Sri Lanka disproportionate.

 5. He was born on [ ] 1937. It is said that he suffers from depression and
    dementia. These conditions have come to the fore  since  the  Appellant
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 23 May 2013 as a visitor. It  is  also
    said that none of the Appellant's large family remain in Sri  Lanka:  a
    son and daughter live in this country  and  his  wife  and  five  other
    children are in India. The Appellant is said to be dependent  upon  his
    son in the United Kingdom, and that he would not be  able  to  cope  if
    removed.

The evidence before me

 6. I have the original Respondent's appeal  bundle  containing  the  usual
    constituent parts: interviews, the reasons for refusal letter and  some
    supporting evidence.

 7. From the Appellant I have the bundle that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (AB1, indexed and paginated 1-71) and a  supplementary  bundle
    served for the purposes of the continuation hearing (AB2,  indexed  and
    paginated 1-12).

 8. The Appellant attended the hearing but did not give evidence. His  son,
    [KC] also attended. He did give oral evidence, a full note of which  is
    contained in the Record of Proceedings.

 9. In summary, the Appellant's son's oral  evidence  was  as  follows.  He
    adopted his statements, contained in AB1 and AB2. In  cross-examination
    he said that the Appellant's health got much  worse  in  October  2013.
    None of the Appellant's family remained in Sri Lanka: the wife had left
    in 2007/2008, and the children at various stages.  Most  recently,  two
    had gone to India in 2014. He  said  that  three  family  members  were
    living in a refugee camp in India, whilst the others were  residing  in
    house. They were, he said, recognised as  refugees  in  India.  It  was
    stated that the last two children left Sri Lanka due to  problems  from
    the authorities linked to the Appellant.

10. [KC] confirmed that the family had land in Sri Lanka, and that they had
    been financially sound when living there. The  Appellant's  health  was
    good when he arrived in the  United  Kingdom.  Subsequently,  he  began
    forgetting things. Things were gradually getting worse. The GP had been
    told about the mental/cognitive health problems about two  weeks  prior
    to the hearing. The Appellant was on a waiting list. In respect of  the
    children in India going to Sri Lanka to assist the  Appellant,  it  was
    said that they did  not  have  passports  and  had  problems  from  the
    authorities there.

11. I asked about the health conditions. [KC] said that the  Appellant  had
    not been on medications before going to the GP. The GP  had  asked  the
    family to make an appointment with mental health services.  There  have
    been no scans or referrals for the  dementia.  The  GP  said  that  the
    Appellant should not be left alone. They went to see the GP  two  weeks
    ago about foot problems and the GP told them  to  make  an  appointment
    with a psychiatrist.

12. In re-examination it was said that the "waiting list"  referred  to  in
    paragraph 30 of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision  related  to
    memory problems. The Appellant was asked questions by  Dr  Dhumad  when
    the first report was prepared. [KC] was also asked  questions.  He  was
    asked if the Appellant's answers were correct.

The Respondent's submissions

13. Mr Kotas relied on  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter.  There  was  no
    evidence from the family allegedly in India. If some were  in  fact  in
    Sri Lanka, the Appellant's case  would  fail.  There  was  no  reliable
    evidence as to why family could not return to Sri Lanka. In respect  of
    the  medical  issues,  the  Appellant  was  not  receiving   specialist
    treatment,  Dr  Dhumad's  reports  were  deficient,   and   there   was
    insufficient evidence to show dependency. At its highest, the case  was
    that the Appellant had dementia and depression. He  would  require  NHS
    treatment and this was relevant to section 117B of the 2002 Act. It  is
    conceded by the Appellant that he cannot meet the requirements  of  the
    Article 8 Rules, and this is significant.

14. Mr Jaisri did not have a skeleton argument. He noted  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had not made adverse credibility  findings  against
    the Appellant. The Appellant's family no longer resided in  Sri  Lanka.
    Whilst there may be financial support available to the Appellant in Sri
    Lanka, there would not be emotional support from the  family.  Reliance
    was placed on the reports of Dr Dhumad. It  would  be  better  for  the
    Appellant to be cared for by family members.

15. The issue of suicide was not being "pushed". The fitness to  fly  issue
    was not being pursued at all.

Legal framework

16. This is a 'new style' appeal under the amended provisions of  the  2002
    Act. The protection issue  has  already  been  determined  against  the
    Appellant. Thus, the only issue for me to "determine"  is  whether  the
    Appellant's removal from the United Kingdom  would  be  unlawful  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

17. I cannot allow or dismiss the appeal "under the  Rules",  as  it  were.
    However, I direct myself that the ability or otherwise to satisfy those
    provisions of the Rules which bear on  Article  8  remains  a  relevant
    factor  in  assessing  the  claim  under  the  well-established  Razgar
    approach. In addition, I will take all relevant aspects of section 117B
    of the 2002 Act into account, together with any further matters I  deem
    to be appropriate to the balancing exercise.

18. The burden of proving the material facts rests with the  Appellant  and
    the standard of proof is that of a balance of probabilities.

19. I assess the facts as at the date of hearing.

Findings of fact and reasons

The Appellant's family members

20. I am just about prepared to accept that the Appellant's wife and  seven
    children have all in fact now left Sri Lanka. I find that his wife  and
    five children are in India and that a son and a daughter reside in  the
    United Kingdom.

21. In large part this is on the basis that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    accepted that this was the case (see paragraph 33 of his decision), and
    this finding was not challenged in the Respondent's grounds of  appeal.
    In addition, this fact is mentioned in the Appellant's own statement of
    16 December 2015 (1A AB1). This evidence is  consistent  with  that  of
    [KC] before me.

22. However, I do not accept that none of the family members  currently  in
    India could not quite reasonably return to Sri Lanka if  the  Appellant
    himself were to be removed there. My reasons for this are as follows.

23. First, although it has been said that  they  are  there  as  recognised
    refugees (or at  least  putative  refugees),  there  is  no  supporting
    evidence  for  this  assertion.  There  is  no   documentary   evidence
    indicating status of any kind. On [KC]'s evidence, the  family  members
    have been in India since 2014 at the latest. It  is  also  stated  that
    some of them live in a refugee camp. It is,  I  find,  highly  unlikely
    that there would not be some form of official  documentation  available
    to show their  status.  Certainly,  if  any  of  them  were  recognised
    refugees, formal evidence of this would exist.  There  has  been  ample
    time in which to produce supporting evidence of residence  and  status.
    None has been forthcoming. There is not  even  any  evidence  from  the
    children themselves.

24. Second, in terms of any subjective fear of returning to  Sri  Lanka  on
    the part of family members, this does not assist the Appellant's  case.
    The Appellant's own protection claim was  rejected  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in late 2015 and this was upheld by me  in  my  error  of  law
    decision in April 2016. One would reasonably assume, given  that  there
    is contact between the family in this country and those in India,  that
    this outcome has been communicated. If it has  not,  this  could  quite
    easily be done.

25. This is relevant because [KC] told me that his siblings in  India  were
    in fear because of the Appellant. However, if there is no real risk  to
    the Appellant, any risk to his children (said to be predicated upon his
    own  profile)  would  necessarily  be  much  lower  still.  Thus,   any
    subjective fear remaining is unfounded.

The Appellant's health

26. I have several concerns about the evidence relating to this issue.

27. I bear in mind that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make  adverse
    credibility findings against the Appellant or indeed [KC].  However,  I
    am assessing the evidence for myself, including evidence that  was  not
    before that Judge. I note too that the Judge had his own concerns about
    some aspects of the medical evidence (see paragraph 30).

28. My first concern is as follows. I have been told that  the  Appellant's
    health on arrival in May 2013 was good. It is said  that  this  changed
    dramatically in October 2013. However, when the Screening Interview was
    conducted on 18 November and 20 December 2013 no health conditions were
    raised and the Appellant stated  that  he  was  fit  and  well.  It  is
    apparent that relevant details were provided in respect of  his  family
    members, addresses and such like. Then, on  17  January  2014,  a  full
    Asylum  Interview  was  conducted.  This  ran  to  203  questions.  The
    Appellant confirmed that he was fit and well at the outset and the  end
    of the interview. There are  no  indications  in  the  record  of  that
    interview of any mental health or cognitive  problems.  There  were  no
    post-interview representations suggesting that the  Appellant  had  had
    problems in the interviews.

29. The evidence of the two interviews is, I find,  significantly  at  odds
    with the claimed serious deterioration in the Appellant's health only a
    couple of months previously.

30. Further, notwithstanding evidence that  the  Appellant  is  effectively
    incapable of  caring  for  himself  or  giving  evidence  at  court  or
    providing coherent  information,  he  did  provide  a  perfectly  lucid
    nineteen-paragraph witness statement in December 2015 (1A-1D  AB1).  It
    has not been explained to me how this was possible. It clearly does not
    sit well with the other assertions being made by [KC] and Dr Dhumad.

31. My second concern relates to the evidence from Dr Dhumad.  I  have  two
    reports from him, dated 29 May 2014 (32 AB1) and 5 May 2016 (3 AB3).

32. The first report followed an interview with  the  Appellant  on  1  May
    2014, less than four  months  after  the  full  Asylum  Interview.  The
    apparent inconsistency  in  the  Appellant's  cognitive  and/or  mental
    health impairment as between these two interviews is not  addressed  by
    Dr Dhumad  at  all  despite  him  apparently  having  seen  the  Asylum
    Interview record and there being a clear instruction  provided  by  the
    solicitors  to  deal  with  communication  issues  relating  to  formal
    questioning. There is, I find,  a  material  omission  in  Dr  Dhumad's
    assessment. This affects the weight to be attributed to the report.

33. Having regard to Dr Dhumad's CV, I see no reference to any expertise in
    assessing/diagnosing dementia. This might not of  itself  preclude  him
    from being able to test and comment on the matter, but I view  what  he
    says in this context.

34. Based on the Appellant's score in a MMSE test, Dr Dhumad concludes that
    there was an indication of "moderate cognitive  impairment  (Dementia)"
    (38 AB1). I m unclear whether this is tantamount to a formal diagnosis,
    or whether it is somewhat tentative because a full assessment  had  not
    been undertaken. I incline towards the latter view, as Dr  Dhumad  goes
    on to say that a "full dementia workup" and referral to a memory clinic
    was recommended. Therefore, I cannot necessarily take from Dr  Dhumad's
    report that the Appellant in fact had dementia.

35. The second report refers to a second MMSE test and a score of 11 out of
    a possible 27 (8 AB2). It is said at  one  point  that  this  indicates
    "moderate dementia." However, in a subsequent paragraph Dr Dhumad  then
    states  that  the  Appellant's  presentation  was  consistent  with   a
    diagnosis of  moderate  to  severe  Depressive  Episode  and  cognitive
    impairment (possibly dementia)" (underlining added). I find it  unclear
    and indeed inconsistent that on the one hand  it  is  said  on  several
    occasions in the two reports that the  condition  is  dementia,  whilst
    then appearing to row back from this by concluding that the  impairment
    might be dementia.

36. What I say above leaves me with a distinct sense that either Dr  Dhumad
    simply cannot and has not diagnosed dementia at all,  or  that  he  has
    purported to do so but has provided unclear conclusions on  the  issue.
    On  either  scenario,  the  weight  I  attribute  to  the  evidence  is
    diminished.

37. I find that Dr Dhumad's comments that the Appellant was unfit  to  give
    evidence at that time (38 AB1) and was unable to  provide  a  factually
    consistent and accurate account of his history (39 AB1) is at odds with
    what occurred in the Screening  and  Asylum  interviews.  As  mentioned
    previously, this issue has not been addressed by Dr Dhumad.

38. Both Dr Dhumad's reports refer to a risk of suicide (38 AB1 and 8 AB2).
    In fairness to Mr Jaisri, he has somewhat distanced himself  from  this
    aspect of the evidence, and has not sought  to  "push"  this  point.  I
    place little weight on Dr Dhumad's view that the  risk  of  suicide  is
    "high". There is no evidence that the Appellant sought to harm  himself
    when the Respondent refused his claims and threatened him with removal.
    Further, it is only very thinly reasoned in  the  reports.  Finally,  I
    already have found that there will be family members who  could  be  in
    Sri Lanka to support the Appellant.

39. At paragraph 5.5 of the  second  report  Dr  Dhumad  states,  "He  [the
    Appellant] is unfit to fly." This bold conclusion is wholly unsupported
    by any reasons or evidence. Mr Jaisri was in my quite right not to rely
    on this point at all. I find that the conclusion is baseless.  It  does
    nothing but add to my serious concerns about the quality and content of
    the reports as a whole.

40. The fact that the second report repeatedly refers  to  "2015"  for  the
    date of the first report rather than "2014" may not be of great import,
    but it does nothing to assist my overall view of the evidence.

41. In the first report Dr Dhumad states  the  "fact"  that  the  Appellant
    required constant help and full-time care from [KC] (38-39  AB1).  With
    respect, this 'statement of facts' can only have been on the  basis  of
    what the Appellant and/or [KC] told Dr Dhumad. The author  had  not  of
    carried out any full care  assessment.  There  had  been  no  dementia-
    related care assessment by anyone (and there still has  not).  I  place
    little weight upon what are apparently stated by  Dr  Dhumad  as  being
    "facts" derived from direct knowledge.

42. Despite my numerous concerns with the  evidence  of  Dr  Dhumad,  I  do
    accept that he was able to and did make a diagnosis of  depression.  It
    is said to be  a  "moderate  to  severe"  Depressive  Episode  in  both
    reports. I accept that the Appellant has been  and  is  suffering  from
    depression. However, taking the evidence as a  whole  (that  considered
    above and below) I find that it is not of a severe level.

43. There is no diagnosis of PTSD and I find that the  Appellant  does  not
    suffer from this condition.

44. My third concern with the evidence relating to the  Appellant's  health
    is what I find to be the glaring absence  of  any  relevant  treatment,
    referrals or assessments.

45. Taking the evidence from [KC] and Dr Dhumad at face value  for  present
    purposes, the Appellant has, since late 2013  and  certainly  no  later
    than May 2014, been  suffering  from  two  serious  health  conditions:
    depression and dementia, with all the care needs  resulting  therefrom.
    Indeed, in his first report Dr Dhumad recommends that the Appellant  be
    prescribed antidepressant medication and a  full  dementia  assessment,
    together with a referral (37-38 AB1).

46. Despite this, and what one might expect to be  the  great  concerns  of
    [KC], I find that no steps have been taken to  access  any  assessment,
    treatments, or other  care  for  the  Appellant  (aside  from  the  two
    appointments with Dr Dhumad, a year apart). Based on my  assessment  of
    oral evidence I find that the Appellant's GP was only informed  of  the
    possible health issues some two weeks prior to the hearing  before  me.
    Even then, I find that the visit was prompted by  a  problem  with  the
    Appellant's feet. In fact, the issue of the feet is  the  only  medical
    matter recorded in the supporting evidence (leaving aside  Dr  Dhumad's
    reports - see 46-58 AB1).

47. It is, I find, extraordinary that the Appellant has not been to see his
    GP (with whom he has been registered since at least early 2014 - see 46
    AB1) previously about the claimed serious  health  issues  relating  to
    depression and dementia if these in fact are  as  serious  as  claimed.
    Even if a prompt were required, Dr Dhumad provided this  in  May  2014.
    And yet nothing was done. As a result, the  Appellant  is  not  on  any
    relevant treatment for depression and there has been no  full  dementia
    assessment. I find that there has not even been a referral by  the  GP.
    This undermines the overall credibility of the  claim  that  there  are
    significant mental health and cognitive problems.

48. In light of the evidence as a whole, references to a "waiting list" are
    not, I find, any reliable evidence of a  formal  referral  having  been
    made to a neurologist or any other dementia  specialist.  There  is  no
    documentary evidence of this and  [KC]'s  evidence  on  this  issue  in
    general was poor.

49. The timing of the very recent disclose to the GP  about  matters  other
    than the feet is, I find, more  than  a  coincidence.  It  follows  the
    upholding of the First-tier  Tribunal's  rejection  of  the  protection
    claim and the possibility  that  the  Article  8  claim  was  open  for
    remaking by myself in due course.

50. There has been no credible explanation (indeed, no explanation at  all)
    for the inaction as regards the Appellant's health.

51. I now bring my findings on the Appellant's health together.

52. Ultimately, having had regard to the evidence as a whole, I  find  that
    the Appellant does suffer from depression, but that this is  not  at  a
    severe level: it may be mild to moderate at best.

53. I find that the Appellant does not suffer from dementia.  The  evidence
    on this as a whole is simply too unreliable.  If  I  were  wrong  about
    this, I would find that any onset of dementia is  certainly  not  at  a
    significant level at this time.

54. In my view, the reality of the situation is that the  Appellant  is  an
    elderly man who will want and receive a degree of assistance from those
    around him given his stage in life. In  light  of  the  evidence  as  a
    whole, I do not accept that the levels of care claimed by [KC] and  re-
    stated in Dr Dhumad's reports, are required as  a  result  of  specific
    health conditions. The unsatisfactory nature of much  of  the  evidence
    has rendered the picture painted of the  Appellant's  circumstances  in
    this country unreliable.

Other matters

55. I accept that the Appellant has a  good  relationship  with  [KC],  his
    wife, their children, and the Appellant's daughter and  her  family  in
    this country. That much is hardly surprising.

56. I find that the family retains land in Sri Lanka, as confirmed by  [KC]
    in his evidence. There is nothing to suggest that it has been lost.

57. I find that there would be, should the Appellant return to  Sri  Lanka,
    the very real probability of financial support from the family  in  the
    United Kingdom and any whom would remain in India. I have already found
    that family members could return to Sri Lanka from India.



Conclusions on the Article 8 claim

Private and family life

58. I find that the Appellant does have a private  life  in  this  country,
    albeit a rather tenuous one. He has been here since 2013 and has  lived
    with his son. He sees his daughter regularly. There  relationships  are
    all part and parcel of a private life.

59. As regards family life, in light of my  findings  of  fact,  I  do  not
    accept that the test in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 has been  met.  The
    Appellant is elderly and can expect some help  from  his  children.  In
    this context, that is perfectly  understandable  and  normal.  However,
    there is nothing beyond this level.

Interference

60. Removal would probably result in a  sufficiently  serious  interference
    with the private life. The Appellant would be removed from his  current
    life with his son.

In accordance with the law and legitimate aim

61. These matters are not in dispute and both questions are answered in the
    affirmative.

Proportionality

62. I take the following matters into account, all of which  have  to  been
    seen in the context of my findings of fact.

63. The public interest lies in maintaining effective immigration  control.
    This is a weighty factor in the Respondent's favour.

64. It has been conceded throughout that the Appellant cannot  satisfy  the
    Rules, either in respect of paragraph 276ADE  or  the  Adult  Dependent
    Relative provisions under Appendix  FM.  This  is  also  a  significant
    factor against the Appellant.  The  Rules  continue  to  represent  the
    Respondent's view, approved by Parliament,  as  to  where  the  balance
    rests between the interests  of  the  public  and  the  rights  of  the
    individual. Here, it is been accepted that the  Appellant  cannot  meet
    the substantive requirements  of  the  relevant  Rules.  Even  if  this
    position had not been taken, I would conclude that the Appellant  could
    not satisfy the Rules, based upon my findings of fact.

65. The Appellant has only ever been  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  a  very
    precarious basis. He entered as a visitor  and  sought  asylum  shortly
    after the leave expired. The weight to be  attributed  to  the  private
    life is thereby reduced significantly.

66. The Appellant has accessed the NHS and would continue to do  so  if  he
    remained in the United Kingdom. This in  turn  has  a  bearing  on  the
    public purse. I take this into account.

67. The Appellant's health is not as it has been claimed  to  be.  He  does
    have depression at a  mild  to  moderate  level,  and  he  may  (on  my
    alternative finding, above) have the early onset of dementia,  although
    not at a significant level.  There  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that
    depression cannot be treated in Sri Lanka. Financial support  would  be
    available from the family for any treatment.

68. The Appellant is seventy-nine  years  old,  and  that  brings  with  it
    certain frailties. I take this into account. Older age does not however
    represent a compelling factor.

69. [KC] is a refugee in the United Kingdom and I accept that he would  not
    travel to Sri Lanka. The Appellant's removal would clearly put  pay  to
    the status quo in terms of living arrangements. [KC]'s  children  would
    no doubt miss their grandfather being present in their lives.  However,
    there is no reason why visits could not be sought by the  Appellant  to
    this country, or to India. Other non-direct  methods  of  communication
    could be used as well.  There  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
    Appellant's  departure  would  have  a  significant   impact   on   the
    grandchildren in this  country.  The  same  reasoning  applies  to  the
    Appellant's daughter here.

70. I have found that other family members would be able to go to Sri Lanka
    to assist in supporting the Appellant (such as that is required  in  an
    emotional and/or  practical  sense).  There  would  also  be  financial
    support available.

71. There are no protection issues of course.

72. I can see no compelling factors in this case.

73. Removal would therefore be proportionate.

Decision
The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.
I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
I re-make the decision by determining that the Appellant's removal from  the
United Kingdom would not be unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human  Rights
Act 1998.
Therefore, the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                       Date: 15 June 2016

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal








TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date:  15 June 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


Annex 1: the Error of law decision

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11877/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 April 2016                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [S K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Jaisri, Counsel, instructed by VJ Nathan
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease of reference I shall refer to the parties as they were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. Thus, the Secretary of State is the Respondent
    and [SK] is once more the Appellant.

 2. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Sweet (the judge), promulgated on 12  January  2016,  in
    which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal  on  protection  grounds  but
    allowed it under Article 8 ECHR.




The judge's decision

 3. The judge dealt first with the protection claim element of the  appeal.
    Whilst not  providing  particularly  clear  findings  of  fact,  it  is
    apparent from paragraph 31 of his decision that  the  judge  found  the
    Appellant to be broadly credible as having had  some  involvement  with
    the LTTE in the past.  The judge concluded that, "there was  some  risk
    on return".  However he went on to conclude that in  light  of  GJ  and
    Others (Post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT  319,  the
    Appellant was not at risk on return.

 4. At paragraph 33 the judge goes on to consider the Article 8 element  of
    the appeal.  He notes the concession by Appellant's  counsel  that  the
    Rules could not be met.  In respect of the Article 8 claim  outside  of
    the Rules the judge says the following:

         "Taking into account his age (79), his ill-health and the fact that
         his wife and children are in India (not Sri  Lanka)  and  following
         the criteria set out in Razgar I have concluded that  it  would  be
         disproportionate for him to return to Sri Lanka.   I  am  satisfied
         that his reason for coming to the UK in May 2013 was indeed a visit
         to see his family members and I have serious concerns as to whether
         it was ever his intention to return to Sri Lanka  after  his  stay.
         He claimed asylum within two weeks  after  his  visa  had  expired,
         which I do not  think  is  an  inordinate  delay.   Though  I  have
         rejected his asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  claim,  I  have
         concluded that it would be disproportionate for  the  Appellant  to
         return to Sri Lanka, therefore his appeal under Article ECHR should
         succeed."

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. Given the contents of paragraph  33  of  the  judge's  decision  quoted
    above, it  is  perhaps  unsurprising  that  the  Respondent  sought  to
    challenge his decision.  The grounds in essence assert that  the  judge
    had failed to have regard to and apply the provisions of  section  117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  failed  to  take
    into account the fact that the Appellant could not meet the Immigration
    Rules in respect of Article 8, and failed to give any or  any  adequate
    reasoning as to the significance of the Appellant's ill-health.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Deans, sitting
    as a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 23 February 2016.

Decision on error of law

 7. There are a number of clear material  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.

 8. The entire extent of the Article 8 consideration is contained within  a
    fairly brief  paragraph  in  the  decision  (paragraph  33,  as  quoted
    previously).  It is abundantly clear from this paragraph that the judge
    has failed to consider the relevant factors in section 117B, has failed
    to deal with the significance of the failure to  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules as regards Article 8, has failed to deal  in  any  way  with  the
    Kugathas issue, has  failed  to  make  findings  or  deal  in  any  way
    adequately with the medical aspect of the Appellant's  claim,  and  has
    failed to provide in general  any  clear  reasoning  for  his  ultimate
    conclusion that the appeal would succeed under Article 8 outside of the
    Rules.  In fairness to Mr Jaisri, he acknowledged the  shortcomings  in
    the judge's decision and I did not need to hear from Mr Kotas.  Because
    of the numerous and significant errors of  law,  the  judge's  decision
    must be set aside.

 9. The judge's conclusion on the protection claim has not been the subject
    of a cross-appeal, and therefore it stands.

Disposal

10. I have decided to  adjourn  this  appeal  within  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Ordinarily I would be re-making  the  decision  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before me but here there are a number of  outstanding  factual
    issues that require determination and in addition the medical evidence,
    such as it is, is almost a year old.  In my view  this  necessitates  a
    continuation hearing in due  course.   I  make  appropriate  directions
    below.

Anonymity

11. There is no longer any need for a direction and I do not make one.
