
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11015/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th November 2015                 |On 4th December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     IB
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A De Ruano (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Kandola (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge S Rodger, promulgated on 31st March 2015, following a hearing  at
    Taylor House on 11th March  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, who  subsequently  applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Albania, who was born  on  16th
    October 1983.  She appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State rejecting her claim that she had been trafficked  to
    work as a prostitute in Albania and that her life was at  risk  if  she
    were to be returned now.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she was in  a  relationship  with  an  AR
    between 2004 and 2006 and they married at the end of 2004 and lived  in
    Kosovo but her parents disapproved of the relationship.   The  marriage
    was not legally registered in Kosovo as he became  very  violent.   She
    became pregnant.  She did not  want  to  register  the  marriage.   The
    marriage ended in 2006.  When she returned back to her parents she  was
    not accepted by them.  She moved to Tirana and  lived  with  a  friend.
    She worked at a coffee shop.  She then met AS at the  coffee  shop  and
    they became friends for some six months and started a relationship.  He
    lent her 1,500 Euros to start a nursing course in October 2007  at  the
    university.  In December 2007 AS said that he wanted  the  money  back.
    She was not able to pay it back.  He forced her into prostitution.  She
    was living with AS at the time.  He forced her through threats  to  the
    family, especially her sisters, and was violent towards her and he  had
    a handgun.  AS kept all the money.  There were gangsters keeping an eye
    on her.  She was regularly beaten.  Her passport was  taken  away  from
    her.  Then a regular client by the name of B helped her to escape.  She
    gave him 2,500 Euros and she escaped to the UK in the back of a  lorry.
    She now fears being re-trafficked by AS or killed by him if she were to
    be returned to Albania.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge rejected the claim.  He  said  that  her  evidence  of  being
    trafficked and being forced to work at the hotel every  day  and  being
    accompanied on her journeys does not sit well with  her  evidence  that
    she travelled to and from work on the bus (see paragraph  46(7)).   The
    judge went on to say that even if he was wrong to  reject  the  account
    given by the Appellant she could  not  succeed  on  the  basis  of  the
    country guidance case of AM, "as she is an educated,  intelligent  lady
    who is likely to be from a relatively wealthy background  or  be  of  a
    high earning potential given that she was able to raise 2,500 Euros for
    her illegal passage to the UK" (paragraph 52).

 5. Her appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The Grounds of Appeal state that the judge attached too much importance
    to immaterial matters and placed too high a standard of  proof  on  the
    Appellant.

 7. On 6th July 2015, permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it
    was not clear where the judge  found  authority  for  his  comment  (at
    paragraph 46.2) that a prostitute would not normally be allowed to keep
    tips and it was not the Appellant's evidence that the  man  controlling
    her knew she was keeping her tips  in  any  event.   Moreover,  it  was
    accepted that the Appellant was rejected by her family after  returning
    from an abusive relationship and her father disowned her and threatened
    to kill her.

 8. On 30th July 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered to the effect that it
    will be noted that at paragraph 52 of the judge's  determination  there
    is "an in the alternative paragraph" so  that  there  was  no  material
    error of law at all.  However, the core claim finding at  paragraph  46
    is that the Appellant's evidence is littered with  inconsistencies  and
    the judge lists at  least  ten  examples  of  this.   Furthermore,  the
    judge's finding on prostitutes' tips is a finding made on the  evidence
    of this Appellant who claims to have been escorted to and from a  hotel
    for work and watched very closely over a period of five years and it is
    not something that needs authority if such a finding had been  made  on
    the evidence.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 6th November 2015, Mr Ruano,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that this was  a  challenge  to  the
    judge's findings of credibility.  There was, however, also a  challenge
    to the fact that there was a material error of fact.  For example,  the
    Appellant was asked to convert Euros in her oral evidence into  British
    pounds and she should have said  3,000  British  pounds  but  ended  up
    saying 3,000,000  when  she  converted  the  figure.   Furthermore,  at
    paragraphs 15 to 21 there are some facts  about  the  earlier  evidence
    that had already been accepted.  Finally, at  paragraph  52  the  judge
    states that even if  he  were  wrong  to  reject  the  account  of  the
    Appellant he will still find that there is no  risk  to  the  Appellant
    upon return to Albania because, "she is an educated,  intelligent  lady
    who is likely to be from a relatively wealthy background ..."

10. For his part, Mr Kandola relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response  of  the
    Secretary  of  State.   He  submitted  that   paragraph   21   of   the
    determination plainly sets out  what  is  accepted  and  what  is  not.
    Thereafter, from paragraph 42,  to  paragraph  52,  the  judge  clearly
    rejects the nub of the Appellant's claim.  The findings of  credibility
    were those for the judge to make on  the  evidence  before  him.   They
    cannot be challenged simply because the Appellant disagrees with  those
    findings.

11. In reply, Mr Ruano submitted that the judge had made  no  contradictory
    findings but he was wrong to say that because the Appellant  is  likely
    to be from a wealthy background she could not have been trafficked.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as  follows.   This  is  a  case  where  the  judge  has  fundamentally
    disbelieved the Appellant's claim in every respect.  He states that,

         "I find it difficult to accept any of the Appellant's evidence as I
         have found her to be an untruthful witness and I do not accept  any
         of her account.  I do not  accept  that  she  is  at  risk  from  a
         trafficker or a gang member if she were to return to  Albania  ..."
         (Paragraph 22).

13. The judge did not accept that she had been  married  as  there  was  no
    marriage certificate.  The judge did not accept that she  had  received
    any threats from her alleged traffickers.  He did not accept  that  she
    was at risk from her father.  He then relied upon paragraphs 153 to 155
    of the AM judgment (which is clearly set out at paragraph 53) and  held
    that the Appellant could not succeed.  This  is  nothing  more  than  a
    disagreement with the judge's findings.

14. It is salutary to bear in mind the Tribunal decision in  Shizad  [2013]
    UKUT 85 where it was made clear that, "although there is a  legal  duty
    to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on the central issue  in
    which an appeal is determined, these reasons need not be  extensive  if
    the decision as a whole  makes  sense".   This  is  a  case  where  the
    decision as a whole makes complete sense.

15. In the context of the determination, when read as a whole, the  judge's
    comments that the Appellant was from a wealthy family was not one  that
    would have  affected  the  outcome  of  this  appeal  in  any  way  and
    consequently I cannot find that there is an error of law such that this
    decision should be set aside.

16. On the contrary, the determination is clear and comprehensive, and  one
    that the judge was entirely open to reach.

Notice of Decision

17. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

18. No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    3rd December 2015

