
[pic]
IAC-BFD- MD

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11539/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th August 2015                  |On 11th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts


                                   Between

                          miss rasha abdullah ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk, of Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant Rasha Abdullah Ahmed who claims to be a citizen of  Syria
    was born 16th February 1988. Her claimed Syrian nationality is disputed
    by the Respondent who considers her to be a national of Iraq.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the UK sometime in early December 2013  having
    travelled via Turkey and a number of other unknown countries by  lorry.
    She was accompanied by her older brother  Jamal  who  is  disabled.  He
    suffers from spinal injuries resulting from an accident suffered  about
    10 years ago when he fell from a roof. He is wheelchair  bound  and  is
    dependent upon the Appellant's claim.

 3. Her claim to asylum amounts to this. She cannot return to Syria because
    she is an ethnic Kurd and would face mistreatment and sexual harassment
    due to the general situation in that country. Her brother,  because  of
    his disability, is unable to offer her protection. Her father  is  dead
    and she is now unaware of the whereabouts of her mother.  She last  saw
    her in Deryeki in Syria. She has a maternal uncle who  facilitated  her
    and her brother's entry to the UK, but the last she saw of him  was  in
    Turkey.

 4. The Respondent did not accept the Appellant's history.  She  considered
    the Appellant to be an Iraqi national founded on two  grounds:  a  LOID
    report and evidence that  the  appellant's  brother  had  made  a  past
    application for entry, in  which  he  described  himself  as  an  Iraqi
    citizen from Duhoq Iraq. That application contained a contact telephone
    number with an Iraqi dialling code. The Respondent  therefore  rejected
    the appellant's claim, concluding that as an Iraqi national  she  would
    not be at risk on return to Iraq.

 5. Both parties agree therefore, that  the  dispute  over  nationality  is
    central to this appeal.

FtT Hearing

 6. When the appeal came before Judge Birkby, two expert reports formed the
    central parts of the documentary evidence submitted for  consideration.



      . A LOID Report which concluded strongly that the  speech  spoken  by
        the Appellant showed that she belonged to  the  Kurdish  linguistic
        community that occurs in  Iraq.  The  Appellant's  language  was  a
        Kurmanji sub-dialect.

      . A report from Doctor Fatah. On  the  basis  of  his  co  linguistic
        examinations of the Appellant in both Kurmanji and  Syrian  Arabic,
        this concluded that the Appellant spoke Kurmanji to the level of  a
        native speaker from Dereyeki and that she also displayed  a  native
        fluency in Syrian Arabic, speaking with a clear Syrian dialect  and
        to a high level. He concluded, this  strongly  suggested  that  the
        Appellant is  a  Kurd  native  to  Syria;  but  then  tempered  his
        conclusions with the following remark,

             "...Both her Arabic and Kurdish accents and vocabulary suggest
             she is a native of Kurdish areas of Syria. Yet, that she -  an
             illiterate, uneducated tailor, who has never left the house in
             the village in which she has always lived - commands a  native
             fluency in two languages  to  the  level  of  a  well-educated
             individual remains striking."

 7. After  considering  the  documentary  evidence,  the  Appellant's  oral
    evidence and the interviews relating to her claim, the Judge  concluded
    that the evidence pointed to the Appellant being an Iraqi national  and
    therefore not in need of protection in Syria. In other words  he  found
    her claim to be an illiterate Syrian national not made out. He found he
    was also satisfied that the Appellant was from Iraq.

The UT Hearing

 8. Mr Schwenk for the Appellant, advanced three grounds  of  challenge  to
    Judge Birkby's decision, which cumulatively, he said amounted to  legal
    error requiring the decision to be set aside and remade.

 9. The first ground of challenge revolves around  the  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's credibility with particular reference  to  what  the  Judge
    says at  [28].  He  submitted  that  when  it  came  to  assessing  the
    Appellant's credibility the Judge incorrectly drew  adverse  inferences
    in three areas.

       . the Appellant's inability in interview to provide  telephone  codes
         for where she resided (Q87)

       . her inability to name local parks (Q 89)

       . an inability to explain the "false" visa application  made  in  her
         brother's name (Q 63)

10. I find nothing really turns on this. The Judge has said at [28] he  did
    not find the Appellant to be a credible witness. He says  her  evidence
    was at times "implausible, inconsistent, vague  and  evasive.  I  shall
    cite some examples although these are not exhaustive".  The  Judge  has
    been criticised  for  saying  he  found  the  Appellant's  response  to
    Question 89 of her asylum interview as vague. Mr Schwenk  submits  that
    the Appellant's response was not vague it was a  straight-forward  one.
    Therefore the Judge erred. I disagree. I agree that the Judge has  used
    the word 'vague' when describing the response to Q89.   What  is  clear
    from a full reading of the determination, is that the Judge disbelieved
    the Appellant's response.  Whilst the adjective  implausible  may  have
    been a better way of expressing his disbelief, nevertheless it is clear
    that the Judge did not accept what she said, and with good reason, when
    her response is looked at  in  the  context  of  the  whole  case.  Her
    response is not simply a  straight-forward  response  as  claimed.  She
    qualifies the sentence by saying that she is illiterate. The Judge  had
    good reason to find this conflicted with other evidence,  notably  that
    from Doctor Fatah. The same can be said about telephone dialling codes.



11. The next challenge concerned the Judge's adverse  credibility  findings
    at [28(viii)]. Criticism is made because he questioned the  Appellant's
    credibility when she was asked why she did not call her  brother  as  a
    witness at the appeal hearing. The Appellant's response which is  noted
    was this "I was not aware of the law of this country, or  that  it  was
    possible for him to give evidence." It is said that the Judge failed to
    consider that the Appellant followed  the  instructions  of  her  legal
    representatives who may or may not have suggested it to her.

12.  Mr Schwenk added that the Appellant's brother  is  mentally/physically
    disabled and the Judge failed to acknowledge  this  when  he  drew  the
    adverse inference he did in [28(viii)]. I find this  to  be  an  unfair
    criticism of the Judge.  It  is  recorded  that  the  question  of  the
    Appellant's brother  giving  evidence,  was  asked  by  the  Presenting
    Officer. This was no doubt  in the context  of  the  Respondent  having
    cogent evidence, that there had been a visa  application  made  by  the
    Appellant's brother (who is a dependant on her claim not  an  appellant
    as the Rule 24 response says) and which details the Appellant's brother
    as an Iraqi citizen.. This is one of the  central  planks  of  why  the
    Respondent rejected the Appellant's claim to  Syrian  nationality.  The
    Appellant's brother was present at the appeal hearing. The  Appellant's
    claim has always been that  she  was  unaware  of  her  brother's  visa
    application and that it must have been a fraudulent one  instigated  by
    her uncle.

13. Mr Schwenk tells me  that  the  Appellant's  brother  is  mentally  and
    physically disabled. I accept that may be so. I take it from  that  the
    Appellant's brother is incapable of giving evidence  directly.  However
    if that be the case, it leaves unanswered the question of why he should
    have been troubled by being brought to  the  Tribunal  hearing  in  the
    first place. Furthermore the evidence shows that the Appellant and  her
    brother are able to communicate with one another; she looks after  him.
    It is not unreasonable therefore to expect her, at the very  least,  to
    have asked her brother what he knew about the  visa  application.  This
    may have taken matters no further but at least the question would  have
    been asked.

14. The next ground of challenge advanced  is  that  the  Judge  failed  to
    adequately consider and give effect to the  conclusion  of  the  report
    prepared by Doctor Fatah. It is said that Doctor Fatah's report is more
    rounded than the LOID Report and therefore his conclusions should  have
    been preferred. The Judge failed to give weight to material matters.

15. The weight to be given to the  evidence  is  a  matter  for  the  Judge
    provided he considers the  evidence  with  the  appropriate  degree  of
    anxious scrutiny, and gives adequate reasons for the findings  made.  I
    find on a reading of the determination the Judge demonstrates that this
    is what he did. It must be kept in  mind  that  Judge  Birkby  had  the
    advantage in seeing and hearing from the parties. It may be that others
    would disagree with the findings or be  of  the  opinion  that  greater
    weight should have been given to other issues when considering  whether
    the evidence substantiated the claim, but that is not the correct  test
    to be applied at this stage. I find the evidence  was  considered  with
    the required degree of care. It has not been said that the findings are
    perverse or irrational. Therefore the findings  made,  are  within  the
    permissible range of those which the Judge was entitled to make.

16. Accordingly for the forgoing reasons, I find that the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal does not contain any error  of  law.  The  decision
    therefore stands.

Decision

17. This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature     Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
