


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
                                                               AA/11070/2015
                                                               AA/11073/2015
                                                               AA/11074/2015
                                                               AA/11075/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 5th December 2016                         |On : 7th December 2016       |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                                   L H + 3
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ahmad, Counsel instructed by MA Consultants,
                       London


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a female national of Pakistan. Her  three  dependents
    are her three children, born 2003 2007, and 2008.  On  the  24th  March
    2016 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge L.A.L Paul) allowed her  appeal  on
    human rights and asylum grounds. The Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department now has permission to appeal[1] against that decision.




    Anonymity Order

 2. This case concerns a  claim  for  international  protection  and  three
    minors. Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of  2013:
    Anonymity Orders I therefore consider it appropriate to make  an  order
    in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The Respondent had advanced a complex account of gender based violence.
    She had variously claimed as part of  her  asylum  case  that  she  had
    suffered psychological and physical abuse at the hands of an  aunt,  an
    uncle, her husband, her brother-in-law and some men of unknown identity
    connected to her brother-in-law.  She stated  that  her  brother-in-law
    had lodged an FIR with the police in Pakistan accusing her of adultery.


 4. The Judge rejected a good deal of that.  He  did  not  accept,  to  the
    lower standard, that as a teenager the Respondent had been raped by her
    uncle  or  abused  by  her  aunt.  That  was  because  she  had   given
    inconsistent evidence about that part of her claim.  Nor did he  accept
    that she had been raped by her brother-in-law. Her evidence about  that
    had also been judged unreliable.  The evidence about the  FIR  did  not
    establish any risk since the Respondent could conclusively prove to the
    Pakistani police that she had been in the United Kingdom  at  the  time
    that she was alleged to be having an affair in  Pakistan.   Furthermore
    there were reasons to doubt the authenticity of the FIR itself.

 5. All of that said, the First-tier Tribunal did find that there were some
    elements of the  claim  that  were  true.  It  was  accepted  that  the
    Respondent has been the victim of sustained domestic  violence  at  the
    hands of her husband.    It  was,  "in  particular"  persuaded  by  the
    evidence  of  two  independent  witnesses,  Mrs  Joanne   Jervis,   the
    Safeguarding and Pastoral Manager at Higher Failsworth  Primary  School
    and Mrs Gilliam Hall from 'Resolve Oldham  -  Counselling  Service  for
    children Affected by Domestic Violence and Sexual Abuse'.     Accepting
    their evidence about the accounts given by the children, the Judge  was
    satisfied that the Respondent had indeed  been  subjected  to  harm  as
    claimed. Implicit in that finding was a finding of  current  risk.  The
    determination  proceeds  to  consider  internal  flight.  The  Tribunal
    directs itself to consider  the  findings  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    various country guidance cases on Pakistani women. Having  done  so  it
    notes that on the evidence it is very likely that the Respondent's  two
    sons would be separated from her and that this would be contrary to the
    best interests of the children. The father would  be  favoured  by  the
    Pakistani courts in disputes over custody.  She is estranged  from  her
    own family, would have  nowhere  to  live  and  would  have  no  family
    support. This would strengthen his already strong claim.   In  all  the
    circumstances the appeal was allowed.

 6. The Secretary of State for the Home Department appeals on the following
    grounds:

              i) The  Judge  bases  his  positive  finding  as  to  domestic
                 violence on the evidence of Mrs Jervis  and  Mrs  Hall  but
                 fails to set out what their qualifications were, what their
                 evidence was, or why it should be afforded any weight;


             ii) There were no  reasons  given  for  the  finding  that  the
                 Respondent was estranged from her family;

            iii) Failure to evaluate internal flight on the particular facts
                 of the case.



    My Findings


 7. I am not satisfied that  there  was  any  error  in  the  determination
    setting out the evidence of Mrs Jervis and Mrs Hall in the way that  it
    does. Although the Judge could have set it out in  greater  detail  the
    documents which he refers to were available to both  parties  (although
    not, perhaps, Mr  Tufan  when  he  drafted  the  grounds)  and  so  the
    reasoning is readily understandable. In a letter dated 5th October 2015
    Mrs Jervis confirms that she has worked very closely with  this  family
    since February 2015 and that she has personally made referrals to other
    agencies in respect of the children's social care and the  Respondent's
    mental  health.  She  writes  that  the  children,  although  generally
    withdrawn  and  quiet,  have  made  disclosures  to  her  about   their
    experiences in Pakistan. They are very worried about their  mother  and
    each of them is taking on a caring role for her.  They were referred to
    Gillian Hall  because  of  the  domestic  abuse  that  they  have  been
    subjected to.  Mrs Jervis also writes that she supported the Respondent
    in attending A&E when she had expressed an intention to  take  her  own
    life.  In an addendum dated 12th February 2016 Mrs Jervis adds that the
    children are now very settled at school and are a  pleasure  to  teach.
    The two younger children have continued to express concerns about  what
    might happen if their father and his  family  should  find  them.   The
    report from Gillian Hall  dated  11th  January  2016  is  expressed  in
    similar terms. She has been providing them with one-to-one  counselling
    since October 2015.  It was this evidence which  led  the  Tribunal  to
    conclude, at paragraph 49:


         "[the children]  have  each  received  specialist  counselling  and
         independently revealed that they have 'real and current fears  that
         their father or their father's brother may  kill  them  should  the
         family return to Pakistan'"


 8. I find that the reasoning is clear. The Respondent  may  have  been  an
    unreliable witness about a great many things,  but about  the  violence
    she claims to have experienced at the hands of her husband in Pakistan,
    there is significant independent corroboration from her  children,  who
    have made their own disclosures to professionals in the United Kingdom.
    As to the expertise and objectivity of Mrs Jervis and Mrs Hall, it does
    not appear that either was put in issue by the Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer with conduct of the case before the First-tier  Tribunal.  That
    being the case the Secretary of State cannot now  reasonably  criticise
    the Tribunal for apparently accepting it.  In any event the  author  of
    the grounds does not advance any  reason  why  the  evidence  of  these
    professionals should be doubted.


 9. As to the general approach to the evidence, it would appear to  be  the
    Secretary of State's case that the Tribunal was not logically  entitled
    to accept any part of the account, where it  had  already  rejected  so
    much.  That is not a sustainable argument.  It is plainly open  to  the
    Tribunal to reject  an  appellant's  evidence  about  certain  matters,
    whilst placing reliance on  others:  see  for  instance  Karanakaran  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000] EWCA Civ  11.   These
    were paradigm Karanakaran findings.  As  the  determination  states  at
    paragraph 50:

         "Fundamentally I find that the basis of the  appellant's  claim  is
         true, but she has tried to unnecessarily strengthen  and  embellish
         her claim with additional information that I have found not  to  be
         true".


    The Tribunal was, on the evidence before it,  entitled  to  accept  the
    account of domestic violence in Pakistan, and indeed the claim that the
    Respondent was estranged from her family, as it does  at  paragraph  53
    and 56.

10. As to the question of internal flight, again this was a finding open to
    the Tribunal. True, the fact that the Respondent  is  "relatively  well
    educated" does not feature in the analysis, but it is difficult to  see
    how such an education (she continued a year past matric) could possibly
    be of any significant assistance given that she would be a lone  female
    victim of domestic violence with no money, no connections,  no  support
    and three children. That two of those children are older boys - and  so
    would be denied entrance to a Dar ul-Amaan with their mother -   was  a
    factor of some significance as  far  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    concerned. That is reasoning that I would endorse.  It appears to me on
    those facts it clearly would be unduly harsh to expect  the  Respondent
    to try and internally relocate.




    Decisions


11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law and it is upheld.

12. There is a direction for anonymity.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             6th December
                                    2016




                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 26th April 2016 by Upper Tribunal Judge
Goldstein

