
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11515/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and reasons promulgated     |
|on 11 November 2016                  |on 16 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 MEI MEI YU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant left China in 2009 to study in Denmark.  She went back to
    China in October and returned to Denmark  on  13  November  2011,  then
    entered the UK on 17 November 2011. She sought asylum in June  2014,  a
    few months before she was due to give birth.

 2. The appellant claimed that she joined the Church of  Almighty  God,  or
    Eastern Lightning, in 2010, and went to China at  the  request  of  her
    church to spread the word about the end of the world in 2012.  She  was
    arrested at a demonstration for her cause, and detained,  but  released
    on bail after signing a document stating that Eastern Lightning  is  an
    evil cult.  She was required to report and not to  leave  the  country,
    but she was able to travel from Beijing back  to  Denmark  on  her  own
    passport.

 3. The respondent refused the claim by letter dated 5 December  2014.   It
    was accepted that the appellant was a member of Eastern Lightning,  but
    not that she had any encounter with the  Chinese  authorities  or  that
    they had any interest in her.  The respondent applied QH (Christians  -
    risk) China CG [2014] UKUT 86.

 4. FtT  Judge  Bradshaw  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  decision
    promulgated on 23 March 2015.  He did not accept that the appellant  is
    anything but an ordinary member of her religion or  that  she  had  any
    profile with the Chinese authorities.  In light of QH he found that the
    appellant did not fall into any risk category (paragraphs 100 - 103).

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal.  One of her proposed grounds
    was that the judge had overlooked that the appellant's religion did not
    fall simply into the category of an unregistered church, but was banned
    as an evil cult.

 6. Permission was refused by the FtT and by the UT.

 7. The Court reduced the UT's refusal of permission.

 8. On 28 July 2016, the Vice President of the UT  granted  permission,  in
    view of the interlocutor of the Court.

 9. Mr Winter advised that the outcome in the Court was  the  result  of  a
    contested hearing and an oral judgement only.  The  arguable  error  of
    law identified had been whether the FtT judge erred in considering that
    QH applied.  Mrs O'Brien agreed that was the only issue  arising.   She
    said that the respondent's position was that the judge  made  no  error
    such as to require his decision to be set aside.

10. Mr Winter submitted thus.  QH made only one passing  reference  to  the
    "evil cult" category, at paragraph 18.  This is  a  distinct  group  of
    organisations,  not  merely  unregistered  but  positively  banned.   A
    schedule of references to the background material which had been before
    the FtT showed the greater degree of risk attached.  The appellant said
    she continued to be active online, produced her posts and said that she
    would plan to re-engage with her church.  Once it was  recognised  that
    there is a further category of risk, and the  background  material  was
    taken into account, the FtT decision should be set aside and reversed.

11. Mrs O'Brien argued as follows.  The appellant had been accepted to be a
    member of Eastern Lightning, but had achieved  no  further  credibility
    finding.   Her  case  was  rightly  approached  in  the  light  of  the
    authorities having no knowledge of or interest in her, and of  her  not
    having proselytised in the past, or being likely to do  so  in  future.
    The judge had been right to find nothing likely to place her  at  risk.
    Nothing had been identified to lead to any  other  conclusion,  so  the
    decision should stand.

12. I reserved my decision.

13. In QH the  UT  found  that  in  general  the  risk  of  persecution  of
    Christians  in  China  is  very  low,  indeed  statistically  virtually
    negligible. That applied not  only  to  state  registered  to  also  to
    unregistered or "house" churches.  The  headnote  at  4  (iv)  and  (v)
    records findings that there may be a risk of  persecution  for  certain
    individual Christians who choose to worship  in  unregistered  churches
    and to conduct themselves in  such  a  way  as  to  attract  the  local
    authorities' attention to them or their political, social  or  cultural
    views. However, unless such individuals are the subject  of  an  arrest
    warrant, their name is on a blacklist, or they have a pending sentence,
    such a risk will be limited to the local area.

14. The one specific reference in QH to "evil cults", as identified  by  Mr
    Winter, is at paragraph 18, quoting a 2013 report by the US  Commission
    on International Religious Freedom 2013:

         Religious freedom conditions in China deteriorated significantly...
         The Falun Gong and other groups deemed "evil cults" face  long-term
         imprisonment,  forced  renunciation  of  faith   and   torture   in
         detention.

15. The background news  reports  and  other  materials  produced  for  the
    appellant show that Eastern Lightning has been listed among  14  banned
    religious groups since 1995.  Sources such as CNN describe some of  its
    members as involved in violence, extortion,  brainwashing  and  murder.
    It is said to number from  several  hundred  thousand  to  one  million
    members.

16. Refugee World says that Eastern Lightning has shown outright  hostility
    towards the Communist Party.  The same source cites legislation:

         Whoever forms or uses superstitious sects or  secret  societies  or
         weird religious organisations or uses superstition to undermine the
         implementation of the laws and administrative rules and regulations
         of the state shall be sentenced to fixed term imprisonment  of  not
         less than 3 but not more than 7 years...

    A defence lawyer is quoted in the New York Times  as  saying  that  the
    authorities sought to eradicate the entire group, not  just  those  who
    committed crimes; but that particularly strong statement does  not  fit
    well with the more specific evidence.

    Sources are cited for 1300 detentions in December 2012, when the  group
    believed the world to be coming to an end, and of criminal cases in the
    aftermath numbering up to 335, with  outcomes  varying  from  suspended
    sentences up to 8 years' imprisonment.

    That evidence shows serious outcomes for  a  few,  after  a  particular
    period of hectic activity,  but  not  mass  ongoing  arrests  of  lower
    profile adherents.

17. There may be Christian religious  groups  in  China  in  China  at  the
    extremes, involvement with which takes  an  individual  beyond  the  QH
    categories of  registered  and  unregistered  churches.   However,  the
    evidence does not disclose a further straightforward category of banned
    "evil cults", simple membership of which leads to  a  protection  need.
    Such  cases  must  depend  on  the  evidence   about   the   particular
    organisation, and about the individual.

18. The inclusion of Falun Gong among the "evil cults" is instructive.   It
    is a movement strongly disapproved of by the government, some of  whose
    practitioners have been found to be at risk, but involvement has  never
    been found to require blanket protection.  The position for Falun  Gong
    practitioners, who are  within  the  "evil  cult"  legal  category,  is
    broadly similar to  that  of  participants  in  unregistered  churches.
    There is no clear distinction between the unregistered and  the  banned
    categories.

19. The evidence does not establish risk to the  many  members  of  Eastern
    Lightning, absent additional factors  of  a  similar  nature  to  those
    identified in QH in relation to unregistered churches.   The  appellant
    had not engaged in crime, preached the apocalypse  or  otherwise  drawn
    the wrath of the  authorities  and  was  not  likely  to  do  so.   The
    principles of  QH  were  safely  applicable.  Any  failure  to  draw  a
    distinction between groups which were unregistered and those which have
    been specifically banned did not amount to a legal  error  such  as  to
    require the decision to be set aside.

20. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

21. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            14 November 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




