

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11409/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 19 December 2016                           |on 20 December 2016          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               RAJALINGHAM [T]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr T D Ruddy, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. First-tier Tribunal Judge McGavin by determination  promulgated  on  19
    August  2016  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  refusal  of
    recognition as a refugee from Sri Lanka.

 2. The appellant's grounds of appeal  to  the  UT  may  be  summarised  as
    follows.

      (1). The respondent accepted the appellant's account of detention  and
      persecution by the authorities in 2009 - 2010.    The judge failed  to
      apply paragraph 339K of the immigration rules  and  to  take  that  as
      indicative of future risk.

      (2) - (3). The  appellant  had  to  report  after  his  release.   The
      authorities did not lose interest in him.  In rejecting his claim that
      he was detained again in  2014,  the  judge  disregarded  the  earlier
      persecution and misunderstood his evidence about  why  he  again  fell
      under suspicion.

      (4). The judge overlooked background  evidence  and  country  guidance
      which confirmed that the authorities had taken  action  against  Tamil
      suspects in a way consistent with the appellant's claims.

      (5). The judge thought it adverse that the appellant  had  not  at  an
      earlier stage corrected evidence he gave at screening  interview  that
      other detainees had informed on him, which he withdrew in his  witness
      statement.  The appellant was not  asked  about  this  at  substantive
      interview or at the hearing.  This was a failure to give fair notice.

      (6) - (7).  The judge overlooked or misinterpreted  evidence  about  a
      crackdown in 2014 when over 60 people were detained.

      (8) - (9). The judge did not accept the appellant's explanation of why
      his wife was not detained.  This overlooked that it was only  a  small
      minority of women who were  detained  because  of  their  male  family
      members' LTTE links.

      (10). The judge failed to take account of supportive medical  evidence
      of scarring.

      (11) In finding that the appellant did not come within category 7  (a)
      of GJ and others the judge failed to consider paragraph  339K  of  the
      rules and the appellant's account of his detention,  escape,  and  the
      continued interest of the authorities in tracing him.

 3. Mr Ruddy identified the appellant's strongest point  as  emerging  from
    grounds (4) and (6).

 4. At paragraph 28 - 30 of her decision the judge said:

      Mr Ruddy  relied  upon  COI  guidance  quoted  by  the  respondent  at
      paragraph 26 of the reasons for  refusal  letter.  It  states  that  a
      military spokesman told the media on 11 April 2014 that  the  military
      had killed Gopi in overnight skirmishes and it  was  stated  that  the
      military had "unleashed a terror  and  intimidation  campaign  in  the
      North, detaining 60 people ...". Mr Ruddy stated that this was "around
      the same time" the appellant claimed to have been detained. I  do  not
      consider this argument has much weight for the following reasons.

      The appellant claims to been arrested in March 2014,  a  month  before
      Gopi was killed. The  COI  guidance  ...  dated  28  August  2014  ...
      footnoted in the reasons for refusal letter states at paragraph  2.2.8
      that the 60 people were arrested in early April 2014.

      There do not appear to be many correlations  between  the  appellant's
      claimed arrest and the country information...

 5. The reference to the refusal letter seems to  be  paragraph  34,  which
    quotes a passage from the guidance and footnotes it to paragraph 2.2.8.
     The passage quoted does not refer to 60 arrests or pin their dates  to
    early April 2014.  It is cited for purposes of  assessing  whether  the
    authorities would have taken an interest in the appellant's wife.

 6. The respondent's bundle prepared for the FtT includes at pp.  H1  -  H3
    parts of the guidance, from 2.2 - 2.2.2. and then from 2.2.19  -2.2.20.
    It does not include 2.2.8.

 7. Mr Ruddy advised that it became apparent at the FtT  hearing  that  the
    respondent had not supplied  all  parts  of  the  guidance  cited.   He
    provided the judge with a further excerpt which included  2.2.4,  which
    is also attached to the grounds of appeal to the  UT.   That  paragraph
    quotes from a news source, the World Socialist  Website,  which  on  16
    April 2014 reported the military's claim to have  killed  on  11  April
    Gopi and others who were trying to revive the LTTE, and went on:

      Since  early  March,  the  military  has  unleashed   a   terror   and
      intimidation campaign in the north, detaining over 60 people ...

 8. Mr Ruddy submitted that the judge fell into an error about  the  timing
    of events which misled her as to  the  likelihood  of  the  appellant's
    account, and that it was plainly material, being the first reason given
    for finding that part of the argument for the  appellant  not  to  have
    much weight.

 9. Mr Mullen acknowledged in course of debate that the judge did appear to
    have gone wrong on  a  chronological  point.   He  submitted  that  the
    detentions recorded in March seemed to have nothing directly to do with
    the appellant's claims about being linked to Gopi, who  was  killed  in
    April; that  there  was  a  very  long  way  between  Gopi's  scene  of
    operations and the appellant's locality; and  that  the  appellant  had
    only a minor and historic link to the LTTE.  Taking  the  judge's  slip
    out of the mix, there were remaining good reasons, some of  which  were
    unchallenged, for dismissing his appeal, and the decision should stand.



10. I reserved my decision.

11. The timing of the  appellants'  claimed  re-detention  did  not  reveal
    inconsistency with the chronology of the background evidence in the way
    the judge thought.  The decision might well have gone the same  way  in
    any event, and I have not been persuaded that any of the other  reasons
    are flawed; but it plainly made a material contribution to the outcome.
     I do not think the decision safely survives its excision.

12. Parties agreed that on  that  view,  the  proper  outcome  would  be  a
    rehearing in the FtT.

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside,  other  than
    as a record of what was said on that occasion.  None  of  its  findings
    are to stand. The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate  in
    terms of section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice  Statement
    7.2 to remit the case to the FtT for a fresh hearing.

14. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge McGavin.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]

            19 December 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
