

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11365/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 17 May 2013                                |On 1 July 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                   MR A K
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O'Ceallaigh of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms M Tanner, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal with permission against a  decision  by  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal Oliver dismissing the  appeal  on  asylum  and  human
   rights grounds.

2) The appellant was born on 21 June 1970 and is a  national  of  Iran.   He
   claimed asylum on arrival in the UK on 2 January 2008.  His asylum  claim
   was originally based on an incident which allegedly occurred when he  was
   stopped at a Basij checkpoint.  The Basij officers took away  his  mobile
   phone and ID.  On the phone there was a joke about the supreme leader,  a
   voice message from a friend and some pornographic material.   As  he  was
   being taken to a police car he pushed away a guard and fled.   He  feared
   that because of the joke about the supreme leader he would face execution
   on return to Iran.  The asylum claim was refused by the respondent and in
   a subsequent appeal in September 2008 the appellant's claim was found  to
   be lacking in credibility.

3) In October 2009 further  representations  were  made  on  behalf  of  the
   appellant.  It was said that in early 2009 the appellant had  joined  the
   Ahwazi Arab People's Democratic Popular Front (AAPDPF).  His brother  had
   been a member of this organisation, having joined in 2004, and  had  been
   killed by the authorities in Iran in 2006.  The  appellant  said  he  had
   attended a demonstration on 3 May 2009 and a conference  afterwards.   He
   attended a demonstration in front of the Iranian Embassy  on  25  October
   2009  and  another  on  29  May  2009.   He  believed  that  the  Iranian
   authorities had monitored these demonstrations by filming them.

4) These further representations led to reasons for refusal letter dated  28
   July  2011  stating  that  the  representations  were  not  significantly
   different from previous submissions.  Further representations  were  made
   again in August 2011 but these too were considered  to  be  not  markedly
   different from previous evidence and submissions and did not amount to  a
   fresh claim.  Following a judicial review a further refusal decision  was
   issued on 3 December 2012 in which it was accepted by the respondent that
   the appellant was now associated with AAPDPF but the appellant's evidence
   about attendance at demonstrations was not accepted.

5) Following the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal in January 2013  the
   judge noted, in accordance with Devaseelan [002] UKAIT  00072,  that  the
   appellant had been found not to be credible in respect of the account  on
   which he originally based his  asylum  claim.   Since  then  two  further
   matters had been advanced, namely the alleged murder of  the  appellant's
   brother in 2006 and the appellant's attendance at  events  on  behalf  of
   AAPDPF.  The judge was  not  satisfied  as  to  the  credibility  of  the
   appellant's account of his brother's death but did consider it  necessary
   to consider the consequences of the appellant's attendance at a number of
   meetings of AAPDPF.

6) In this regard the judge referred to the country guideline  cases  of  BA
   (Demonstrators in Britain - Risk on Return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT36 and  SB
   (Risk on Return - Illegal Exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT  00053.   The  judge
   commented that the appellant would fit the profile of an activist on  his
   return to Iran only if his presence at the demonstrations was  prominent.
   The judge accepted that the appellant had attended demonstrations at  the
   places and dates which he claimed.  When demonstrating in  front  of  the
   Iranian Embassy he could have been photographed in a  way  in  which  the
   authorities  could  identify  him.   His  presence,  however,   was   not
   prominent; he attended at only some demonstrations; and he did not take a
   leading part.  There was no evidence of any significant media coverage of
   the demonstrations, which were small.  The judge was  not  satisfied  the
   appellant would be at risk on return.

7) In the application for permission to appeal it  was  contended  that  the
   judge had misdirected himself in applying the country guideline  case  of
   BA.   It  was  not  necessary  that  the  appellant's  presence  at   the
   demonstrations be prominent in order to establish a real  risk.   It  was
   accepted that the appellant had attended significantly more than only one
   or two determinations and, in terms of BA, this might  give  rise  to  an
   increased risk.  He was a member of the party and he had  attended  about
   six demonstrations as well as attending a memorial service for the  death
   of a poet.  These attendances required serious consideration.  The  judge
   had not properly considered other risk factors, such as  the  appellant's
   membership of a separatist party.

8) In the application for permission  to  appeal  reference  is  made  to  a
   further country guideline case, SA (Iranian Arabs - No General Risk) Iran
   CG [2011] UKUT 41.  Submissions were made on the  appellant's  behalf  at
   the hearing in relation to this but these  were  not  considered  in  the
   determination.  On the basis of the decision in SA  it  was  argued  that
   Iranian authorities viewed Arabs in general  with  suspicion  and  viewed
   London  as  the  centre  of  separatist   activity.    Attending   Ahwazi
   demonstrations in London could give rise to a risk of persecution for  an
   Ahwazi Arab on  return  to  Iran  and  undertaking  low-level  separatist
   activity in London would increase  risk  regardless  of  whether  it  was
   genuine.  In addition, having left Iran  unlawfully  was  a  factor  that
   increased risk on return.

9) In granting permission to appeal the judge noted that  according  to  the
   application the judge failed to give adequate reasons for dismissing  the
   appeal given that the judge accepted that the appellant had taken part in
   seven demonstrations in the UK, that he was a member of a political party
   and that he was an Arab from Iran.   In  view  of  the  relevant  country
   guideline cases and these findings of fact, the grounds  were  considered
   arguable.

Submissions

10) In his submission for the appellant, Mr O'Ceallaigh pointed out that  it
   was accepted that the appellant  was  a  member  of  an  Arab  separatist
   organisation and  had  attended  various  demonstrations.   He  had  also
   attended a political event commemorating the death of  an  Iranian  poet.
   Having found these facts, the  judge  should  have  applied  the  country
   guideline cases of BA and SA.  The latter was a case  concerning  Iranian
   Arabs.  According to the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  at  paragraph
   31 of the determination, the appellant would only fit the profile  of  an
   activist if his attendance at demonstrations  was  prominent.   This  was
   contrary to the case  law.   The  case  of  SA  showed  how  the  Iranian
   authorities would view  such  activity.   Arab  separatist  activity  was
   viewed very seriously.  Accordingly to paragraph 48 of SA, the  appellant
   might face vigorous interrogation on return and, as stated  at  paragraph
   49, even if a person was not particularly sincere or  particularly  well-
   informed, links with a separatist group could provoke ill-treatment.   It
   was accepted in that case that when someone had left Iran irregularly and
   had been in the UK for 6 years there was an enhanced risk.  At  paragraph
   54 it was pointed out that there was heightened suspicion towards  anyone
   coming from London because of activities in  opposition  to  the  present
   regime that were said to be encouraged by the UK.

11) Mr O'Ceallaigh referred to the decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  RT
   (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38.  He contended  that  when  the  appellant  was
   interrogated on return he would be required to lie  about  his  political
   beliefs and activities.  This had not been  taken  into  account  by  the
   judge, whose legal analysis was flawed.  Mr O'Ceallaigh pointed out  that
   the respondent's Rule 24 response of 29 April 2013 relied on the case  of
   YB (Eritrea) [2008] EWCA Civ 360.  Accordingly  to  the  respondent,  the
   Iranian  authorities  would  be  able  to  distinguish  facts  about  the
   appellant including his lack of a political profile and  the  lack  of  a
   genuine claim.  Mr O'Ceallaigh submitted that the respondent  was  making
   up reasons that were not in the  determination  to  support  the  judge's
   findings.  He pointed out that the case of YB was based on the  situation
   in Eritrea some five years ago.  The cases of BA and SA  post-dated  this
   case.

12) Ms Tanner acknowledged that it was accepted by the respondent  that  the
   appellant had had  dealings  with  AAPDPF.   The  issue  of  whether  the
   appellant would be regarded as an Arab separatist had  to  be  addressed,
   even if findings had been made that the appellant's motives were  cynical
   ones.  According to SA, even low level support in the UK would lead to an
   increased risk.  The judge had not referred to submissions in relation to
   SA in the determination, which was a matter for the Tribunal to consider.



13) Ms Tanner considered that the assessment of sur place activities in  the
   case of BA was to be preferred to that of SA but she acknowledged that SA
   was concerned with Arab separatist activity.  If there was found to be an
   error of law in the decision she would seek a further hearing.

14) In response to this Mr O'Ceallaigh argued that  a  further  hearing  was
   not required.  There was no challenge to the findings made by the  judge.
   The appellant's account of his activities in Iran had been  rejected  but
   his account of his activities in the UK had been accepted.   There  could
   be no new hearing before  the  Tribunal  today  because  the  appellant's
   supporting witness was absent.

15) There then followed some discussion of the evidence  of  the  supporting
   witness at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  The  evidence  of
   the witness, Mr Abid Shaghuti,  was  recorded  at  paragraph  22  of  the
   determination.  The witness worked closely with the Secretary General  of
   AAPDPF and confirmed that the appellant had  been  a  supporter  of  this
   party since early in 2009.  His  involvement  with  the  party  had  been
   genuine.  The party was banned inside in Iran and  for  security  reasons
   had to maintain a level of secrecy.  The respondent was incorrect to have
   suggested at one point that AAPDPF had changed its name in  2007  to  the
   Ahwazi Democratic Popular Front.  This was a separate organisation.   The
   party issued supporting letters only when it was sure  about  a  person's
   genuine commitment.  There was mounting evidence of Iranian surveillance.
    The conference the appellant attended  on  3  May  2009  was  a  private
   meeting but details of this with photographs  had  been  published  on  a
   website.

16) Notwithstanding having recorded this evidence at  paragraph  22  of  the
   determination, the judge stated at paragraph 30 that the witness was  not
   asked whether AAPDPF and APDF  were  separate  organisations.   This  was
   clearly a matter which was  recorded  at  paragraph  22  as  having  been
   covered by the witness in his  evidence.   The  judge  nevertheless  made
   findings  about  the  appellant's  participation  in   AAPDPF   and   its
   activities.

17) I indicated at this point in the hearing that the  decision  would  have
   to be set aside and re-made but I considered this could be  done  on  the
   basis of  the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  country
   guideline cases without the need for any  further  evidence.   Ms  Tanner
   responded that if the decision was to be  re-made  at  this  hearing  she
   would seek to make submissions on the substantive issues, which she  then
   did.  She submitted that the appellant had not attended  a  demonstration
   since 2011, although Mr O'Ceallaigh sought to  correct  this  by  stating
   that the appellant had attended a demonstration on  20  April  2012.   Ms
   Tanner then referred to the appellant's supplementary statement, in which
   it was recorded that he had attended a demonstration in  April  2012  and
   then the memorial service in November 2012.   In  December  2012  he  had
   written an article which had been published  on  a  website.   Ms  Tanner
   pointed out that the appellant was relying only on sur  place  activities
   before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   She  submitted  that  the  appellant  had
   cynically manipulated everything he had done  in  order  to  bolster  his
   claim.  As was pointed out in SA, he would not be at risk just because of
   his ethnicity but some additional feature would be required  to  increase
   his risk.  According to paragraph 52 of SA, the appellant  in  that  case
   was somebody already known to the authorities, who were reasonably likely
   to have a record of his detention in Iran.  A  previous  offence  he  had
   committed in Iran would come to light on his return.   The  appellant  in
   that case was not at risk just because of his sur place activities.

18) Applying the decision in BA, Ms Tanner continued, the appellant was  one
   of many who had participated in annual events on 20 April of  each  year.
   The appellant had managed to link this with Arab separatism but this  had
   been done to enhance his claim.  This would be recognised by the  Iranian
   authorities who would differentiate between those who were perceived as a
   real threat to the regime and asylum seekers who were pursuing their  own
   agendas.  According to BA there was no facial  recognition  equipment  at
   the airport in Tehran,  although  officials  could  recognise  a  lot  of
   people.  The procedures on arrival were haphazard and those who  did  not
   come to attention on arrival might be picked up  subsequently.   However,
   the appellant had only one of the risk factors identified in  SA,  namely
   his attendance at demonstrations, at which he was one of  many.   He  did
   not require the benefit of the Refugee Convention.

19)  In  response,  Mr  O'Ceallaigh  pointed  out   that   the   appellant's
   involvement was greater than this.  It was not disputed that he  attended
   all the demonstrations set out in his supplementary statement.  The Judge
   of the First-tier Tribunal had not made a finding to the effect that  the
   appellant's motives were cynical and in SA itself some of the  claim  had
   been rejected.  The factors identified in SA as giving rise to a risk for
   Ahwazi Arabs did not apply only to those  of  whom  the  authorities  had
   previously had knowledge.  The Iranian authorities were not interested in
   whether someone was protecting their own interests but only  in  crushing
   dissent.  As was pointed out at paragraph 65 of BA, it was the perception
   of the regime which  had  to  be  considered.   The  appellant  had  been
   photographed and had been participating in a separatist  organisation  in
   his own name.  He had written about this  in  his  own  name.   The  risk
   factors were his Arab ethnicity; his illegal  departure  from  Iran;  his
   forced return from the UK; and his links to Arab separatist activity.  He
   was likely to be interrogated.  In terms of BA, he had attended more than
   one or two protests  and  he  had  been  photographed  on  at  least  one
   occasion.  He had attended a meeting and produced a publication.  He  was
   likely to be subject to interrogation in breach of Article 3.   In  terms
   of RT (Zimbabwe), even if the authorities were unaware of his  activities
   in the UK he would be asked about what he had done and would have to  lie
   to protect himself.  On either basis the appellant was a refugee.

Discussion

20) I am satisfied there is an error of law in the decision by the Judge  of
   the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  judge  failed  to  address  the  country
   guideline decision in SA, notwithstanding that he was referred to this at
   the hearing and it was directly in point.

21) Ms Tanner submitted that there should  be  a  further  hearing  for  the
   decision to be remade.  On the basis of the findings made by the Judge of
   the First-tier Tribunal, which were unchallenged before  me,  I  did  not
   consider a further hearing was necessary.  Directions  were  issued  with
   the hearing notice but these appear to have been only to the effect  that
   the parties should lodge prior to the hearing the documents on which they
   relied.  The parties do not appear to have been directed to  bring  their
   witnesses to this hearing for the purpose of re-making the decision but I
   did not consider was necessary to hear any further oral evidence.

22) Ms Tanner challenged the motives of the  appellant  for  his  sur  place
   activities and submitted that the Iranian authorities would  be  able  to
   distinguish between those whose activities represented a  genuine  threat
   to the regime and those who were seeking to bolster or enhance an  asylum
   claim.  I response, Mr O'Ceallaigh referred to  paragraph  65  of  BA  in
   which it is stated:

       "While  it  may  well  be  that  an  appellant's  participation   in
       demonstrations is opportunistic, the evidence suggests that this  is
       not likely to be a major influence on the perception of the  regime.
       Although expressing dissent itself will be sufficient to result in a
       person having, in the eyes of the regime,  a  significant  political
       profile, we consider that the nature of the level of the  sur  place
       activity will clearly heighten  the  determination  of  the  Iranian
       authorities to identify the demonstrator while  in  Britain  and  to
       identify him on return.  That, combined with the factors which might
       trigger enquiry would lead to an increased likelihood of questioning
       and of ill-treatment on return."


23) Having regard to the  country  guideline  cases  of  SA  and  BA,  I  am
   satisfied that if the appellant were to be identified on return as having
   been involved in Arab separatist activities in the UK  then  the  Iranian
   authorities would be unlikely to question his motives  but  would  assume
   that he was an opposition activist.

24) This raises the question of whether the appellant  would  be  identified
   on return.  Ms Tanner submitted that, in terms of BA, there was no facial
   recognition technology at Tehran Airport for  those  returning,  and  she
   further pointed out that, unlike the appellant in SA, the  appellant  was
   not shown to have any previous record of detention at the  hands  of  the
   Iranian authorities.

25) It seems that on the particular facts of  SA  the  appellant's  previous
   mistreatment weighed heavily  with  the  Tribunal  but  nevertheless  the
   conclusions expressed were of a general nature  and  do  not  necessarily
   depend on an appellant having previously come to  the  attention  of  the
   authorities.   The  lack  of  facial  recognition  technology  would   be
   compensated for, according to Mr O'Ceallaigh, by the appellant's  illegal
   exit and forced return, which would give rise  to  interrogation  at  the
   airport.  In SA the Tribunal accepted that an  irregular  departure  from
   Iran combined with presence in the UK for  6  years  were  matters  which
   would come to light in the event of the appellant's return  to  Iran  and
   would enhance the risk to the appellant.  The  Tribunal  considered  that
   even  "the  most  benign  questions  concerning  his  identity  and   the
   circumstances of leaving Iran would be  at  least  reasonably  likely  to
   highlight the fact that he had left irregularly." The Tribunal then found
   that it would be "but a short step  from  there  to  find  it  reasonably
   likely that the appellant would be interrogated, and would have to  admit
   he left without permission."

26) The difference that then arises between SA and this appellant's case  is
   that in SA once the authorities had this information they would  look  up
   the appellant's records to find that he  had  been  detained  because  of
   leafleting in the course of Arab separatism.  In the present  appeal  the
   appellant has not established that he was previously  detained  in  Iran.
   He has, however, now been in the UK for more than 5  years,  having  left
   Iran unlawfully.  In terms of SA this would be sufficient reason for  the
   authorities to question him on his return.  Even though  the  authorities
   had no record of illegal activities  in  Iran,  as  was  pointed  out  in
   paragraph 54 of SA there is heightened suspicion towards any Ahwazi  Arab
   returning from London because the authorities believe the Arab separatist
   cause to be particularly well organised in London and they  believe  that
   opposition activities are encouraged by the UK.

27) Mr O'Ceallaigh's submission was that even if  the  authorities  did  not
   have any knowledge of the  appellant  having  taken  part  in  separatist
   activity in the UK, then he would still be entitled to the protection  of
   the Refugee Convention if he was required to deny any  such  involvement,
   in terms of RT (Zimbabwe).  According to SA, at paragraph 49,  the  links
   with separatist groups could  easily  provoke  ill-treatment  even  if  a
   person was not particularly sincere or particularly well-informed.  There
   is a real risk that as an Ahwazi Arab making a forcible  return  to  Iran
   after more than 5 years in London, after having left Iran illegally,  the
   appellant would be subjected to interrogation  on  return  and  would  be
   forced to lie about his political activities if they were  not  known  to
   the Iranian authorities.  In the event that the authorities were aware of
   these activities, of course, even  though  the  appellant  might  not  be
   sincere there would be a real risk of ill-treatment.

28) As was pointed out at paragraph 26 of RT (Zimbabwe),  the  principle  in
   HJ (Iran) applies to a person who has political beliefs and is obliged to
   conceal them in order to avoid the persecution that he would suffer if he
   were to reveal them.

29) In any event, given the frequency of the activities  undertaken  by  the
   appellant and their nature, I consider there is a real  risk  that  these
   would have come to the attention of the Iranian authorities.  Even if the
   appellant were not to be recognised on return to Iran, there  is  a  real
   risk that the authorities would identify him as an opposition activist at
   a later stage.  The appellant has not only attended demonstrations but he
   has attended a memorial service for a dissident poet and he has published
   opposition material of his own on a website.  Having regard  to  the  low
   standard of proof, I am satisfied that the appellant faces a real risk of
   persecution by reason of his political opinion were he to return to Iran.



Conclusions

30) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.

31) I set aside the decision.

32) I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

I continue that order (pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).

Fee Award    (Note: This is not part of the determination.)

In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in the appeal by
allowing it, I have considered whether to make a fee award.  I make no fee
award on the basis that no fee has been paid or is payable.


Signed                                             Date


Judge of the Upper Tribunal





