
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aA/11409/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On  7 August 2015                    |On 2 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     CT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Agata Patyna, Counsel, instructed by Trott &
Gentry Sols.
For the Respondent:    Ms Emma Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant  is  a  young
    asylum seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 1. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Head-Rapson)  allowing  the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken  on  5  December  2014  to
    refuse the respondent's asylum claim and to remove the respondent  from
    the UK.

Introduction

 2. The respondent is a citizen of Turkey  of  mixed  Kurdish  and  Turkish
    ethnicity born on 21 January 1997. He claims that he became  active  in
    his support for the BDP in 2011 and as a result  was  detained  on  two
    occasions. His first detention was on 14 February 2012 for two days. He
    was fingerprinted,  photographed,  ill-treated,  questioned  about  PKK
    activity in his village and beaten with a baton. He was  then  released
    without charge. He was arrested again on 17 February 2012 when  leaving
    the BDP party building. He was detained for two days and  tortured.  He
    was released and refrained from political activity until the summer  of
    2012. In April-May 2013 the respondent heard that  his  home  had  been
    raided and his mother taken to the gendarme station.  His  uncle  found
    out that a friend who had been previously arrested had  confessed  that
    the respondent had links to the PKK. The respondent fled Turkey  on  25
    May 2013.

 3.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality but disputed ethnicity. His claim was otherwise rejected as
    not being credible.

The Appeal

 4. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Taylor House  on  23  March  2015.  He  was  represented  by
    Counsel.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  the  evidence   of   the
    respondent that he was of mixed Kurdish and Turkish ethnicity and  that
    there was a reasonable degree of likelihood that the appellant would be
    at risk were he to be returned to Turkey. He was also at real  risk  of
    being identified as a failed asylum seeker upon return and then sent to
    the airport police for further investigation. The two  detentions  were
    not official but unofficial records may have been kept which would come
    to light upon return.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
    finding that the respondent was at risk, he  would  be  returned  as  a
    failed asylum seeker who does not speak Kurdish and local  interest  in
    him for his claimed political opinion would not be known  to  officials
    on his entry. The judge also failed to make any finding as  to  whether
    internal relocation would be available to  the  respondent.  There  was
    nothing to suggest that the respondent could not reside in another part
    of Turkey.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Frankish
    on 16 June 2015. It was arguable that no reason was given  for  finding
    that the two unofficial detentions would become officially recorded and
    relocation received a mention in theory but not in practice.

 7. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 8. Ms Savage submitted that the findings of fact at paragraph  64  of  the
    decision are wholly inadequate because  there  is  no  explanation  for
    finding that the respondent was subject to  unofficial  detention.  The
    judge failed to deal with  the  reasons  for  refusal  in  any  detail.
    Internal relocation is not mentioned except at paragraphs 24-26.  There
    is no explanation of the core  and  material  basis  for  allowing  the
    appeal. The decision should be set  aside  and  remitted  for  a  fresh
    hearing.

 9. Ms Patyana submitted that the appeal is based upon two  narrow  grounds
    and there is no overall challenge to the  findings  of  fact  that  the
    respondent is at risk on return  or  his  credibility.  The  judge  did
    consider credibility in any event. The judge accepted the  respondent's
    account that the detentions were recorded in the local area and that is
    consistent with country guidance. The records of local detentions could
    be obtained  during  the  course  of  questioning  upon  return  on  an
    emergency travel document. There  is  no  internal  flight  alternative
    because of the judge's findings of fact. The threshold for  the  asylum
    claim was  passed.  Even  if  there  are  insufficient  findings  about
    internal relocation the error  is  not  material.  There  are  positive
    credibility findings at paragraphs 54, 62, 63 and 64 of the decision.

10. Ms Savage replied that in order to find the respondent to  be  at  risk
    the judge had to explain why the respondent was at risk and that is not
    clear from the decision. In particular, the judge did not  explain  how
    local records could be accessed by the authorities.

11. I find  that  the  judge  has  not  engaged  in  any  detail  with  the
    credibility issues raised in the refusal letter. However,  the  overall
    findings on credibility are  not  challenged  in  the  grounds  by  the
    Secretary of State, despite Ms Savage's submissions. The  appeal  comes
    down to two specific issues; absence  of  reasons  for  the  unofficial
    local detentions constituting  a  future  risk  to  the  appellant  and
    absence of any finding on internal relocation.

12. The wording of the decision at paragraphs 61-62  is  unfortunate,  with
    references to the respondent's claim rather than findings of fact  made
    by the judge. However, I  read  those  paragraphs  in  the  context  of
    paragraph 64 where the judge  clearly  accepted  the  evidence  of  the
    respondent. I therefore accept that the judge made findings of fact  at
    paragraph 61 of the decision that the respondent was suspected as a PKK
    sympathiser and was detained on two occasions when he  was  ill-treated
    and  threatened.  During  his  detentions  he  was   photographed   and
    fingerprinted. His detentions were unofficial in that he did not appear
    before a public prosecutor and was released without charge.  Unofficial
    records of his detention were created in his local area and would  come
    to the fore upon his return.

13. There are further findings of fact at paragraph 62 that the  respondent
    travelled without a passport and would be returned by emergency  travel
    documents and thus would be identified as a failed  asylum  seeker.  He
    would be subject to in-depth questioning by the Turkish authorities and
    there is a reasonable degree of likelihood that he would be sent to the
    airport police station for further investigation. The judge referred to
    IK (Returnees - IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAP  00312  but  did  not  then
    explain in terms how the local unofficial records could  "come  to  the
    fore". I have considered IK and note  paragraphs  133-135  which  state
    that extensive records can be kept about a person  in  his  local  area
    either manually or on a computer. At paragraph  135,  transfer  to  the
    airport police station could generate an enquiry by the  police  as  to
    what appears in the person's local records. I  find  that  the  country
    guidance case bridges the gap between  the  judge's  findings  and  the
    conclusion that the respondent is at risk upon return.  The  respondent
    should not be deprived of  the  benefit  of  the  positive  credibility
    findings made by the judge simply because the judge failed to fully set
    out the relevant country guidance in the decision. No material error of
    law arises.

14. It is common ground that the judge self-directed on internal relocation
    at paragraphs 24-26 of  the  decision.  The  judge  then  followed  the
    finding at paragraph 82 of IK that as a  returned  asylum  seeker,  the
    respondent could be subject to questioning  and  sent  to  the  airport
    police station for further investigation. The judge states at paragraph
    20 of the decision that the documents at pages 9-74 of the  appellant's
    bundle were considered. The Turkey OGN from May 2013 (paragraph 3.9.12)
    states that there are ongoing concerns about  the  use  of  torture  in
    Turkey, especially in places  of  detention,  with  insufficient  steps
    being taken to carry out efficient investigations into  allegations  of
    torture and ill-treatment.  As  a  matter  of  common  sense,  internal
    relocation would not assist the respondent if he was detained and  ill-
    treated at the airport.

15.  However,  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  IK  did  not  wholly  exclude  the
    possibility of  escaping  from  local  ill-treatment  by  state  actors
    through internal relocation. Internal relocation may be  a  possibility
    but  that  will  depend  on  an  individual's  material  history.   The
    respondent's  history  includes  past  detentions  and   suspicion   of
    membership of the PKK. Most of the risk factors from A (Turkey)  [2003]
    UKIAT 0034 apply to the  respondent;  including  suspected  involvement
    with a separatist organisation, previous detentions, the  raid  on  the
    respondent's house is evidence that the authorities did view him  as  a
    suspected separatist, there was a significant degree of  ill-treatment,
    the respondent left Turkey shortly after the raid,  he  is  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity and he does not have a Turkish passport.

16. At paragraph 120 of IK, the Upper Tribunal accepted the validity of the
    UNHCR guidance which stated that; "in the context of internal flight it
    is essential to find out if Turkish asylum seekers if returned would be
    suspected of connection or sympathy with the PKK.  In  this  case  they
    should not be considered as having been able to avail themselves of  an
    internal flight alternative ...  if  persecution  emanates  from  state
    authorities there is no internal  flight  alternative  or  relocation".
    That is consistent with the Secretary of State's OGN  which  states  at
    paragraphs 2.31-2.32 that "very careful consideration" must be given to
    internal relocation in the context of ill-treatment by state agents.

17. Taking all of those factors into account, I find that  the  failure  to
    make findings on internal relocation does  not  amount  to  a  material
    error of law. Given the findings of fact  and  the  case  law  set  out
    above, the First-Tier Tribunal could  only  have  found  that  internal
    relocation was not available to the respondent.

18. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal under the Refugee Convention did not involve  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and its decision stands.

Decision

19. I dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State.


Signed   [pic]    Date 30 August 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
