
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11840/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd December 2015                 |On 22nd January 2016                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                NASIRA SALAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Thornton
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 12th February 2015.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  22nd  July  1968.   She
    came  to  the  UK  on  8th  August  2014  and  claimed  asylum  shortly
    thereafter, on the basis that she feared persecution  on  a  return  to
    Pakistan on the grounds of religion.

 3. It was accepted by the respondent that she is of the Ahmadi  faith  and
    was party president for the Ahmadi ladies in her area for four to  five
    months before her departure from Pakistan. It was also accepted, in the
    refusal letter, that she had encountered some  societal  discrimination
    in her local area as a result of being an Ahmadi, but not that she  had
    preached the Ahmadi faith, nor that it was of particular importance  to
    her religious identity to practise and manifest it openly in  Pakistan.
    Her account of having come to  the  attention  of  the  Khatme  Nabuwat
    Maulvis was rejected.

 4. The judge found that the appellant was not a credible witness and in  a
    detailed  determination  in  which   the   appellant's   evidence   was
    forensically examined she concluded that the appellant's entire account
    of the circumstances which allegedly led to her  fleeing  Pakistan  was
    not credible.  In particular she rejected the claim that the  appellant
    had preached either in Pakistan or in the UK since her arrival here.

The grounds of application

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had not properly applied the relevant country guidance case of  MN  and
    Others (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk) Pakistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT
    389.

 6. The protection of behaviours which cover an Ahmadi  Muslim's  behaviour
    represents a marked departure from the previous country guidance  which
    attributed  risk  only   to   exceptional   Ahmadis,   defining   these
    substantially by reference  to  preaching  or  proselytising  activity.
    Under present case law, any Ahmadi Muslim whose intention  or  wish  to
    practise and manifest in Pakistan aspects of the faith not permitted by
    the Pakistan Penal Code will face persecution on return, even if he  or
    she would suppress that intention through fear of persecution.

 7. The judge had failed to deal  adequately  with  the  primary  question,
    which concerns the appellant's  strength  of  feeling  as  regards  the
    manifestation of her religious faith, and she was entitled  to  succeed
    by reference to MN and Others even if some aspects of  the  claim  were
    sustainably rejected by the judge.

 8. The judge's confusion was illustrated by her dealings with the evidence
    from the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association.  The relevant question  was  the
    appellant's commitment to the community and  to  its  defining  belief,
    supplemented by her leadership position. The judge had dealt  with  the
    letters in a confused and inadequate manner,  criticising  it  for  not
    recording that the appellant conducted preaching activities.  This  was
    factually incorrect since preaching was  referred  to  in  the  letter.
    Furthermore, she had erred in expecting excessive detail and had failed
    to distinguish between evidence which could be based only  upon  report
    and evidence based upon direct experience.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted for the reasons stated in the  grounds
    by Judge Cox on 15th April 2014, save for a final point relating to the
    judge's decision not to direct anonymity which was not material to  the
    outcome of the appeal.

10. On 8th May 2015 the respondent served a reply,  defending  the  judge's
    credibility findings.  It was  clear  that  she  had  directed  herself
    properly to the country guidance information and  the  appellant  would
    not be at risk on return merely as a follower of the Ahmadi faith.

Submissions

11. Mr Khan relied on his grounds.  He submitted that the appeal  ought  to
    have been allowed on  the  basis  of  the  facts  as  accepted  by  the
    respondent. Her profile, as the Ahmadi president in her local area, who
    held meetings at her home, was not in dispute. Irrespective of  whether
    the appellant had preached or not, she had attracted hostility.  It was
    accepted, at paragraph 13 of the refusal letter, that  the  appellant's
    doors had been broken, bricks and rubbish had been thrown at her and  a
    child from across the road had brought a gun.

12. He also argued that the  judge  had  approached  the  letter  from  the
    Ahmadiyya Association in the wrong way.  He referred to paragraph 66 of
    the decision in MN which states:

         "The Ahmadiyya Association is a highly organised one and is capable
         of providing sophisticated information  on  the  numbers  who  have
         converted to their faith, the number of  members  and  it  appears,
         based on the information provided on its website, the  numbers  who
         have faced difficulties".

    The  judge  had  unreasonably  expected  too  much  detail   from   the
    Association, more than an organisation under siege in Pakistan could be
    expected to provide.  In any event, the letter did refer  to  preaching
    to neighbours and the distribution of leaflets.

13. Mr Diwnycz relied on his Rule 24 reply but agreed that  there  was  too
    much focus in the determination on whether the appellant had engaged in
    preaching when the issue was whether she was at risk from her  accepted
    profile.

Findings and Conclusions

14. The grounds do not challenge the judge's conclusions  with  respect  to
    the claimed threats to her by the Khatme Nabuwat Maulvis nor  is  there
    any challenge to  her  rejection  of  the  appellant's  claim  to  have
    preached, save in relation to the treatment  of  the  Ahmadiyya  Muslim
    Association letter.

15. The judge accepted that there was  some  reference  in  the  letter  to
    preaching but she  was  entitled  to  state  that  no  information  was
    provided as to what was involved in her preaching  to  the  neighbours.
    Furthermore,  whilst  it  may  be  that  not  every  judge  would  have
    criticised the letter on the same basis, it was open to her to conclude
    that the references to preaching were vague and lacking in detail.  She
    did consider the evidence that the  appellant  had  preached  to  named
    neighbours in the UK but was entitled to give  little  weight  to  that
    evidence on the grounds that  neither  had  attended  the  hearing  nor
    provided written evidence in support of her claim.  Moreover, there can
    be no quarrel with the judge stating  that,  when  asked  how  she  had
    conducted her preaching activities in the UK, the appellant had in fact
    described putting letters and pamphlets through people's letterboxes.

16. The judge's conclusions on the credibility of the appellant's claim  to
    have preached were open to her and not vitiated by any legal error.

17. On the other hand, the judge criticised her inability at  interview  to
    provide detailed information about  the  life  of  Mirza  Ghulam  Ahmad
    Qaidiani but it is not disputed that she is an Ahmadi  from  birth  and
    there may have been many other reasons for her difficulty at  interview
    in giving clear answers.  Indeed, she said that she  felt  under  great
    pressure and was unwell.

18. It is quite clear that the judge's focus was on whether  the  appellant
    had shown that she was  committed  to  preaching  or  proselytising  in
    Pakistan.  However, as Mr Diwnycz accepted,  that  is  not  the  entire
    answer to the question of whether she would be at risk on return, which
    is  not  restricted  to  those  who  have  engaged  in   preaching   or
    proselytising activity.

19. In  concentrating  her  attention  on  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
    credibility rather than on whether, on the facts as found, she would be
    at risk on return, the judge erred in law. Her decision is set aside.

20. In MN and Others the Tribunal held, at paragraph 2(i):

         "The background to the risk faced by Ahmadis  is  legislation  that
         restricts the way in which they are able to openly  practise  their
         faith.  The legislation not  only  prohibits  preaching  and  other
         forms  of  proselytising  but  also  in  practice  restricts  other
         elements of manifesting one's religious beliefs,  such  as  holding
         open  discourse  about  religion  with  non-Ahmadis,  although  not
         amounting  to  proselytising.   The  prohibitions  include   openly
         referring to one's place of  worship  as  a  mosque  and  to  one's
         religious leader as an imam.  In addition Ahmadis are not permitted
         to refer to the call to prayer  as  azan  nor  to  call  themselves
         Muslims or refer to their faith as Islam.  Sanctions include a fine
         and imprisonment and if blasphemy is found there is a risk  of  the
         death penalty which to date has not been carried out although there
         is a risk of lengthy  incarceration  if  the  penalty  is  imposed.
         There is clear evidence that this legislation is used by  non-state
         actors to threaten and harass Ahmadis.  This includes the filing of
         First  Information  Reports  (the  first  step  in   any   criminal
         proceedings) which can result in detentions whilst prosecutions are
         being pursued.  Ahmadis are also subject to  attacks  by  non-state
         actors from sectors of the majority Sunni Muslim population".

21. Whilst the Tribunal accepted  that  it  was  possible  in  general  for
    Ahmadis to practise their faith on a restricted basis either in private
    or in community with other Ahmadis without infringing domestic Pakistan
    law, it concluded at paragraph 3(i):

         "If an Ahmadi is able to  demonstrate  that  it  is  of  particular
         importance to his religious identity to practise and  manifest  his
         faith openly in Pakistan in defiance of  the  restrictions  in  the
         Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) under Sections 298B and 298C by  engaging
         in behaviour described in paragraph 2(i) above he or she is  likely
         to be in need of protection in the light of the serious  nature  of
         the sanctions that  potentially  apply  as  well  as  the  risk  of
         prosecution under Section 295C for blasphemy.  It is no  answer  to
         expect an Ahmadi who fits  the  description  just  given  to  avoid
         engaging in behaviour described in paragraph 2(i) above to avoid  a
         risk of prosecution".

22. Whilst the Tribunal accepted that Ahmadis who were  not  able  to  show
    that they practised their faith at all in Pakistan or that they did  so
    on anything other than the  restricted  basis  described  in  paragraph
    2(ii) were in general unlikely to be able to show  that  their  genuine
    intentions or wishes were to practise and manifest their  faith  openly
    on return, the appellant does not fall into that category.

23. Undoubtedly the appellant is not merely a follower of the  faith.   She
    has held significant positions in her local community over a number  of
    years, most recently President, but  also  Secretary  for  services  to
    humanity from 2010 to 2012 and she has given out  leaflets  and  books.
    The criticisms by the judge of the AMA letter relate to the appellant's
    preaching activities rather  than  positions  held  within  the  Ahmadi
    community in Pakistan.

24. She may well have exaggerated the extent of her activities  and  indeed
    invented an attempt to kill her, but that in itself does not mean  that
    she would not be at risk.  The appellant has demonstrated by  her  past
    behaviour,  in  particular  the  holding  of  office,  that  it  is  of
    particular importance to her to preserve her religious  identity.   She
    has demonstrated a commitment to her community and its defining beliefs
    which, according to MN, puts her at risk on return.

Notice of Decision

25. The original judge erred in law.  The decision is set aside.  It is re-
    made as follows.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

