
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11027/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 April 2016                               |On 19 May 2016                |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Moriarty of Counsel instructed by Luqmani
                    Thompson & Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   These proceedings result from a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    following a  hearing  on  22  December  2015  against  which  both  the
    appellant and the respondent have been granted permission to appeal.

2.   The history of this matter is helpfully set out in paragraphs 3  and  4
    of the decision of the First-tier Judge as follows:


         "3.  The Appellant's history is that he arrived in the UK  in  mid-
             2011 and claimed asylum on 31 October  2011.   His  claim  for
             asylum was rejected by the Respondent in a decision  dated  20
             February 2012 but because he was then under 18  years  of  age
             and an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child, the  Appellant  was
             granted discretionary leave to enter and remain until 28  June
             2013 when he was assessed to be 17 years  and  6  months  old.
             The Appellant appealed against  the  decision  to  refuse  his
             claim for asylum and his appeal was heard by a  judge  of  the
             First-tier Tribunal who, in a decision  dated  4  April  2012,
             dismissed his appeal.  The Appellant applied for permission to
             appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  which  was  granted,  and  his
             appeal was heard on 28 August 2012.  In a  decision  dated  17
             September 2012 a deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal  dismissed
             the appeal.  The Appellant then sought permission to appeal to
             the Court of Appeal, which was  granted  and  his  appeal  was
             heard on 18 October 2013.  The decision of the Court of Appeal
             dismissing his appeal was dated 11 December  2013.   This  was
             after  the  expiry  of  the  discretionary  leave  which   had
             originally been granted to the Appellant.


         4.   Meanwhile, because of the imminent expiry of his discretionary
             leave, the Appellant submitted an application on 3  June  2013
             for further  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.   The  Respondent
             rejected that application in a decision dated 3 December 2013,
             some eight days before the handing down of the decision in his
             appeal to the Court of Appeal.   In  respect  of  this  second
             notice of rejection,  the  Appellant  submitted  a  notice  of
             appeal dated 16 December 2013 to the First-tier Tribunal under
             cover of a letter from his solicitors dated 17 December  2013.
             Meanwhile, he applied for and was granted permission to appeal
             to the UK Supreme Court against the decision of the  Court  of
             Appeal.  That appeal was heard by the Supreme Court on 2 and 3
             March 2015 and the decision of the Supreme  Court  was  handed
             down on 24  June  2015.   The  appeal  by  the  Appellant  was
             dismissed, which brought to an end that sequence of appeals."

3.   The proceedings herein result  from  the  decision  of  the  respondent
    dated 3 December 2013.

4.   The judge commenced by considering the findings made by the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 4 April 2012 and referred to the principles  in  Devaseelan
    [2002] UKIAT 00702.  The judge did not hear from the appellant who  was
    not called to give evidence but did hear  evidence  given  by  a  Mr  J
    Horsman who worked for a specialist accommodation and  support  service
    for young people in social services care.

5.   In reaching his conclusions the judge noted  that  the  judge  who  had
    determined the appellant's appeal on 4 April 2012 had  found  that  the
    core of the appellant's claim was not credible.  It was found that  the
    appellant's family in Afghanistan were at the  date  of  that  decision
    likely to be all alive and well.  The appellant did not  have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution but was an economic migrant and neither the
    Taliban nor the Afghan government authorities had any interest  in  the
    appellant.

6.   The judge was invited to revisit the conclusions reached by  the  judge
    in 2012 in the light of evidence that the appellant had suffered from a
    learning disability but in the absence of an expert learning disability
    assessment the judge was not satisfied that  the  material  before  him
    showed any grounds other than for continued assessment  nor  was  there
    anything shown of an additional factor which had not  been  taken  into
    consideration in the previous determination.  The evidence did not show
    new personal facts relating to the appellant which were  of  sufficient
    weight and clarity to allow him to depart from the principles  set  out
    in Devaseelan.  The judge went on to consider the issue of tracing  and
    did not find that the failure to  undertake  tracing  enquiries  was  a
    weighty factor in support of the appellant's credibility requiring  him
    to revisit the 2012 findings.

7.   The  judge  then  turned  to  consider  the  question  of  humanitarian
    protection and the submission that the  country  guidance  case  of  AK
    (Afghanistan) CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC) was out of  date.   The  judge
    considered this submission and concluded his determination as follows:

         "37. This Appellant says that he is from a remote mountain area  in
             the eastern province of Nangarhar.   The  Respondent  has  not
             disputed that claim and proposes to remove him and return  him
             to his family in the original home village.  The situation  in
             or around Kabul is not, therefore, relevant in this appeal.  I
             have considered all of the references put before me by counsel
             for the Appellant as set out in  the  record  of  proceedings,
             although it is not necessary for all of them to be repeated in
             this decision.


         38.  At page FT194 of the Appellant's bundle B there  is  a  report
             from the United  Nations  Assistance  Mission  in  Afghanistan
             (UNAMA) and the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner
             for Human Rights (UNHCR) dated February 2015  considering  the
             year 2014.  In the executive summary on page FT207 the  report
             describes the civilian loss of life and injury in  Afghanistan
             in 2014 as "reaching unprecedented levels"  with  over  10,500
             civilian casualties, which includes a 25% increase in civilian
             deaths and a 21% increase in civilian  injuries.   These  were
             the highest number of civilian deaths and injuries recorded by
             UNAMA since it began recording figures in 2009.  In a graph on
             page FT236 UNAMA reported the highest  number  of  deaths  and
             injuries in  the  east  of  Afghanistan,  including  Nangarhar
             province, since  their  records  began,  second  only  to  the
             civilian deaths and injuries in the south of Afghanistan.  The
             report went on to give information about  civilian  casualties
             from ground engagements involving both  pro-government  forces
             and anti-government  elements,  which  included  incidents  of
             crossfire deaths and cross-border shelling.  On page FT217  of
             the bundle UNAMA  reported  that  the  early  months  of  2015
             indicated that Afghan security forces  and  the  Taliban  "are
             determined to make the 2015 fighting season a turning point in
             the  conflict"  with   more   frequent   and   larger   ground
             engagements, including the use of indiscriminate shelling  and
             other weapons in civilian populated areas.  They expected that
             the number of civilian casualties will  continue  to  rise  in
             2015.


         39.  From page FT528 the bundle includes  a  report  from  Dr  Liza
             Schuster of the  Department  of  Sociology,  City  University,
             London, dated 26  March  2015.   From  paragraph  41  of  that
             report, on page FT538, Dr Schuster considers the situation  in
             Nangarhar province.  She notes that this is one  of  the  nine
             provinces  with  significant  poppy  cultivation,   which   is
             admitted by the Afghan government to  have  doubled  in  scope
             since 2013.  She reports views of key people that the security
             situation in Nangarhar had deteriorated, even  to  the  extent
             that district chiefs in 16 towns were unable  to  visit  their
             offices in official vehicles  and  had  to  use  local  taxis,
             effectively moving in disguise (paragraph  44).   Dr  Schuster
             set out particulars of  attacks  in  Nangarhar  in  the  early
             months of 2015 leading to civilian deaths and injuries.


         40.  The most  recent  operational  guidance  note  on  Afghanistan
             issued by the UK Home Office is dated February  2015  and  was
             from page FT775 of the bundle.  At paragraph  2.2.16  the  OGN
             noted that the provision of state protection outside of  Kabul
             or other main cities "might  not  be  accessible  due  to  the
             structural weakness of the security services".  At page  FT815
             there was a press release by the head of UNAMA dated 12  April
             2015 which confirmed that in the first three  months  of  2015
             civilian casualties from ground engagements had  risen  by  8%
             compared to the same period in 2014 which was,  in  its  turn,
             the highest number of  casualties  in  the  equivalent  period
             since records began  in  2009.   The  press  release  did  not
             identify individual provinces.  I also bear in mind  that  the
             international coalition forces were almost  all  withdrawn  by
             the end of  2014,  leaving  only  a  few  US  and  UK  service
             personnel engaged in training.


         41.  From page FT926 there was a copy of the  Home  Office  country
             information  and  guidance  on  Afghanistan  relating  to  the
             security and humanitarian situation  dated  August  2015.   At
             paragraph 2.4.4 on page FT930 the view was expressed that  the
             humanitarian  situation  in  Afghanistan  since  the   country
             guidance case of AK "has not deteriorated to the  extent  that
             it represents, in general, a real  risk  of  harm  country  to
             article 3 of the ECHR" but that the facts of  each  individual
             case must be considered.  At paragraph 2.5.7 it  was  reported
             that the worst affected areas for  security-related  incidents
             were  southern,  south-eastern  and   eastern   regions   with
             Nangarhar province  being  the  most  volatile,  although  the
             proportion of the civilian  population  directly  affected  by
             violence remains low.  Finally, it was noted at the hearing of
             the appeal on 22  December  2015  that  news  reports  in  the
             principal UK newspapers and  on  the  BBC  that  morning  were
             reporting advances by insurgent forces against the key town of
             Sangin in Helmand  province,  which  was  part  of  a  general
             escalation in the conflict  between  the  insurgents  and  the
             Afghan government.


         42.  I am bound by the country guidance cases issues by  the  Upper
             Tribunal unless I receive cogent and  credible  evidence  that
             the situation at the date of my consideration,  which  is  the
             date of hearing of this appeal, is  materially  different.   I
             take into consideration the decision of the Court of Appeal in
             SG & OR [2012] EWCA  Civ  940  which  confirmed  that  general
             position.  I have  looked  carefully  at  all  the  background
             information with which I have been provided, which comes  from
             authoritative and reliable sources and presents  a  consistent
             picture that the security situation throughout Afghanistan and
             particularly  in  the  southern,  south-eastern  and   eastern
             provinces, including Nangarhar, has substantially deteriorated
             since  2012.   The  reports  by  UNAMA  show  the  significant
             consequences of  that  escalation  in  early  2015  after  the
             withdrawal  of  most  coalition   armed   forces   and   makes
             predictions  of  continuing  deterioration  in  the   security
             situation which most recent news reports indicate  are  likely
             to be true.  Against  that  background  information,  which  I
             accept as credible and reliable, I have reached the conclusion
             that the country guidance in AK is no longer authoritative for
             this  appeal.   I  find  that   the   background   information
             demonstrates  that  the  overall  security  situation  in  the
             province of Nangarhar has  deteriorated  to  the  extent  that
             simply returning a person to that province, even to live in  a
             rural location as this Appellant did, will be likely to  place
             him at real risk of serious harm simply by his  residence.   I
             find that this Appellant is entitled to  the  benefit  of  the
             protection afforded by  article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
             Directive.


         Humanitarian Protection


         43.  I did not receive any additional submissions on behalf of  the
             Appellant about  his  entitlement,  if  any,  to  humanitarian
             protection  in  the  UK.   In  the  light  of  the  continuing
             authority of the findings by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  as
             to the credibility of the Appellant, I find that  he  has  not
             shown a real risk that in his individual case, his removal  to
             Afghanistan will be in breach of his rights under article 3 of
             the ECHR  and  that  he  would  be  entitled  to  humanitarian
             protection.  However, I  have  found  that  the  Appellant  is
             entitled to the benefit of  article  15  (c)  because  of  the
             general security situation.


         Human Rights


         44.  In his skeleton argument, counsel  for  the  Appellant  argued
             that the removal of the Appellant would be in  breach  of  his
             rights under article 8 of the ECHR and he set out for specific
             grounds.   In  his  oral  submissions,  he  did  not  add  any
             additional  details.   In  essence,  counsel  relied  on   the
             evidence from Mr Horsman, as supported by the Appellant's  GP,
             that the Appellant would find it very difficult to reintegrate
             into Afghanistan and live independently because of his limited
             skills and lack of progress  while  in  the  UK.   As  I  have
             concluded above, although I accept the views expressed  by  Mr
             Horsman as being honestly  and  reasonably  put  forward,  the
             conclusion reached by the first Judge in his appeal  was  that
             his family most likely remains in Afghanistan and there was no
             reason  why  the  Appellant  should  not  rejoin  them.    The
             presenting officer made clear that  it  was  the  Respondent's
             position that the Appellant could go back to  his  family  and
             that there was, therefore, no need to assess whether he  could
             relocate to Kabul or any other part of the country.  As I have
             concluded that I must begin my consideration with that judge's
             findings, it follows that I must find that the Appellant  will
             return to his own family, into  the  rural  agricultural  life
             that he previously knew where his illiteracy and lack of urban
             life skills will not be a significant factor.  I find that the
             Appellant will be able to integrate into Afghanistan and  that
             he does not meet, therefore,  the  requirements  of  paragraph
             276ADE of the Immigration Rules.


         45.  In the light of the above conclusions I find that the decision
             appealed against would not cause the United Kingdom to  be  in
             breach of  the  law  or  its  obligations  under  the  Refugee
             Convention.   I  further  find  that  the  Appellant  has  not
             established his entitlement to humanitarian  protection  under
             paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules HC 395.


         46.  In the light  of  the  above  conclusions,  I  find  that  the
             decision appealed against would cause the United Kingdom to be
             in breach of the law or its obligations under article 3 of the
             European Convention on Human Rights but not under article 8.


         NOTICE OF DECISION


         47.  I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.


         48.  I dismiss the appeal in respect of Humanitarian Protection.


         49.  I allow the appeal on human rights grounds under article 3  of
             the ECHR."




8.   It will be observed that there is a difficulty  with  the  construction
    of this determination.  In the grounds  of  appeal  Counsel  refers  to
    paragraph 48 of the decision  where  it  is  recorded  that  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal in respect of humanitarian protection and  submits
    that this must be a misprint.  However there is an  additional  problem
    in paragraph 45 where the judge clearly records that the appellant  has
    not established his humanitarian protection case under paragraph  339C.



9.   As I have said both sides  were  dissatisfied  with  the  decision  and
    permission to appeal was granted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  on  12
    February 2016 in respect  of  the  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.  Judge Perkins considered  that  while
    reasons had been given arguably these "are not sufficient  to  overcome
    the considerable weight that should be attached  to  country  guidance.
    Arguably the mere fact that  the  evidence  is  more  recent  than  the
    country guidance is not enough".

10.  In the grounds the respondent had referred to the case of SG relied  on
    by the First-tier Judge and had set out paragraph 47 of  that  decision
    as follows:

         "It  is  for  these  reasons,  as  well  as  the  desirability   of
         consistency, that decision makers and Tribunal Judges are  required
         to take country guidance determinations into account, and to follow
         them unless very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence,  are
         adduced justifying their not doing so."

11.  In relation to the argument that the judge had misapplied the  guidance
    set out in Devaseelan the First-tier  Tribunal  granted  permission  to
    appeal in a decision dated 5 February 2016.  It was noted that evidence
    had been adduced from at least five health professionals including  the
    appellant's  GP  that  the  appellant  might  be  suffering   from   an
    undiagnosed  learning  disability  which  could  explain  the  previous
    inconsistencies in his account.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge referred
    to the argument that the Tribunal had made no reference to guideline  7
    in Devaseelan where the  Tribunal  had  said  that  the  force  of  the
    reasoning underlying the guidelines 4 and 6 would be greatly reduced if
    there was some very good reason why the appellant's failure  to  adduce
    relevant evidence before the first Tribunal should not be held  against
    him.  The judge found it arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in the light of all the evidence when he declined  to  visit  the
    issue of credibility and he had failed to adopt a  holistic  assessment
    of credibility in the light of all the evidence.   Both  the  appellant
    and the respondent filed responses opposing their respective arguments.
     Mr Bramble pointed out that the judge had stated in paragraph 27  that
    no expert learning disability assessment had  been  completed  and  the
    Tribunal now had the report of Dr Peter Maggs which might  be  relevant
    were the appeal to be remitted de novo.  However he submitted that  the
    judge had been entitled to conclude as he did on  the  material  before
    him.  He relied on his grounds of  appeal  and  submitted  that  strong
    evidence had not been found for departing from the country guidance and
    little specific material had been identified.   The  decision  was  not
    sufficiently reasoned.

12.  Mr Moriarty invited me to uphold the judge's decision  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds and to find  that  he  had  misdirected  himself  in
    respect of his findings on the appellant's credibility.

13.  As I indicated at the hearing I  find  very  considerable  difficulties
    with this determination.  It does appear clear on any view that where a
    country guidance case is to be departed from, great care  is  required.
    While the judge refers to the decision of the Court of Appeal in SG the
    wording in paragraph 47 of the case - reproduced  in  the  respondent's
    grounds which I have set out above - does not appear to  have  informed
    the approach of the First-tier Judge who simply refers to the reception
    of "cogent and credible evidence"  rather  than  "very  strong  grounds
    supported by cogent evidence".

14.  Standing back from the decision for a moment, the  judge  having  found
    that the appellant would be at real risk  of  serious  harm  simply  by
    virtue of his residence in Nangarhar went on in  paragraph  44  of  his
    decision when considering Article 8 issues to conclude that  there  was
    no reason why the appellant should not rejoin his family in  that  very
    province.  He could resume his rural agricultural  life  with  his  own
    family.  Having found this the  judge  then,  as  I  have  said,  twice
    indicated he was  dismissing  the  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds.   It  is  extremely  difficult  to  reconcile  these   various
    features.  If the judge had indeed throughout  intended  to  allow  the
    appeal on humanitarian protection grounds it is difficult to see how he
    could have expressed himself as he  did  in  paragraph  44.   He  would
    either have made it clear that  it  was  not  necessary  to  deal  with
    Article 8 or have made  his  findings  expressly  in  the  alternative.
    Coupled with what is said at paragraph 45 and  48  of  the  decision  I
    believe that the problems cannot be  dismissed  as  mere  typographical
    ones.  It may be that the judge changed his mind at some point  in  the
    drafting of the determination but whatever the position the outcome  is
    unsatisfactory.

15.  Insofar as the Devaseelan point is concerned, I am  in  agreement  with
    the grounds that  the  judge  made  no  reference  to  guideline  7  in
    Devaseelan in the light of the evidence given  by  Mr  Horsman  at  the
    hearing referred to in paragraph 6  of  the  appellant's  grounds.   As
    argued in paragraph 11 the judge had  applied  the  guidelines  without
    calibrating them to the proper context of the case.

16.  I have come to the conclusion that in the light of the concerns  raised
    in the respective grounds of appeal as well as the difficulties  raised
    by the apparently contradictory findings  made  by  the  judge  in  the
    concluding paragraphs of his decision, it would not  be  right  to  let
    this decision stand and the  matter  should  be  remitted  for  hearing
    afresh before a different First-tier  Judge.   The  appeal  is  allowed
    accordingly.   The  anonymity  order  made  by  the  First-tier   Judge
    continues.  None of the findings of fact are to stand.






Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                                  Date 13 April 2016

G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

