
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11637/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th July 2016                             |On 8th August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                                   Miss K.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Neal, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This the Appellant's, Miss K's, appeal against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ross promulgated on  25th  May  2016  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone. It is the Appellant's  case
    that if she is returned she will be killed for refusing  to  carry  out
    female genital mutilation, FGM, having inherited her mother's title  of
    Sowei following her mother's death on 10th July  1995,  which  involved
    initiating people into  the  Bondo  and  Sowei  societies  which  would
    involve her being forced to perform FGM on them but she says  that  she
    has since 2010 campaigned against FGM.

 3. In his decision First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross accepted at paragraph 22
    that the Appellant had been made  Sowei  following  the  death  of  her
    mother and had subsequently become opposed to FGM and he indicated that
    he found that it would not to be safe for her to  return  to  her  home
    area.  Although the judgement does not specify what is  meant  by  'her
    home area' I take that to be, as is said by the  Appellant  within  the
    Grounds of Appeal, returning to Moyamba.

 4. However Judge Ross then went on to make  adverse  credibility  findings
    about the Appellant in relationship with her husband  and  daughter  at
    paragraph 23 and went on to then consider whether or not the  Appellant
    would be able to relocate to Freetown in safety. The  judge  considered
    following the case of FB  (Lone  women  PSG  relocation)  Sierra  Leone
    [2008] UKAIT 00090 that the Appellant could safely  relocate  with  her
    husband to Freetown and dismissed her appeal on  asylum,  human  rights
    and humanitarian protection grounds.

 5. The Appellant has now  sought  to  appeal  against  that  decision  and
    permission to appeal has been granted by Designated  Immigration  Judge
    McCarthy on 23rd June 2016.  Judge McCarthy indicated that on 13th June
    2016 the Appellant applied to amend the Grounds of Appeal and  that  he
    admitted the amended Grounds of Appeal and considered those alone.

 6. Within the Amended Grounds of Appeal it is argued in the  first  ground
    of appeal that the First-tier Tribunal judge  failed  take  account  of
    relevant evidence. It is argued by the Appellant that when  considering
    whether or not the Appellant could  safely relocate  to  Freetown  that
    the judge had failed to take account of the Appellant's own evidence of
    the problems  that  she  had  previously  experienced  when  living  in
    Freetown herself, namely her evidence that in 2012 Sowei women had come
    to her house in Freetown to attack her and she was forced to leave  the
    house for her family's safety and that stones were thrown at the house,
    and that further that on another occasion when  she  staying  with  her
    cousin in Freetown Sowei women threatened to burn the  cousin's  house,
    as a result of which she was forced to leave.

 7. It is argued that the distinction between the Appellant's case and  the
    case of FB was that the Appellant had actually suffered threats  within
    Freetown and it is argued by the  Appellant  that  the  judge  has  not
    actually properly considered that relevant  evidence  when  considering
    whether or not the Appellant could safely relocate to  Freetown  having
    already been subject to threats  in  Freetown.   Within  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal Judge McCarthy indicated that it was arguable that
    there was no analysis or reference to  these  instances  within  either
    paragraphs 23 or 24 of the decision and that it was arguable  that  the
    judge had overlooked that evidence.

 8. I am grateful to the submissions I have  heard  this  morning  from  Mr
    Neil, Counsel for the Appellant and also from Mr  Tarlow,  Senior  Home
    Office Presenting Officer.  In light of those submissions it  has  been
    agreed and conceded by Mr Tarlow that this is a case in which there may
    be errors within the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross.   With
    regards to ground one of the grounds of appeal Mr Tarlow conceded  that
    insofar as the question as to the Appellant's  own  evidence  regarding
    the threats made to her whilst living in Freetown  that  that  evidence
    has not been  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  his
    consideration as to whether or not the Appellant could safely  relocate
    to Freetown, at paragraph 24 of the decision.

 9. Given that concession, I find that the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  has
    looked simply followed FB in finding that  an  appellant  could  safely
    relocate to Freetown, as a general  principle,  but  has  not  actually
    considered specifically the evidence from the Appellant herself in this
    case regarding the threats  that  she  said  that  she  had  previously
    suffered whilst in Freetown itself.

10. I do therefore find that this  relevant  evidence  that  has  not  been
    considered by the judge and I find  that  that  may  well  have  had  a
    material  effect  on  the  outcome  of  the  case  regarding   internal
    relocation.  I do therefore find that that is a material error of law.

11. In the second ground of appeal it is argued that there are insufficient
    reasons given for the adverse  credibility  findings  at  paragraph  23
    where the First-tier Tribunal Judge disbelieved the Appellant's account
    of the breakdown of the Appellant's relationship with her husband.

12. Within the Grounds of Appeal and in oral submissions before me, it  was
    argued that the Appellant said that she was unable to give  a  specific
    date as to when she separated from her husband, but when forced  to  do
    so she indicated that she said that it was about 2011.   However it  is
    argued that the Appellant had indicated that she was not able to give a
    clear date and that what are said to be inconsistencies should  not  be
    taken against her, and that little weight should  be  placed  upon  the
    answers that she  gave  in  that  regard  in  the  screening  interview
    following the case of JF (Afghanistan.

13. However, when  looks  at  paragraph  23  of  the  judgment,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ross the judge stated :

         "However, one aspect of her claim about  which  she  has  not  been
         truthful, in my judgement  is  the  position  in  relation  to  her
         husband and daughter. Her account of when she  separated  from  her
         husband and whether she has  any  contact  with  her  daughter  has
         changed, and she does not  appear  to  be  able  to  stick  to  one
         account.  In her evidence to me she  was  pressed  about  when  she
         separated from her husband. She stated that she could not remember.
         She then stated it was 2011.  She then stated that her last contact
         with her husband was when she was leaving  and  told  him  that  he
         would have to look after the child.  She confirmed that  this  must
         have been in 2013.  In her screening interview at 6.5 she was asked
         when she had last seen her children and she  replied  that  she  is
         with my husband.  She was then asked: Are you in contact with them?
         and she replied Yes.  In her statement at paragraph 14 she said she
         was separated from her husband in 2012 and had  lost  contact  with
         her daughter and did not know where she was.  In the evidence of F.
         B. he said that when he left Sri Lanka in 2013  the  Appellant  was
         living with her husband. He then changed his account and said  that
         the Appellant moved to live with him.  Mrs B. said  that  when  the
         Appellant came to the UK she had still been  in  contact  with  her
         husband but that he had gone ballistic when she had told  him  that
         she was proposing to claim asylum on the basis of her opposition to
         FGM. There is  no  clear  account  therefore  of  the  relationship
         between the Appellant and her husband and daughter and  I  consider
         that the Appellant has not been truthful about  this,  because  she
         does not want to admit she could return to live with her husband in
         Freetown. "

14. Although criticism is made of the evidence recorded  by  the  judge  in
    respect of Mr B.  And as to whether or not what  is  actually  recorded
    within the decision was his evidence in that regard,  the  evidence  as
    recorded by Judge Ross at [23] correlates with his note of the evidence
    in the Record of Proceedings.  However in my judgement the findings  of
    Judge Ross as to why he disbelieved the evidence regarding relationship
    between the Appellant and  her  husband  and  daughter  has  been  both
    adequately and sufficiently explained. The judge has set out clear  and
    adequate reasons for his findings in this regard, and clearly  set  out
    and  explain  the  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence.   Although   the
    appellant says that she could not actually remember specifically  being
    asked the questions she was asked in screening interview,  it  was  not
    being argued that the appellant had given inconsistent answers to  that
    which were recorded, simply that she could not remember.

15. The Judge has clearly set out and what he found to  be  inconsistencies
    in the evidence regarding the relationships  and  also  inconsistencies
    between the evidence of the Appellant and also the evidence of  Mr  F.B
    and was entitled in my judgement  to  make  the  findings  he  made  in
    respect of the fact that the Appellant had not been truthful  regarding
    the position in relation to her  husband  and  daughter.   The  Judge's
    reasons are clearly set out and have been adequately  and  sufficiently
    explained.

16. In respect of the third ground of appeal, it is argued that Judge  Ross
    at  paragraph  25  wrongly  considered  the  risk  of  suicide  to  the
    Appellant.  In that regard when looking  at  paragraph  25  Judge  Ross
    found and stated:

         "I must go on to consider whether the appeal should be  allowed  on
         the basis of her depressed condition. The report from the  clinical
         psychologist with regard to Krotoewizc-Griffiths dated 19th January
         2016 makes it clear that there is no real  risk  in  this  case  of
         suicide. She states that M.  Denied having any intention or plan to
         harm herself. There  is  no  history  of  self-harming  or  suicide
         attempts. There is no evidence of impulsive  personality  features.
         The report of Professor  Katona  indicates  that  there  may  be  a
         deterioration of her mental state if she is obliged to go  back  to
         Sierra Leone.  There is no evidence in this case that the Appellant
         has harmed herself or that she will do so.   I consider  that  even
         taking the report of Professor Katona at its highest  there  is  no
         justification for concluding that there is a real risk  of  suicide
         in this case.   I consider there is a very big  difference  between
         thinking about suicide and actually  carrying  it  out.   The  high
         point of the report is that Professor Katona states,  'there  is  a
         high risk of experiencing an increased frequency and  intensity  of
         these thoughts and that she might act upon  them  with  potentially
         lethal consequences.'  Looking at the criterion set out in the case
         of J v Home Secretary [2005] EWCA Civ 629 I do not  consider  there
         is any objective evidence that the Appellant  will  be  ill-treated
         upon return and this tends  to  draw  me  to  the  conclusion  that
         removal will not constitute a breach of Article 3.'"

17. Although Judge Ross at paragraph 25 indicates that the  high  point  of
    the report of Professor Katona when he says that "There is a high  risk
    that she would experience an increase in the frequency and intensity of
    these thoughts and that she might act on them with  potentially  lethal
    consequences", that does not fully reflect what was said in the  report
    of  Professor  Katona.  At  paragraph  10(b)  of  his  report  although
    Professor Katona did clearly state that  in  his  professional  opinion
    there is a  high risk she would experience increased intensity of these
    thoughts and she may act upon them with potential lethal  consequences"
    as stated by the Judge, the Professor went on to find specifically that
    "In my opinion Miss K. will be at significant risk of suicide  both  in
    the UK, prior to removal, once she has  given  up  all  hope  of  being
    allowed to remain, during the removal process and once she is  back  in
    Sierra Leone".

18. I find that the judge is not fully  taken  account  of  the  report  of
    Professor Katona and the evidence given by him in respect of  the  risk
    of suicide,  and  this  amounts  to  a  failure  to  consider  material
    evidence.

19.  However,  the  question  of  risk  of  suicide   and   the   appellant
    psychological state will have to be reconsidered  in  any  event,  when
    considering the question of internal relocation, and as to  whether  or
    not that will be unduly harsh.

20. In such circumstances  I  do  find  that  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ross does contain material errors of law and I set aside
    the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  respect  of  his
    reasoning both in terms of internal relocation and the risk of suicide.



21. However I preserve the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  findings  contained
    at paragraph 22 of the judgment in terms of the  Appellant  being  made
    Sowei and that she has subsequently become opposed to FGM, and that  it
    will not be safe to go back to her local area.

22. In terms of disposal, given the fact  that  the  question  of  internal
    relocation, risk of suicide, and risk upon return therefore have to  be
    reconsidered, in my judgement it is appropriate  for  the  case  to  be
    remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  given  the  amount  of  fact
    finding that was required in  that  regard.   The  case  is  to  be  to
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard before any  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross.




Notice of Decision

    The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross  does  contain  material
    errors of law and is set aside in respect of his findings  on  internal
    relocation, risk of suicide and risk upon return.  However, I  preserve
    his findings at paragraph 22 relating to the risk to the  Appellant  in
    her home area.

    The case is to be to remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    heard before  any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ross.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 29th July 2016

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
