
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11022/2014
                                                               AA/11024/2014
                                                               AA/11027/2014
                                                               AA/11029/2014
                                                               AA/11032/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                       | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On 21 September 2015                         | On 25 September 2015         |
|Prepared on 22 September 2015                |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    M I A
                                     S I
                                    M S I
                                     M J
                                    M I I
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Dogra, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  The  First  Appellant  first
      entered the UK in 2013, using entry clearance granted  to  him  on  13
      December 2012. Subsequently he was granted  a  multi-entry  visa.  The
      Second to Fifth Appellants (his wife and three children)  entered  the
      UK in 2014 using entry clearance granted to them on 19 November  2013.
      The Appellants claimed asylum on 15 March 2014.
   2. On 28 November 2014 the Respondent refused the asylum claims,  and  in
      consequence made a decision to refuse to  vary  their  leave,  and  to
      remove the family by reference to s47. The Appellants' appeals against
      those removal decisions were heard on 26 January 2015, and  they  were
      dismissed in a Decision promulgated on 5  March  2015  by  First  Tier
      Tribunal Judge Buchanan.
   3. The Appellants were granted permission to appeal the  Decision  on  31
      March 2015 by Tribunal Judge Pooler on the basis it was arguable there
      had been procedural unfairness because the Judge  had  gone  behind  a
      concession of fact made by the Respondent.
   4. Thus the matter comes before me.


   The Respondent's decision
   5. It is accepted on behalf of the  Respondent  that  in  the  course  of
      giving her reasons for refusing the asylum applications, she had  said
      the following [RFR #13];
     In the light of the above, it is  considered  that  you  have  given  a
              consistent and coherent account of why you converted  to  the
              Shia denomination of Islam. It is therefore accepted that you
              are a Shia Muslim.
   6. It is moreover accepted that this amounts to  concessions  of  primary
      fact, that lie at the  heart  of  the  First  Appellant's  claim  that
      because he had converted to the Shia faith, from the  Deobandi  faith,
      that he and his family are at risk of harm. The Respondent  has  never
      formally withdrawn either the concession that the First Appellant is a
      Shia Muslim, or, that he converted to that  faith  from  the  Deobandi
      faith.


   The Judge's decision
   7. The Judge noted  the  existence  of  the  concession  that  the  First
      Appellant was a Shia Muslim [6.18] but makes no express  reference  to
      the concession that the First Appellant had converted  to  that  faith
      from the Deobandi faith.
   8. It is common ground that the only fair reading for paragraph  6.24  of
      the Decision is that the Judge therein considered the  credibility  of
      the First Appellant's claim to have converted to the  Deobandi  faith.
      Rather than noting the Respondent's concession of fact the Judge  made
      the following finding, rejecting his claim to have done so;
     I do not consider it likely, in face of the  objective  evidence  about
              the terror wraught upon the Shias, that the appellant and his
              wife and children would convert to Shia sect  simply  because
              two Shia Muslims began working for the appellant and that  on
              observing them, the appellant was persuaded  that  these  are
              true lovers of the Prophet.  I  consider  that  the  evidence
              about converting sects is vague and superficial  and  without
              sufficient detail to persuade me that it  truly  occurred  as
              claimed.
   9. There are other references in the Decision to the lack of  credibility
      of the evidence of the First and Second Appellants, but it is clear in
      my judgement that the Judge rejected the  core  of  the  account  upon
      which the asylum claim is based, which the Respondent had conceded. Mr
      Mangion accepted before me that  the  Respondent  had  not  sought  to
      resile from the concession at the hearing, and that the Judge had  not
      given any indication to the parties at the hearing that he intended to
      disregard it. For her part Ms Dogra accepts that  the  Judge  was  not
      bound to accept the Respondent's concession, if he had good reason not
      to do so, and if he took steps to  ensure  that  the  Appellants  were
      afforded a fair hearing. In this case  that  might  have  required  an
      adjournment and providing the opportunity for the Appellants to obtain
      further evidence on the issue.
  10. I have in these circumstances considered whether or not to  remit  the
      appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for it to be reheard,  as  requested
      by the Appellants. In the circumstances of the appeal I  am  satisfied
      that this is the correct approach, and I note Mr Mangion does not seek
      to suggest otherwise. In circumstances such as these,  the  effect  of
      that  error  of  law  has  been  to  deprive  the  Appellants  of  the
      opportunity for their case to be properly and fairly considered by the
      First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of  25
      September 2012. Moreover the  extent  of  the  judicial  fact  finding
      exercise is such that having regard to the over-riding  objective,  it
      is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to  the  First  Tier
      Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of  25  September
      2012.
  11. Having reached that conclusion, with the agreement of  the  parties  I
      make the following directions;
           i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside and the  appeal  is
              remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing.  No
              findings of fact are preserved.  The  appeal  is  not  to  be
              listed before Judge Buchanan.
          ii) An Urdu interpreter  is  required  for  the  hearing  of  the
              appeal.
         iii) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at the
              North Shields hearing centre after 12 October 2015.
          iv) The Respondent shall by 5pm  on  5  October  2015  state  her
              position in writing in relation to the  concessions  of  fact
              previously made in paragraph 13 of the letter of 28  November
              2014, specifying whether the First Appellant's claim to  have
              converted to the Shia faith from the Deobandi faith continues
              to be accepted, or, whether  the  Respondent  accepts  merely
              that the family are Shia Muslim, or,  whether  she  withdraws
              the previous concession in its entirety so that no concession
              is made in relation to the family's faith.
           v) The Anonymity Direction previously made  by  the  First  Tier
              Tribunal is preserved.




Decision

  12. The decision promulgated on 5 March 2015 did involve the making of  an
      error of law sufficient to require it to be set aside and the  appeals
      to be reheard. Accordingly the decision upon the appeal is  set  aside
      and the appeals are remitted to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  with  the
      following directions;
           i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside and the  appeal  is
              remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing.  No
              findings of fact are preserved.  The  appeal  is  not  to  be
              listed before Judge Buchanan.
          ii) An Urdu interpreter  is  required  for  the  hearing  of  the
              appeal.
         iii) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at the
              North Shields hearing centre after 12 October 2015.
          iv) The Respondent shall by 5pm  on  5  October  2015  state  her
              position in writing in relation to the  concessions  of  fact
              previously made in paragraph 13 of the letter of 28  November
              2014, specifying whether the First Appellant's claim to  have
              converted to the Shia faith from the Deobandi faith continues
              to be accepted, or, whether  the  Respondent  accepts  merely
              that the family are Shia Muslim, or,  whether  she  withdraws
              the previous concession in its entirety so that no concession
              is made in relation to the family's faith.
           v) The Anonymity Direction previously made  by  the  First  Tier
              Tribunal is preserved.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 22 September 2015

