
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/11171/2014
                                                               AA/11176/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     cMa
                                     NMA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellants:    Mr P. Turner, instructed by Crescent Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellants. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings.

 2. The appellants are appealing the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (FtT), promulgated on 16 February  2015,  whereby  it  dismissed  their
    appeals against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to  grant  them
    asylum or humanitarian protection and to remove them  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. The appellants are nationals of Pakistan who are married to each other.
    The first appellant was born on 1 July 1945 and  the  second  appellant
    was born on 1 January 1945.  They were issued visit visas to visit  the
    UK on several occasions between  2009  and  2014.  In  July  2014  they
    entered the UK on a valid visit and  claimed  asylum  on  entry.  Since
    2011, until coming to the UK, they have been living in Dubai.

 4. The appellants claim to have a well founded fear of persecution arising
    from their religious practice as Ahmadis.  The core of their  claim  is
    that they have a high standing within the Ahmadi and wider community in
    Pakistan (a photograph of the first appellant,  who  is  a  pharmacist,
    appears in a book about the Ahmadi and he is a Musi, which is  position
    of honour and privilege, placing him at higher risk);  they  have  used
    their home for prayer meetings (between 1983 and 1995; and then between
    2003 and 2014), and  the  first  appellant  has  undertaken  preaching.
    Although they have  not  personally  had  problems  directly  from  the
    authorities, they claim that they are unable to  practice  their  faith
    openly and are at real risk of persecution if returned to Pakistan such
    risk having been heightened by their conduct since arriving in the UK.

 5. The respondent refused the appellants' application for  asylum.  Whilst
    it was accepted that they were Ahmadi, it was not  accepted  that  they
    would be at risk on return to Pakistan  because  of  their  faith.  The
    respondent  did  not  accept  that  they  were  openly  practising  and
    preaching Ahmadi Muslims such that they would fall into a  category  of
    person considered at risk  under  MN  and  others  (Ahmadis  -  country
    conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389(IAC)

Decision of FtT

 6. The appellants appealed and their appeal was heard by FtT  Judge  Ford.
    The FtT made clear that the appeal was being considered in light of  MN
    and Others and HJ (Iran) 2010 UKSC 31. It accepted that the  appellants
    were Ahmadi but not that they were inclined to preach or proselytise or
    attempt to convert non Ahmadis. At paragraph [44] the FtT concluded:

         "I am not satisfied that they wish to practice their faith in  such
         a matter as to bring them to the adverse attention of the  Pakistan
         authorities. This is not a case where they  have  been  intimidated
         and prevented by threats and  fears  of  violence  from  practicing
         their faith in the way it demands. Their faith, ie  their  personal
         faith, does  not  demand  proselytising,  preaching  or  attempting
         conversation of others."

 7. The FtT did not accept that their sur place  activities  added  to  the
    level of risk they would face and found at paragraph [45] that if  they
    are returned to Pakistan they

         "... will continue to practice their faith in  the  way  that  they
         have always done so, which is in private and in  a  quiet  personal
         way."

 8. In reaching its conclusion about the risk the appellants would face  on
    return to Pakistan the FtT made, inter alia, the following findings:

      a. Although the first appellant was considered  a  generally  credible
         witness, the FtT did not accept his account of regularly  returning
         to Pakistan to continue Ahmadi activities and of allowing his  home
         to be used for prayer meetings after moving to Dubai in 2011.

      b. It was accepted that the appellants hosted prayer meetings in their
         home between 1983 and 1995 but not between 1995 and 2011.

      c. The FtT found that the first appellant had never preached  directly
         or indirectly to non Ahmadis in Pakistan or elsewhere  and  is  not
         perceived as a proselytiser either in the UK or Pakistan.

      d. His sur place activities have been limited to attending events  and
         handing out leaflets.

      e. Prior to 2011 the appellants were living a quiet life  in  Pakistan
         as respected members of the Ahmadi community and  participating  in
         administrative functions of  the  community.  The  first  appellant
         participated in administrative functions for the community and is a
         Musi which is a position  of  privilege  and  honour  but  not  one
         involving proselytising or preaching.

      f. The first appellant's photograph appears in a book  by  the  Ahmadi
         community but there was  no  evidence  to  suggest  this  book  was
         distributed beyond the community.

      g. The FtT found that the first appellant is  an  individual  who  has
         always chosen to practice his faith  in  private  and  limited  his
         discussion of his faith to other Ahmadis and trusted friends.

Grounds of appeal

 9. In a detailed grounds of appeal,  the  appellants  raise  a  number  of
    issues.

      a. Firstly, they argue that the FtT  applied  the  wrong  standard  of
         proof.

      b. Secondly, they argue that the FtT misapplied the applicable country
         guidance MN and Others and that on a correct application of the law
         to the facts found by the FtT the appeals should have been allowed.
         The essence of  their  argument  is  that  the  FtT  concluded  the
         appellants were not at risk because they are not  inclined  towards
         proselytising and preaching whereas MN and Others recognises that a
         range of activities falling short of this,  such  as  holding  open
         discourse  about  religion  with  non-Ahmadis  or  referring  to  a
         religious leader as an Imam, can place an Ahmadi at risk  and  that
         they should not have to conceal core aspects of their  identity  by
         exercising 'discretion' if returned to Pakistan.

      c. Thirdly, they argue that the  FtT  improperly  failed  to  make  an
         anonymity direction.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan on the
    basis that the FtT may have erred in its assessment of  what  treatment
    might cumulatively amount to persecution and in the application of  the
    relevant country guidance (ie the second of the three grounds described
    above). Judge Canavan described the  ground  relating  to  standard  of
    proof as unarguable. With regard to anonymity, the Upper Tribunal  made
    an appropriate direction and I am satisfied that  this  issue  has  now
    been resolved. The matter before me, therefore, is the  second  of  the
    three grounds described above.

Submissions

11. Mr Turner argued (both orally and in a skeleton argument) that the  FtT
    had not applied MN and Others correctly. It based  its  decision  on  a
    finding that the first appellant is not (and has not been)  engaged  in
    proselytising and preaching whereas, under MN and Others,  the  correct
    test is whether the appellants wish to openly practice  their  religion
    as they have been able to do since coming to the UK and  whether,  upon
    return to Pakistan, they would have to curtail  the  open  practice  of
    their religion, which under HJ (Iran) cannot be expected  of  them.  He
    submitted that the first appellant is an elderly man who  has  lived  a
    quiet life in respect of his faith  in  Pakistan  because  of  fear  of
    persecution. Upon coming to the UK he started  to  practice  his  faith
    more openly and in such a way that he falls within the risk  categories
    identified by MN and Others. Only fear  of  persecution  prevented  him
    openly practicing his faith in Pakistan.

12. Moreover, argued Mr Turner, the  sur  place  activities  of  the  first
    appellant, which have taken the form of attending  events  and  handing
    out leaflets, would put him at risk if undertaken in Pakistan, and  had
    not been properly addressed by the FtT.

13. Mr Kola argued, in response, that the grounds of  appeal  are  no  more
    than a disagreement with the FtT's findings. The reason the FtT focused
    on the  issue  of  proselytising  and  preaching  was  that  the  first
    appellant's case was that  this  is  what  he  did.  It  was  therefore
    entirely proper for the FtT to engage with  this  issue.  The  FtT  has
    considered MN and Others in detail and there is no basis  to  argue  it
    has been misunderstood. Mr Kola further  argued  that  whilst  the  FtT
    found the first appellant to be generally credible  there  was  several
    findings showing a lack of credibility in certain aspects of  his  case
    and the decision demonstrates careful and detailed consideration of the
    evidence and a proper application of  that  evidence  to  the  relevant
    country guidance.

Consideration

14. It was common  ground  between  the  parties  that  the  FtT  correctly
    identified that the appellants' appeal should be assessed in  light  of
    the findings in MN and Others as to  the  risks  faced  by  Ahmadis  in
    Pakistan.

15. The headnote to MN and Others is highly instructive for this appeal and
    therefore the relevant parts are set out in full:

         "2.(i)   The background to the risk faced by Ahmadis is legislation
         that restricts the way in which they are able  openly  to  practise
         their faith. The legislation not only prohibits preaching and other
         forms  of  proselytising  but  also  in  practice  restricts  other
         elements of manifesting one's religious beliefs,  such  as  holding
         open  discourse  about  religion  with  non-Ahmadis,  although  not
         amounting  to  proselytising.  The  prohibitions   include   openly
         referring to one's place of  worship  as  a  mosque  and  to  one's
         religious leader as an Imam. In addition, Ahmadis are not permitted
         to refer to the call to prayer  as  azan  nor  to  call  themselves
         Muslims or refer to their faith as Islam. Sanctions include a  fine
         and imprisonment and if blasphemy is found, there is a risk of  the
         death penalty which to date has not been carried out although there
         is a risk of lengthy  incarceration  if  the  penalty  is  imposed.
         There is clear evidence that this legislation is used by  non-state
         actors to threaten and harass Ahmadis. This includes the filing  of
         First Information Reports (FIRs) (the first step  in  any  criminal
         proceedings) which can result in detentions whilst prosecutions are
         being pursued. Ahmadis are also subject  to  attacks  by  non-state
         actors from sectors of the majority Sunni Muslim population.

         (ii) It is, and has long been, possible in general for  Ahmadis  to
         practise their faith on a restricted basis either in private or  in
         community with other Ahmadis, without infringing domestic  Pakistan
         law.

         3.(i)    If an  Ahmadi  is  able  to  demonstrate  that  it  is  of
         particular importance to his religious  identity  to  practise  and
         manifest  his  faith  openly  in  Pakistan  in  defiance   of   the
         restrictions in the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) under  sections  298B
         and 298C, by engaging in  behaviour  described  in  paragraph  2(i)
         above, he or she is likely to be in  need  of  protection,  in  the
         light of the serious nature of the sanctions that potentially apply
         as  well  as  the  risk  of  prosecution  under  section  295C  for
         blasphemy.

         (ii) It is no answer to expect an Ahmadi who fits  the  description
         just given to avoid engaging in behaviour  described  in  paragraph
         2(i)  above  ("paragraph  2(i)  behaviour")  to  avoid  a  risk  of
         prosecution.

         ...

         6.   The next step (2) involves  an  enquiry  into  the  claimant's
         intentions or wishes as  to  his  or  her  faith,  if  returned  to
         Pakistan.  This is  relevant  because  of  the  need  to  establish
         whether it is of particular importance to the religious identity of
         the Ahmadi concerned to engage in  paragraph  2(i)  behaviour.  The
         burden is on the claimant to demonstrate that any intention or wish
         to practise and manifest aspects of the faith openly that  are  not
         permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) is genuinely held and of
         particular importance to  the  claimant  to  preserve  his  or  her
         religious identity.  The decision maker needs to evaluate  all  the
         evidence. Behaviour since arrival in the UK may also  be  relevant.
         If the claimant discharges this burden he is likely to be  in  need
         of protection.

         ...

         8.   Ahmadis who are not able to show  that  they  practised  their
         faith at all in Pakistan or that they did so on anything other than
         the restricted basis described in  paragraph  2(ii)  above  are  in
         general unlikely to be able to show that their  genuine  intentions
         or wishes are to  practise  and  manifest  their  faith  openly  on
         return, as described in paragraph 2(i) above.

         9.    A  sur  place  claim  by  an  Ahmadi  based  on  post-arrival
         conversion or revival in belief and practice will  require  careful
         evidential analysis. This will probably  include  consideration  of
         evidence of the head of the claimant's local United Kingdom  Ahmadi
         Community and from the UK headquarters, the latter particularly  in
         cases where there has been a conversion. Any  adverse  findings  in
         the claimant's account as a whole may be relevant to the assessment
         of likely behaviour on return.

         10.  Whilst an Ahmadi who has  been  found  to  be  not  reasonably
         likely to engage or wish to engage in paragraph 2(i) behaviour  is,
         in general, not at real risk on return to Pakistan, judicial  fact-
         finders may in certain cases need to consider whether  that  person
         would nevertheless be reasonably

16. Under MN and Others, in order for the appellants to have  succeeded  in
    their appeal before the FtT  it  was  not  necessary  for  it  to  have
    accepted that the first appellant  has  engaged  in  proselytising  and
    preaching. It would have been sufficient, to found a  successful  claim
    for protection, if the FtT  accepted  the  appellants'  claim  to  have
    engaged in activities falling short of proselytising and preaching  but
    nonetheless falling within the activities described in  paragraph  2(i)
    of the headnote to MN and Others or their claim to have only  refrained
    from open practice of  their  religion,  in  the  way  contemplated  by
    paragraph 2(i), because of fear of persecution.

17. However, although the FtT found the first appellant to be a  "generally
    credible" witness, it did not accept all of his  claims.  It  is  clear
    from the decision, in particular paragraphs [12] - [23], that the  FtT,
    in reaching its view on the first appellant's credibility and on  which
    of the evidence to accept  or  not,  has  given  consideration  to  and
    engaged with the relevant evidence, both documentary and oral, that was
    before it. Careful consideration was given, in particular, to the  oral
    evidence of the first appellant about, inter alia, his role and profile
    in the Ahmadi community, the way in which he has  practiced  his  faith
    (in Pakistan and the UK), and the use of his  home  in  Pakistan  as  a
    prayer centre. The FtT has also carefully considered the letters in the
    appeal bundle from the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association. Having  considered
    these  and  the  other  material  evidence,  and  without  taking  into
    consideration any immaterial matters,  the  FtT  reached  a  number  of
    conclusions about the appellants and the way  in  which  they  practice
    their faith. These conclusions are not  limited,  as  suggested  by  Mr
    Turner, to a finding that the appellants are not inclined to preach  or
    proselytise, but address issues that go to the  heart  of  whether  the
    appellants are likely to be at risk on return to Pakistan as that  risk
    has been described in MN and Others. The conclusions that the  FtT  has
    drawn from the evidence about the appellants includes the following:

      a. They have not shown an intention or wish to defy  the  restrictions
         on the practice of their faith in Pakistan;

      b. The restrictions on their faith in Pakistan are not  of  particular
         importance to their religious identity;

      c. They do not wish to practice their faith in such a manner that will
         bring them to the attention of the Pakistan authorities; and

      d. If they return to Pakistan they will  continue  to  practice  their
         faith in private and in a quiet personal way;

      e. The first appellant is an  individual  who  has  always  chosen  to
         practice his faith in private and only discussed faith matters with
         other Ahmadis and trusted friends; and

      f. Neither the authorities nor the wider Sunni community  in  Pakistan
         have an adverse interest in them

18. Whilst these conclusions are not the only ones that could reasonably be
    drawn from the evidence, I am satisfied that  they  are  based  on  and
    properly grounded in the evidence that  was  before  the  FtT  both  in
    relation to the appellants' activities in the Pakistan and in  the  UK.
    Having made these findings, it was consistent with both MN  and  Others
    and HJ (Iran) for the FtT to conclude that the appellants fall into the
    category of Ahmadi that is covered by paragraph 2(ii) of  the  headnote
    and as such are not in need of protection under MN and Others.

19. Accordingly, I find that the FtT has not made a material error of  law.
    For the reasons explained above it has (a) made  factual  findings  and
    drawn conclusions from those findings that  were  open  to  it  on  the
    evidence; and (b) properly applied  MN  and  Others  to  those  factual
    findings and conclusions.

Decision

      a) The appeal is dismissed.

      b) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of a material error of law and shall stand.

      c) An anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date: 30 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan
