

                                                      [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
AA/11151/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke  |                   Decision and Reasons  |
|                               |Promulgated                              |
|On 12 August 2015              |                   On 14 August 2015     |
|                               |                                         |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     FI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bloomer (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an anonymity order.  Unless the Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
directly or indirectly identify  the  original  appellant.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

   1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Nigeria.    I  have  anonymised  this
      decision as it refers to her asylum claim and her minor children.



Procedural history

   2. In a decision promulgated on 30 April  2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      dismissed the appellant's appeal against a  decision  to  remove  her,
      having accepted that her  children  are  at  risk  of  female  genital
      mutilation in her home area but that they could  internally  relocate.
      The Judge also considered the best interests of the children but found
      that the removal of the  family  would  not  constitute  a  breach  of
      Article 8 of the ECHR.

   3. In a decision dated 23 June 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge  Renton  granted
      permission to appeal on the basis that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
      arguably erred in law in referring to the appellant's partner  as  her
      husband throughout the decision.

   4. The matter now comes  before  me  to  determine  whether  or  not  the
      decision contains a material error of law.

Hearing

       5. Mr Bloomer acknowledged that the decision is a  comprehensive  and
          detailed one but submitted that in failing to appreciate that  the
          appellant's partner was not her lawful husband  the  Judge  failed
          to take into account that he would not  be  able  to  provide  the
          protective mechanisms said to obviate the undue harshness  in  the
          family's relocation.


       6. Having heard fully from Mr Bloomer,  I  indicated  to  Mr  McVeety
          that I did not need to hear from him as I would be dismissing  the
          appeal. I now provide my reasons for doing so.

Error of law discussion

Husband

       7. I deal firstly with the ground of appeal that formed the basis  of
          the grant of permission and Mr  Bloomer's  oral  submissions.   It
          cannot be disputed that the  Judge  referred  to  the  appellant's
          partner as her husband throughout his decision.   I  am  satisfied
          that  whilst  this  is  mistaken,  it  has  caused  no  unfairness
          whatsoever to the appellant and cannot be said to  be  a  material
          error of law.  The appellant herself referred to  her  partner  as
          her husband (see her answers to Qs 24-27  of  the  interview)  and
          clearly regarded him to be her husband even though  they  are  not
          legally married.  He is the  father  of  her  three  children  and
          named as such on each birth  certificate.   Indeed  it  is  likely
          that the Judge  knew  that  the  appellant  was  not  married  but
          referred to her partner as her husband in  the  same  manner  that
          the appellant had been doing.  The appellant  pointed  out  during
          the hearing that she was not actually married to her  partner  and
          this is recorded by the Judge at [15].


Other grounds of appeal

       8. Although Mr Bloomer did not expand upon the two other  grounds  of
          appeal I address these for the sake of completeness.


       9. I do not accept that the Judge failed to  take  into  account  the
          appellant's  uncle's  position.   The  Judge  was  aware  of   and
          recorded this submission [20] and was entitled to  find  that  the
          family could safely internally relocate for the  reasons  provided
          [39-40].

  10. The Judge expressly considered the  best  interests  of  the  children
      [58].  There was no need  to  consider  each  specific  child  in  the
      circumstances of this case: the children are all young and  there  was
      no material evidence to differentiate between them  and  to  undermine
      the Judge's finding that  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  them  from
      returning to Nigeria with both of their parents.

Decision

  11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law and I do not  set  aside  the
      decision.

Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
13 August 2015

