
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11696/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th August 2015                  |On 11th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            JOSE EDISON HERNANDEZ
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Ms R Akther, Counsel instructed by Thoree & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach allowing the Claimant's appeal on human
    rights grounds pursuant to Article 8 ECHR.

 2. In a Refusal Letter, dated 5 December  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the Claimant's human rights  application  in  relation  to  his
    right to private and  family  life  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    outwith the Rules pursuant to Article 8 ECHR and under  rule  353B  and
    Articles 2 and 3 ECHR, and further issued removal  directions  dated  5
    December 2014 (IS151B)  set  for  the  Claimant's  country  of  origin,
    Colombia. The First-tier Tribunal promulgated its decision allowing the
    Claimant's appeal against that decision on 15 May 2015.

 3. The Appellant appealed against that decision and was granted permission
    to appeal by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford  on  two  out  of  three
    grounds, the first being a disagreement with the findings of fact.  The
    grounds upon which permission was granted may be summarised as follows:

      i) The judge erred in failing to correctly apply  section  117B(4)  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in relation to the
         status of the Appellant and his partner when they  entered  into  a
         relationship; and

     ii) The judge erred in failing to consider fully the issue  of  whether
         there were insurmountable obstacles  to  the  couple  returning  to
         Colombia together.

 4. I was not provided with a Rule 24 response from the  Claimant  but  was
    addressed in oral submissions by her counsel.

    Error of Law

 5. At the close of submissions,  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision, which I shall now give. I find that there was an error of law
    in the decision such that it should be set aside.  My  reasons  for  so
    finding are as follows.

 6. In relation to the first ground, I find that the Secretary  of  State's
    appeal is just made out in relation  to  the  judge  having  failed  to
    consider section 117B(4).  Whilst  the  judge  clearly  states  in  her
    decision that she has taken account of the  statutory  public  interest
    when assessing Article 8. Pursuant to Dube (ss.117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT
    90 (IAC), Judges are duty-bound  to  "have  regard"  to  the  specified
    considerations; however it is not an error of law to fail to  refer  to
    ss.117A-117D considerations if the judge has applied the test he or she
    was supposed to apply; as what matters  is  substance,  not  form.  The
    difficulty the Claimant faces is that unfortunately the judge  has  not
    explicitly  considered  the  amount  of  weight  to  be  given  to  the
    Claimant's private life and family life in light of his status.

 7. In relation to the Claimant's partner's status a  further  complication
    arose  during  the  course  of  submissions,  namely  that  the   judge
    misconstrued what status the partner actually held at certain points in
    recent history (it transpired that she did not hold indefinite leave to
    remain when the judge stated she did). I should remark that it  is  not
    the fault of the judge at the First-tier Tribunal that neither  of  the
    representatives brought the  precise  status  of  the  partner  to  her
    attention given its importance under section 117B(4).

 8. Whilst this error may have occurred inadvertently  it  has  nonetheless
    given rise to a material factual error in relation to the consideration
    of section 117B(4) as it is unclear whether the Claimant's partner  met
    the statutory definition of a "qualifying partner" or not  and  whether
    the Claimant should be afforded less weight to his  relationship  as  a
    consequence or not which is crucial for the  statutory  application  of
    section 117B. This consideration is an unavoidable  one  owing  to  its
    statutory inception and must be accurately  considered  if  the  public
    interest is to be given its appropriate measure, be that great or small
    against the facts of the particular case.

 9. The findings made upon the relationship with the Claimant's partner are
    inextricably  linked  to  the  assessment  of  his  human  rights   and
    consequently, those findings are tainted and must be set aside. Despite
    Ms Akther's valiant submissions, I therefore  find  that  there  is  an
    error and that the appeal will need to be re-made.

    Decision

10. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to  be  heard  by  a
    differently constituted tribunal.

    Anonymity

13. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  order.  I  was  not
    invited to make any such order and in any event I see no reason to make
    such an order.

    Fee Award

14. The First-tier Tribunal did not make any fee award and no further order
    is necessary at present.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
