


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/11743/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 8 July 2016                      |On 18th July 2016                 |
|                                    |                                  |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                     H S
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms S Akinbalu (counsel) instructed by Malik & Malik,
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant because this case turns on the welfare of  his  young
child.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Coaster promulgated on 13 April  2016,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1989 and is a national of Afghanistan.

4. The appellant arrived in the UK in February 2013  as  a  student.  On  12
January 2012 he participated in a Tier 4 Pilot interview. On 3 May 2012  his
tier 4 visa was revoked, so that leave  to  remain  expired  on  19  October
2012. On 1 July 2014 the appellant  informed  the  respondent  that  he  was
married to a Latvian national,  and  they  have  a  child  in  the  UK.  The
appellant appeared in both the criminal and the family courts in  England  a
number of times throughout 2014 & 2015.


5. On 26 February 2015 the  respondent  served  removal  directions.  On  27
February  2015  the  appellant  claimed  asylum.  On  13  August  2015   the
respondent refused the appellant's claim for asylum.


The Judge's Decision

6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Coaster ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.  Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 23 May  2016  Judge  Shimmin
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      " 5. With regard to ground (1) the contact order of HHJ Nathan and the
      CAFCASS report both address the child's welfare and best interests and
      contact is now in place. It  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  has  made
      irrational findings about the report's contents  which  amount  to  an
      error of law.


      6. With regard to ground (2) the Judge indicates at paragraph 88  that
      the need to maintain immigration control outweighs  the  interests  of
      the appellant to develop a  relationship  with  his  daughter.  It  is
      arguable that no "weighty reasons" (Azimi - Moayad [2013] UKUT 00197 &
      LD(Zimbabwe) [2010] UKUT 278) are identified by the Judge thus she has
      made a misdirection in law.


      7. I grant permission on the above grounds."

The Hearing

7. (a) Ms Akinbalu, counsel for the appellant, moved the grounds of  appeal.
She told me that the Judge incorrectly placed weight on  a  Cafcass  report,
when at pages 25 and 26 of the appellant's bundle there was  an  order  from
the family courts for twice-weekly contact with  the  appellant's  daughter.
She told me that the decision of the family  court,  as  a  matter  of  law,
could only have been made on the basis that contact  between  the  appellant
and his daughter is in the child's best interests. She  told  me  that  that
fundamental finding should have formed the basis of  the  Judge's  decision.
She said that if the Judge had taken account of the order  from  the  family
court the decision would have been different.


(b) Ms Akinbalu told me that the Judge's findings are inconsistent  with  an
extant order for contact. She then moved the second  ground  of  appeal  and
told me that the Judge's  assessment  of  article  8  ECHR  is  flawed.  She
reminded me that the Judge made clear findings that  the  appellant's  child
cannot go to Afghanistan, &  said  that  the  Judge  did  not  give  weighty
reasons to bring the established contact between the appellant &  his  young
child to an end. She referred to the case of PD  and  Others  (Article  8  -
conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC), telling me  that
the decision there reaffirms the ratio in EV (Philippines)  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 & Azimi  -  Moayad  [2013]
UKUT 00197.

(c) Ms Akinbalu told me that this is not "a pure section 117B(6) case",  but
argued that the principles set out  there  indicate  that,  as  there  is  a
genuine and subsisting relationship between the appellant and his  daughter,
the public interest is  not  served  by  separating  father  &  daughter  by
removing the  appellant.  She  urged  me  to  set  the  decision  aside  and
substitute my own decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
respondent's decision.

8. Mr Walker, for the respondent, adopted the terms  of  the  rule  24  note
dated 27 June 2016. He told me  that  the  decision  does  not  contain  any
errors of law material or otherwise. He  argued  that  the  Judge  carefully
considered  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  child,   and   reach
conclusions which were open to the Judge to reach on the facts as she  found
them to be. He argued that the grounds of appeal amount to little more  than
an expression of dissatisfaction with a decision  that  the  appellant  does
not like. He told me that the arguments advanced for  the  appellant  amount
to an attempt to re-litigate this case. He urged me to dismiss the appeal.

Analysis

9. No challenge is taken to the Judge's findings in relation  to  asylum  or
humanitarian protection, nor is any challenge taken to  the  Judges  finding
in the first sentence of [67] that the appellant is not a credible  witness.
This appeal is directed entirely at the  appellant's  appeal  on  article  8
ECHR grounds.

10.  At  [74]  the  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  cannot  fulfil   the
requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules,  and  that  there
was insufficient evidence placed  before  her  of  the  component  parts  of
private life, so that the was no reason to consider article 8  private  life
out-with the immigration rules. Between [75] and [88] the  Judge  considered
section 55 of the  Borders  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  &  the
interests of the appellant's child.

11. It is trite law that the best interests of the child drive decisions  of
the family court. At pages 25 and 26 of the appellant's bundle, there is  an
order from the family court dated 21 October  2015  granting  the  appellant
supervised contact to his child. It is argued for the  appellant  that  that
order is pretty much determinative of this case and should have  formed  the
foundation of the Judge's decision making.

12. The problem with that argument is that the court order dated 21  October
2015 does more than set out the arrangements for interim contact. The  order
was  made  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  was  still
outstanding and the order calls for a Cafcass report.

13. At [79] the Judge clearly records the arrangements for  interim  contact
sanctioned by the family court on 21 October 2015. The Judge  then  goes  on
to consider the Cafcass report which post-dates the  interim  contact  order
by almost 3 months and provides the Judge  with  information  that  was  not
before the family court when the interim contact order was made.

14. It is not suggested that the Judge has misinterpreted  the  contents  of
the Cafcass report. Between  [84]  and  [86]  the  Judge  sets  out  careful
consideration of the content of the  Cafcass  report  before  concluding  at
[87] that the appellant does not enjoy family life  within  the  meaning  of
article 8 of  the  1950  convention.  At  [88]  the  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant's removal will not affect the well-being of his young daughter.

15. In LD (Article 8 - best interests of child)  Zimbabwe  [2010]  UKUT  278
(IAC) the Tribunal held (in the context of children who  had  been  lawfully
settled in the UK for many years) that the interests of minor  children  and
their welfare are a primary consideration. A failure to treat them  as  such
will violate Article 8(2).  Weighty reasons would  be  required  to  justify
separating a parent from a lawfully settled minor  child  or  child  from  a
community in which he or she had grown up and lived for most of his  or  her
life.

16.   In EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 it was  held
that the best interests of the child were to be determined by  reference  to
the child alone without reference to the immigration history  or  status  of
either parent (paras 32 and 33). In then  determining  whether  or  not  the
need for immigration control outweighed the best interests of the  children,
it was necessary to determine the relative strength  of  the  factors  which
made it in their best interests to remain  in  the  UK;  and  also  to  take
account of any factors that pointed the other way.

17. In PD and Others (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016]
UKUT 00108 (IAC) it was held that when considering the conjoined  Article  8
ECHR claims of multiple family members, decision-makers should  first  apply
the Immigration Rules to each  individual  applicant  and,  if  appropriate,
then consider Article 8 outside the  Rules.  This  exercise  will  typically
entail the consideration and determination of all claims jointly, so  as  to
ensure that all material facts and considerations are taken into account  in
each case.

18. A fair reading of this decision  makes  it  abundantly  clear  that  the
Judge carefully considers  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  child
between [80] and [88] of the decision. The Judge takes the contents  of  the
Cafcass report as the most up to date and detailed evidence (evidence  which
was called for in the Family Court order of 21 October 2015) of  the  extent
of contact between the appellant and  his  daughter,  the  quality  of  that
contact, and the impact that cessation of  contact  now  will  have  on  the
appellant's daughter.

19. There is no flaw in the Judge's fact finding. The correct  test  in  law
is applied. The Judge manifestly placed the interests of the  child  at  the
centre of her decision. The conclusion which she reached is well within  the
range of conclusions reasonably open to her.

20. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

21. There is nothing wrong  with  the  Judge's  fact  finding  exercise.  In
reality the appellant's appeal amounts to little more  than  a  disagreement
with the way the Judge has applied the facts as she found them  to  be.  The
appellant might not like the conclusion that the  Judge  has  come  to,  but
that conclusion is the result  of  the  correctly  applied  legal  equation.
There is nothing wrong with the Judge's fact finding exercise.  The  correct
test in law has been applied. The  decision  does  not  contain  a  material
error of law.

22.   The Judge's decision, when read as a whole,  sets  out  findings  that
are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

23.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

24.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed                                                              Date 14
July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

