

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11279/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |               Decision & Reasons    |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 25th January 2016                     |               On 2nd February 2016  |
|                                         |                                     |

                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     YG
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Namani of Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. For the purpose of continuity with the determination in  the  First-
       tier Tribunal I will hereinafter refer to the Secretary of State  as
       the Respondent and YG as the Appellant.


    2. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  for  asylum  or
       ancillary protection on 28 November 2014.  His  appeal  against  the
       refusal of asylum and humanitarian protection was allowed by  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Gandhi ("the Judge") following a  hearing  on  1
       June 2015.

    3. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify the original Appellant. This  direction  applies
       to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to  comply  with  this
       direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings. I do  so
       in order to preserve the anonymity of the Appellant who is a minor.

The grant of permission


    4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle granted  permission  to  appeal  (24
       November 2015) on the grounds that it is arguable that the Judge:
          1) speculated;
          i) "...that the Appellant would need emergency travel documents to
             be removed" and "failed to explain why the Appellant's  expired
             passport would not be adequate if he could not be removed",
         ii) "...than an appointment made with  an  unknown  individual  was
             evidence of the Appellant's severe mental health problem",
        iii) by giving "weight to  immaterial  matters,  namely  the  mental
             health resources of the NHS", and
         iv) by failing "to refer to the  VAF  and  inconsistencies  in  the
             evidence"; and
          2) failed to give adequate reasons for her conclusions.


Respondent's position

    5. Mr Tarlow conceded that his strongest  point  related  to  [3](1)(i)
       above and that the other grounds only came into account if I  agreed
       with him on that point.


Appellant's position


    6. There has been no challenge to the rest of the  findings  summarised
       in [106] (a-m) of the decision. The emergency travel document  issue
       is irrelevant if the Appellant was to return to his home  area.  The
       findings must be read in conjunction with [133] and  [72-78]  of  IK
       (Returnees - records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312 and IA  and
       Others (Risk, guidelines, separatists) Turkey CG [2003] UKIAT 00034.

The Judge's findings

    7. The following findings of the Judge [106] were not challenged;


          "a) The appellant was arrested twice.
          b) During the second arrest the  authorities  knew  of  his  first
          arrest.
          c) He was questioned about PKK activities.
          d) He has had his fingerprints taken and signed a blank  piece  of
          paper.
          e) He was asked to report after his second release from detention.
          f) He was not detained for long.
          g) He reported on 4 occasions.
          h) With the payment of  a  bribe  he  was  however  able  to  stop
          reporting.
          i) He has not been charged and there is no evidence of  an  arrest
          warrant.
          j) He lives in an area of conflict.
          k) His friend was arrested and mentioned the appellant's name upon
          arrest.
          l) His father is still reporting to the police.
          m) His parents were stopped at the  airport  on  their  return  to
          Turkey."


Case law


    8. IA guides me to the view, among other things, that where a person is
       suspected of membership of the PKK or providing  support  to  it  he
       will be handed over to the Anti-Terrorist Branch where he would face
       a real risk of persecution or breach of his human rights.


    9. IK guides me to the view, among other things, that the  computerised
       GBT  system  comprises  amongst  other  things  outstanding   arrest
       warrants, previous arrests, possible draft evasion, and  refusal  to
       perform military service. Arrests are distinguished from  detentions
       as they require some  Court  intervention.   The  system  is  fairly
       widely accessible and in particular to the border police and  booths
       in Istanbul airport and elsewhere in Turkey to the security  forces.
       If a person is held for questioning on arrival or  subsequently  and
       the situation justifies it some additional inquiries could  be  made
       of the authorities in his local area where  more  extensive  records
       indicate either manually or on computer and inquiry  could  also  be
       made to the antiterrorist police or MIT. Returning on  an  emergency
       travel document, or having a material entry in the GBTS  or  on  the
       border  control  information  means  there  is  a  real   risk   the
       authorities will be put on notice of an  unsuccessful  asylum  claim
       that could lead to him being sent to the airport police station  for
       further investigation.  The escalation  of  violence  following  the
       ending of the PKK ceasefire reinforces the view  that  the  risk  to
       Kurdish returnees of ill treatment by the authorities may be greater
       if his home is in a conflict area.  The use of torture is  long  and
       deep seated in the security forces and  it  will  take  time  and  a
       continued and  determined  effort  to  bring  it  under  control  in
       practice.


   10. MY (Turkey) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA
       Civ 410 guides me to the view, among other things, that  IA  and  IK
       did not say that anyone suspected  of  connection  to,  or  sympathy
       with, the PKK was at real risk of  persecution.  The  assessment  of
       risk depended upon a large number of factors, one of which  was  the
       level of a claimant's known or suspected involvement with  the  PKK.
       Suspected connection or sympathy with the PKK was capable of showing
       risk, but was not determinative.

   11. SD (Turkey) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA
       Civ 1514 guides me to the view, among other things, that in IK,  the
       starting point of the enquiry had  to  be  whether  there  would  be
       information about a returning failed asylum seeker in his home area.
       The issue was whether that record was reasonably likely to  lead  to
       persecution outside his home area.  Thus,  the  first  question  was
       whether the information from the home area would arrive at the point
       where the Claimant would first be questioned  at  the  airport.  The
       absence of any record under the GBTS system was not  dispositive  as
       to the means  which  could  be  deployed  for  enquiring  about  the
       background of  a  particular  returning  failed  asylum  seeker.  IK
       revealed that on returning with emergency documentation, there was a
       real risk that someone in the position  of  the  Claimant  would  be
       asked questions as to why he left Turkey and  the  circumstances  of
       his return. It was also accepted that, when individuals  were  asked
       about the circumstances in which they left Turkey and in which  they
       were returning, they were not expected to lie.

Discussion

   12. In my judgement there is no merit in  [3](1)(i)  for  the  following
       reasons. The assessment of risk within IK is based on a  combination
       of factors rather  than  any  one  individual  fact.  It  is  not  a
       checklist. The Judge  was  entitled  to  take  the  view  that  when
       combined (even excluding [106 (n)]) the Appellant was at  real  risk
       of harm on his return. He should not have to lie on his return about
       his reason for having been here. As a child it is reasonably  likely
       he will be asked about his parents. He should not have to lie  about
       them. It is reasonably likely  the  link  to  his  father  (who  was
       stopped at the airport on return) would be established, and  a  link
       to his father's problems and his own past revealed.  The  Judge  was
       entitled to find that (irrespective of the document he returned  on)
       this would place the Appellant at real risk of ill treatment.

   13. It is clear that [3](1) (ii and iii) have no impact  on  the  asylum
       claim.

   14. In my judgement there is no merit in [3](1)(iv)  for  the  following
       reasons. The Judge  does  not  have  to  refer  to  every  piece  of
       evidence. The fact the Appellant stated he was coming to  visit  his
       sister for 3 weeks is irrelevant. No  adverse  consequences  can  be
       drawn from the fact that his parents returned to Turkey as they made
       whatever decision they felt was appropriate for their circumstances.
       Contrary to that which was asserted in the grounds,  the  Judge  was
       aware that the Appellant did not claim asylum for 5 months [79]  and
       noted that this affected his credibility but he was a minor  at  the
       time and reliant on others so it did not affect it much. I have  not
       been pointed to any unresolved material discrepancies.

   15. In my judgement there is no merit in [3](2). The Judge gave detailed
       reasons for his decision [78 to 101].  He  does  not  have  to  give
       reasons for reasons.

   16. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge made no  material  error  of
       law.



Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision.



Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
31 January 2016
