
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/11658/2011
                                                               AA/11842/2011
                                                               AA/11844/2011
                                                               AA/11845/2011
                                                               AA/11846/2011
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 16th September 2013                          |On 23rd September 2013     |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                               HABIB uR rehman
                                 ISHRAT RIAZ
                                ATIQU REHMAN
                               SHUMAILA REHMAN
                                SABIHA REHMAN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Halim, instructed by Dear Mason Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are nationals of Pakistan born on 1st January 1963, 19th
    June 1963, 8th April 1994,  24th  July  1999  and  15th  December  2001
    respectively. The first and second Appellants are husband and wife  and
    the remaining Appellants are their children who claim as dependants and
    rely upon his claim for asylum. The first Appellant  arrived  with  his
    family members and entered the United Kingdom using their own Pakistani
    passports with valid visit visas on 18th  September  2011  and  claimed
    asylum.

The Background to the Appeal

 2. The basis of the claim for asylum was that the Appellant and his family
    members were practising members of the Ahmadi faith in Pakistan and  in
    the United Kingdom.  He had come to the attention of local residents in
    Pakistan due to the practice and propagation of his faith and  in  2008
    concerning an incident that arose from the first Appellant's membership
    of a construction committee for an extension being built to the  mosque
    in Kotli.  The Appellant claimed that  he  was  part  of  the  building
    committee that helped supervise the workers for the extension.   During
    the building work, a group of Molvis protested  against  the  extension
    and an open FIR (First  Information  Report)  was  issued  against  the
    committee.  He was arrested on 16th June 2008, detained  for  two  days
    and bailed after a payment was made.  The extension of the  mosque  was
    never completed.  The Appellant and his  family  members  continued  to
    live in Pakistan.  On 15th September 2011 the Appellant was involved in
    an incident concerning two Molvis who saw an Ahmadi  newspaper  on  his
    counter  and  caused  an  incident  claiming  that  the  Appellant  was
    proselytising his Ahmadi faith.  They threatened him with violence  and
    another FIR was registered on 15th September 2011 arising out  of  this
    incident.  He left Pakistan on 18th September  along  with  his  family
    members using a valid visa which he had to enter the United Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent refused the Appellants' claim in a reasons  for  refusal
    letter dated 6th October 2011 and on the same date, a decision was made
    to refuse the claim for asylum and on humanitarian protection and human
    rights grounds and to remove the Appellants by way of directions  under
    Paragraph 10A of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

 4. The Appellants exercised their right to appeal that decision and  in  a
    determination promulgated on 2nd December 2011  the First Tier Tribunal
    (Judge Hands ) dismissed the appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds
    and further found that the Appellants were not entitled to a  grant  of
    humanitarian protection.

 5. An application was made for permission to appeal which was  granted  by
    the First Tier Tribunal (Judge Blandy) by an order dated 22nd  December
    2011. On 23rd February 2012, directions were given  for  hearing  which
    led to a hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Deans on 9th May 2012.  In
    a decision and directions issued on 20th August  2012,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Deans found that the determination of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
    contained  a  material  error  of  law  and  he   therefore   set   the
    determination aside and recorded that none  of  the  findings  of  fact
    should stand and listed the appeal on a date to be  fixed  for  further
    hearing before him.  As discussed with the  advocates,  there  did  not
    appear to be a written decision in respect of the error of law although
    it was clear to all concerned that  Judge  Deans  had  heard  the  oral
    submissions of the parties  at  the  hearing  on  9th  May  and  having
    reserved his determination issued a "decision and directions" in  which
    he set out the decision  that  he  had  reached,  namely  that  he  was
    satisfied from submissions that he had heard and from the material that
    he had read that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained
    a material error of law and that none of the findings  of  fact  should
    stand.  The parties had prepared their  cases  on  the  basis  of  that
    decision.  It therefore can only be the position that the judge reached
    the conclusion that  the  determination  should  be  set  aside  having
    considered and accepted the grounds of appeal that had  been  filed  on
    behalf of the Appellant and in particular ground two of  the  grant  of
    permission, referring to the failure of the First-tier Tribunal to make
    proper  findings  with  regard  to  the  possibility  that  the   first
    Appellant, as an Ahmadi, would be at risk by preaching about his  faith
    in the light of the decision of HJ (Iran)  and  HT  (Cameroon)  v  SSHD
    [2010] UKSC 31 and MT (Ahmadi - HJ (Iran))  Pakistan  [2011]  UKUT  227
    (IAC) and that the judge should  have  considered  the  wider  risk  on
    return in accordance with the principles set out in those cases.

 6. On 21st November 2012, a transfer order was made by Principal  Resident
    Judge Southern.  Thus the case was listed before the Upper Tribunal for
    a resumed hearing in accordance with the decision and  directions  made
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Deans.

 7. At the hearing, the Appellants were represented by Mr Halim of  Counsel
    and the  Respondent  was  represented  by  Ms  Martin,  a  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.

The Evidence

 8. The Appellants' bundles were numbered 1 and 2 for  convenience.   Those
    bundles consisted of Bundle 1 which was a consolidated bundle  for  the
    Upper Tribunal hearing  which  included  witness  statements  from  the
    Appellant, his wife and daughter and a number of documents and  reports
    numbered pages 1-308.  Bundle 2 contained  further  evidence  submitted
    under Rule 15(2A) and numbered 1-190.

 9. Many of the documents in the Home Office bundle  were  those  documents
    provided by the Appellants when they claimed asylum.   In  addition  at
    the  hearing  the  Presenting  Officer   relied   upon   the   original
    Respondent's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.

10. The first Appellant gave evidence with  the  assistance  of  the  court
    interpreter and gave evidence in the Urdu language.  I carried  out  an
    introduction of the proceedings so that the Appellant was familiar with
    the procedure that would be adopted during the  court  hearing  and  in
    particular I ensured that  the  Appellant  and  the  interpreter  could
    understand each other.  There were no difficulties identified.  I  note
    that during the hearing there were no difficulties with  the  Appellant
    being able to give evidence or with the interpretation and no  concerns
    were raised at any time during the hearing in relation to that.

11. There is a full record of  oral  evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  the
    witnesses which appears in the Record of Proceedings.  I shall refer to
    the relevant parts of the evidence during my analysis of  the  case.  I
    have heard both advocates by way of summary at the  conclusion  of  the
    case which I have recorded in my Record of Proceedings.  I confirm that
    I have considered those submissions during my analysis of the  evidence
    and in the conclusions that I have reached, even  if  not  specifically
    referred to.

12. I note that I was guided to certain passages in the objective material.
     I confirm that I have read those passages with care, but I  read  them
    in the context of the entire document.  I further confirm that  I  have
    read the whole of the documentation set  out  before  me  in  order  to
    assist me in reaching my conclusions.

The Law and the Burden and Standard of Proof

13. In reaching my decision I have borne fully in mind the relevant law and
    Immigration Rules, including the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
    of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, and the Handbook on  Procedures  and
    Criteria for  Determining  Refugee  Status  ('The  Handbook')  (Geneva,
    January 2000). By Article 1(a)(2) of the Refugee  Convention  the  term
    "refugee" shall apply to any person who:-

         "Owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted  for  reasons  of
         race, religion, nationality,  membership  of  a  particular  social
         group  or  political  opinion,  is  outside  the  country  of   his
         nationality, and is unable, or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to
         avail himself of the protection of that country; or who, not having
         a nationality and being outside the country of his former  habitual
         residence is unable, or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return
         to it."

14. The provisions of SI [2006] No.2525 "The Refugee or Person in  Need  of
    International Protection (Qualification) Regulations  2006"  now  bring
    into United Kingdom domestic law the  Council  of  the  European  Union
    Directive 2004/83/EC of 29th April 2004 on 'minimum standards' for  the
    qualification and  status  of  third  country  nationals  or  stateless
    persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise need protection and the
    content of the protection granted, normally referred to in  the  United
    Kingdom as the Qualification Directive.  Commensurate changes were made
    in the Immigration Rules by  means  of  Statement  of  Changes  in  the
    Immigration Rules also taking effect on 9th October 2006.

15. The determination I have made has approached the issues in this  appeal
    from the perspective of the 2006  Regulations  and  in  particular  has
    applied the  definitions  contained  there,  in  deciding  whether  the
    Appellant is a refugee under the 1951 Geneva Convention.  We have  also
    applied the amended Immigration Rules.   These  have  permitted  us  to
    consider whether the Appellant is in need of Humanitarian Protection as
    being at risk of serious harm, as defined  in  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Rules.  Finally, I have gone on to consider whether the Appellant is at
    risk of a violation of his human rights under  the  provisions  of  the
    ECHR.

16. The burden of proof is upon the Appellant.  The standard of  proof  has
    been  defined  as  a  'reasonable  degree  of  likelihood',   sometimes
    expressed as 'a reasonable chance' or  a  'serious  possibility'.   The
    question is answered by looking  at  the  evidence  in  the  round  and
    assessed at the time  of  hearing  the  appeal.   We  regard  the  same
    standard as applying  in  essence  in  human  rights  appeals  although
    sometimes expressed as 'substantial grounds for believing'.    Although
    the 2006 Regulations make no express reference to the standard of proof
    in asylum appeals, there is no suggestion that the Regulations  or  the
    Directions were intended to introduce a change in either the burden  or
    standard of proof.  The amended Rules, however, deal expressly with the
    standard of proof in deciding whether  the  Appellant  is  in  need  of
    Humanitarian Protection.

17. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules defines a person  eligible  for
    Humanitarian Protection, as a person who does not qualify as a  refugee
    but in  respect  of  whom  substantial  grounds  have  been  shown  for
    believing that the person concerned, if returned,  would  face  a  real
    risk of suffering serious harm.  It seems to us  that  this  replicates
    the standard of proof familiar in  the  former  jurisprudence  and,  by
    implication, applies the same standard in asylum cases.

18. Accordingly, where below I refer to 'risk' or 'real risk' this is to be
    understood as an abbreviated way of identifying respectively:-

      i) whether on return there is a well-founded fear of being  persecuted
         under the Geneva Convention;

     ii) whether on return there are substantial grounds for  believing  the
         person would face a real risk of suffering serious harm within  the
         meaning of paragraph 339C of the amended Immigration Rules; and

    iii) whether on return there are substantial grounds for believing  that
         the person would face a real risk of being exposed to a  real  risk
         of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

19. The Appellant places specific reliance on Article 3 of the ECHR.  It is
    for an Appellant  to  show  that  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that he or she is at real risk of ill-treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3 ECHR, which prohibits torture, inhuman or degrading treatment
    or punishment.  The  standard  of  proof  equates  to  that  in  asylum
    appeals.  Unlike Article 3,  Article  8  rights  are  qualified  rights
    protecting the right to respect for private and family life,  home  and
    correspondence.  It is for an Appellant to show that  one  or  more  of
    such qualified rights is engaged and that there is an interference with
    such a right or  rights.   The  Respondent  must  then  show  that  any
    interference pursues a legitimate aim, is in accordance  with  the  law
    and is proportionate.

20. In coming to my determination, following Section 85  (4)  of  the  2002
    Act, I may take into account evidence about any matter  which  I  think
    relevant to the substance of the  decision,  including  evidence  which
    concerns a matter arising after the date of decision.

The Appellant's Claim

21. The basis of the Appellant's claim is set out in his  written  evidence
    comprising of two witness statements dated 14th November 2011 and  13th
    June 2013.  The statements are adopted as evidence-in-chief.

22. The Appellant and his family members are members of the Ahmadi faith in
    Pakistan.  Whilst living in Kotli, Azad Kashmir, the Appellant and  his
    family members were an important part of the Ahmadi community  in  that
    area and took part in a  number  of  committees  in  respect  of  their
    religious faith.

23. On 10th May 2002 a criminal case was registered against the Appellant's
    community associates for the construction of  a  mosque  and  preaching
    activities.  The  first  Appellant  worked  as  a  businessman  selling
    electrical items with a shop located in the main bazaar in Kotli  named
    as "Electric Point".  As part of the practice of his faith,  he  was  a
    member of a mosque construction committee.   It  was  decided  that  an
    extension to the current mosque would take place in June.   However  it
    is asserted that  a  group  of  local  Molvis  protested  against  that
    extension and work was therefore stopped.

24.   On 3rd June 2008 a criminal case under the anti-Ahmadiyya legislation
    was registered by the police against the population of Kotli  under  an
    open First Information Report  (hereafter  referred  to  as  "FIR")  on
    complaint of mullahs  of  Khatme  Nabuwwat  and  their  associates  for
    construction of the mosque and the preaching of the Ahmadiyya religious
    beliefs.  On 5th June 2008 two separate criminal cases were  registered
    by the police against the population  of  the  Ahmadiyya  community  in
    Kotli again on the complaints of the mullahs of the Khatme Nabuwwat and
    their associates for preaching in the construction of the mosque  under
    two open FIRs.  In response to this an application was addressed to the
    district magistrate in Kotli through representatives signed by  members
    of  the  construction  of  the  mosque  committee  including  the  main
    Appellant.  It was after this that it was alleged  that  the  Appellant
    was arrested on 16th June 2008 and was detained for two  days  but  was
    bailed when 50,000 rupees was paid.  In cross-examination he was  asked
    whether or not the problems in Kotli  began  after  the  grant  of  the
    construction of the mosque.  The Appellant stated in his evidence  that
    they had had problems even before the construction of the mosque and it
    was a longstanding issue in the area.  He said  that  all  the  Ahmadis
    born in the area had those problems.  He set out  that  they  were  not
    able to pray or read the Koran or attend meetings and that they had had
    no freedom to preach and if they had people would  issue  FIRs  against
    them to cause them trouble and harassment.  He confirmed  that  he  had
    not been arrested prior to June 2008  although  he  stated  there  were
    problems for the Ahmadiyya  community  including  members  of  his  own
    family.  He confirmed in  cross-examination  that  the  government  had
    granted the construction of the mosque in Kotli but as a result  of  it
    individuals had complained to the authorities.  He referred to the  FIR
    and its open nature  that  was  against  the  whole  of  the  Ahmadiyya
    community in Kotli.  It was put to him that the FIR that he referred to
    did not name him specifically.   He  said  that  the  FIR  was  against
    everyone of the Ahmadiyya community.  As to his  arrest,  he  confirmed
    that he was arrested whilst he was inside his shop and that there  were
    twelve members of the construction committee but the rest had run  away
    and he had gone to the shop and it was where they had caught  him.   He
    said that he had not gone into the shop for hiding, he had gone to  the
    shop because it was his business.  He said that they had  come  looking
    for him, that when FIRs had been issued they would  come  to  look  for
    people to arrest.  He was asked how would they know to look for him  if
    he had not been named on the FIR?  He stated that he was known  through
    his family connections as coming from a well-known  Ahmadi  family  and
    that everybody knew that.  He said the police station was 20 feet  away
    from his shop and therefore he was easy to arrest.  He confirmed he was
    detained for two days and released on bail.  He referred  to  the  bail
    document at [R127, Bundle 1].  In cross-examination he said he did  not
    have to comply with any other conditions and when asked if  he  had  to
    attend the police station to report, the Appellant stated he  had  gone
    to court but not the police station and that there would be no set time
    for him to attend.  He confirmed that when he attended court his lawyer
    would go with him.  He said nobody else would.  The bail agreement  was
    put to him referring to a man called Mr Dawood.  The  Appellant  stated
    that he was bailed and that the man named was his first cousin who  was
    vouching for him.  He said that he had kept going to  court  to  comply
    with the bail conditions.  It was put to him that he had  not  said  in
    his interview that he had attended court.

25. The Appellant was asked about the "hit list" and he was asked if he was
    named on the list.  The Appellant confirmed that his name  was  not  on
    the list but his shop was on the list of which he  was  the  owner  and
    also his employee was named, Mr Khokar.  There were also other  members
    of his family who were on the list.  He confirmed that at page R44  the
    person named was his nephew but that his shop  was  also  on  the  list
    under the businesses.  When asked who wrote the list he said it  was  a
    group of people who had written down a list of all  the  Ahmadis  in  a
    high position in the area.  He could not say when the list was  written
    but that it was written by a group called the Khatme Nawabwe.

26. After the incident in 2008, the Appellant referred to an incident  that
    occurred on 15th September 2011 which  led  to  the  Appellant  leaving
    Pakistan with his family members.

27. On 2nd September 2011 the first Appellant received a threatening letter
    from the Lashkar Hizb-ul-Mujahadin Kotli threatening that he  would  be
    killed.  The Appellant referred to this letter being  sent  to  him  in
    relation to the "hit list" that had been written  in  August  2008  and
    publicised in the English language of the mullahs of Khatme Nabuwwat in
    March 2009.  The Appellant gave an account as to what happened  in  his
    shop on 15th September 2011.  He said that he had been in his shop when
    two Molvis had come into it.  They came in as potential  customers  but
    on the shop table there was a newspaper which was an Ahmadi  newspaper.
    One of the men started to read the newspaper and the other one said  he
    would like to look at them and  so  the  Appellant  showed  them.   The
    person reading the newspaper said that this was  an  Ahmadi  newspaper.
    He then asked the Appellant if he  was  Ahmadi  and  then  an  argument
    ensued in which they asked him  if  he  had  preached  and  they  began
    shouting.  A neighbour or a shopkeeper from next door  could  hear  all
    the noise and tried to calm the Molvis down.  They shouted at  him  for
    proselytising and they told him that the police would not  do  anything
    if they returned to kill him.  They also said that they  would  get  an
    FIR issued against him.

28.   The Appellant in cross-examination said that the  men  did  not  know
    that he was an Ahmadi because they came from a different town and  that
    they had reached the conclusion he was an Ahmadi because they had  seen
    the newspaper in his shop.  He confirmed  that  as  a  result  of  this
    incident an FIR was issued.  He confirmed that he had not  preached  to
    them but they had picked up the newspaper.  The contents of the FIR was
    put to him in  cross-examination  which  had  set  out  details  of  an
    incident.  The Appellant was asked if  the  explanation  given  was  an
    accurate one or one to justify the FIR.

29.   It was put to him that the information in the FIR as  to  the  events
    was not consistent with the account that he had given.   The  Appellant
    said that the information in the FIR claiming that he was proselytising
    was false and incorrect.  The FIR was issued because they  had  made  a
    false claim that he had preached to them and were therefore  trying  to
    file a false case against him.  He confirmed that he did not preach  to
    them that day and false information had been placed before  the  police
    in the First Information Report.

30. Following this the family left the United Kingdom using a valid visa to
    enter the United Kingdom as family visitors.  They claimed asylum  upon
    arrival on 18th September 2011.  One daughter was left in  Pakistan  in
    Rawalpindi.  In cross-examination he said that  she  had  had  problems
    there but he could not say  if  she  was  preaching  the  Ahmadi  faith
    presently as he did not know because he was not with her.  He was asked
    in cross-examination if she had  been  targeted  due  to  their  Ahmadi
    faith.  The Appellant said that when they were  in  Kotli  one  of  the
    daughters coming home from college were attacked.  He said  that  there
    had been problems recently on 13th April 2013.

31. Since the family has arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  they  have  been
    active members of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK and  upon  making
    contact with that group when in the United Kingdom sought  confirmation
    from them as to his practice of his faith  in  Pakistan  and  also  his
    family members.  In his evidence he said that he supported the  AMA  UK
    financially through voluntary financial contributions as did  his  wife
    and daughter separately.  That he would attend meetings and conventions
    including  congregational  prayers,  Eid  festivals  and   the   annual
    convention called the "Jalsa Salana" and annual gatherings organised by
    the AMA UK.  In the bundle of documentation produced he made  reference
    to photographs showing him with the supreme leader, out on the  streets
    preaching, copies of his payments made by way of financial contribution
    and confirmation of the membership of the committees on which  he  sat.
    He had assisted in the food and hospitality work of the  branch  during
    branch meetings and functions and held responsibility for looking after
    the maintenance and cleaning programme of the local AMA  branches.   He
    had been appointed as the muntazim izaar and muntazim ziafat.

32.  In his oral evidence-in-chief he was asked about  his  preaching.   He
    confirmed that he had been preaching in the United Kingdom and that  he
    had preached in Pakistan.  He stated in  his  oral  evidence  that  the
    preaching of his faith was important to him and that it had  been  part
    of the Ahmadi religion for generations.  He said that it was  important
    and that you could not live without it and it is part of  his  heritage
    and his religious faith to tell others about their faith and  not  keep
    quiet.  He confirmed that in preaching in Pakistan it was dangerous and
    that he has continued to do it although  they  are  in  fear  of  their
    lives.  In cross-examination it was put to him  that  he  had  said  at
    questions 51 and 52 that he had  not  proselytised  in  Pakistan.   The
    Appellant stated that that had been an interpreter's error and that  he
    had not given the right answer on his behalf.   He  made  reference  to
    problems with the interpreter later on in his interview which had  been
    raised during the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  He said that he had not
    withdrawn the complaint at the hearing and  that  the  judge  had  said
    there should be a full hearing at which point he began  crying  (before
    the First-tier  Tribunal).   The  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    grounds (amended grounds) made some reference to these problems.

33. In respect to the practice of his faith in the United Kingdom, he  said
    that he first  attended  after  18th  September  2011,  about  a  month
    afterwards.  He was shown the photographs between pages 67 and  74  and
    said that  they  had  been  taken  on  different  days.   There  was  a
    suggestion that he was wearing some of the same clothes.  The Appellant
    said that that was what he wore and he was not very well off  and  that
    on some of the photographs he was  wearing  someone  else's  shirt  and
    jumper but at the photographs on page 65 they were  his  own  trousers.
    He was asked about the financial contributions at pages 57 to 61 and it
    was put to him that they were large amounts bearing in mind his limited
    means.  He said that they were not large amounts, that everybody had  a
    responsibility to give a little of what they had including his children
    and himself and his wife.  He confirmed  that  his  wife  and  daughter
    donated separately.  It was put to him that he had described himself as
    a "poor asylum applicant" and how was it that  he  could  donate  large
    amounts of income?  The Appellant said that he  was  saving  little  by
    little and that he had used to smoke cigarettes but that he  had  given
    up and that had freed up some of his money.  He said that  he  had  not
    been working in the United Kingdom.  He refuted the suggestion in cross-
    examination that he had had two years to learn the Ahmadi faith stating
    that he had been an Ahmadi since birth and that had been  supported  by
    the documentation.

34.  When asked about proselytising  in  Pakistan,  he  said  that  he  did
    proselytise there but that he had a fear of the men that  were  against
    them and that if they found out they would  file  false  cases  against
    them and the punishment would be the death penalty and  that  would  be
    the outcome if they preached in Pakistan.  He said that in the UK  they
    had no fear because they were able to preach freely.  It was put to him
    that he had joined the Ahmadiyya Association in  the  UK  in  order  to
    support his claim for asylum.  The Appellant refuted that.  It was also
    put to him that if asylum would be granted he would stop attending  the
    association and stop proselytising.  The Appellant again  refuted  this
    stating that he had been born an Ahmadi as were members of  his  family
    going way back and that he had been brought up in that religion.

 The Submissions

35. Ms Martin on behalf of the Respondent relied upon  the  refusal  letter
    dated 6th  October  2011  and  in  addition  made  the  following  oral
    submissions.  Ms Martin began by helpfully setting  out  the  essential
    paragraphs of the country guidance case of MN  and  Others  (Ahmadis  -
    country conditions - risk) Pakistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00389  (IAC)  by
    summarising the headnote and paragraphs 119-127 of the  decision.   She
    confirmed that it was accepted on behalf of the Secretary of State that
    the Appellant and his family members were of the  Ahmadi  faith.   When
    considering the test set out in MN and Others (as cited) she said  that
    the  Appellant's  credibility  was  in  issue.   In  relation  to   his
    activities in Pakistan and proselytising, questions  51  and  52  state
    that he did not proselytise in  Pakistan.   Whilst  the  Appellant  had
    raised the issue of interpretation problems and  there  having  been  a
    complaint  made,  the  complaint  was  withdrawn  and  that  since  his
    application for asylum the Appellant had  had  a  number  of  years  to
    bolster his claim so that he could fall  within  the  country  guidance
    provisions.

36.  As to the events in Pakistan, a number of documents had been  produced
    which should be seen in the light of the matters  in  the  COIR  Report
    relating to documents from Pakistan.  Looking at those FIRs,  there  is
    only one that names the Appellant at R153.  Looking at the contents  of
    the FIR, they are not consistent with the account of  the  incident  on
    15th September given by the Appellant during oral evidence.  The threat
    letter, predates the only FIR and the other FIRs are all open documents
    and none of them name the Appellant.  The Appellant has also provided a
    "hit list" (page 125).  The Appellant is not named on the list although
    his employee and the business is named on the list.  If  the  Appellant
    was really wanted by the authorities he would  be  named  on  the  "hit
    list" personally.  The threatening letter that  came  two  years  later
    refers to him "you are on the hit  list"  however  he  was  not.   When
    considering the arrest in 2011, the Appellant in cross-examination said
    that he had attended court in respect of bail and that he had  attended
    with his lawyer.  But the bond agreement refers to Mr Dawood and he was
    inconsistent.

37.  As  to  proselytising  in  the  UK,  there  are  letters  listing  his
    activities. The specific activities are evidenced by photographs in the
    bundle.  It was submitted that at best the  photographs  covered  three
    separate occasions and the photographs were self-serving to  support  a
    claim for asylum.  He made donations to the Ahmadiyya UK Association as
    did his wife and his daughter.  Those were set out.  It  was  submitted
    that this was a "snippet" and that he could not afford to pay such sums
    of money.  As to the Appellant's wife's account, she  claimed  to  have
    preached once to a lady in a library.   The  Appellant's  daughter  had
    said that she had assisted her mother in meetings at the house in which
    seven or eight ladies had attended.

38.   In those circumstances, applying the country guidance  case,  he  did
    not fulfil the requirements and that whilst he may be known  as  Ahmadi
    prior to his departure he did not proselytise and was  not  wanted  for
    doing so and had no difficulties.  He has created an account to  remain
    in the United Kingdom and he has not discharged the burden to show  him
    that he would be at risk on return.

39. Mr Halim on behalf of the Appellant relied upon his skeleton  argument.
    There is no need for me to make reference to that skeleton argument  as
    it is before the Tribunal.  Counsel  submitted  that  contrary  to  the
    submission made by the Presenting Officer, he had been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a number of years before the country guidance case had been
    promulgated and therefore would not have known at the time he began his
    activities in the United  Kingdom  what  the  outcome  of  the  country
    guidance case would have been.  That was a bare assertion and  was  not
    supported by any evidence.

40.   In this case it is clear that the Ahmadiyya Association in the UK had
    sought confirmation from Pakistan that he and his  family  members  had
    been involved in the propagation of the faith in Pakistan.  The replies
    that they have received by way of verification are set out in documents
    at pages 52 and 52(a) which demonstrate  that  he  was  an  active  and
    prominent member for  advancement  of  his  faith  in  Pakistan.   This
    included being part of a committee building an extension to the mosque.
     The association have also confirmed the activities that he has carried
    out in the United Kingdom for the Ahmadiyya Association.  They have  no
    vested interest in supporting any particular appellant  but  they  have
    been able to  confirm  and  verify  the  Appellant's  past  association
    membership and propagation of his faith in Pakistan and also to confirm
    his work and propagation of the faith and proselytisation in the United
    Kingdom.  The photographs, and letters and voluntary contributions also
    demonstrate the advancement of his faith in the United Kingdom.  All of
    that evidence was positive.

41.   Whilst the Presenting Officer had criticised the donations made,  the
    factual basis upon which it would put the Appellant was wrong.  He  was
    never asked in cross-examination if he had made  weekly  donations  and
    that his oral evidence was that he had saved money little by little and
    that he did not smoke and was able to use that  money.   They  are  not
    large amounts when viewed in the round.

42.  As to events in Pakistan, whilst the Appellant was not  named  on  the
    "hit list" the business name is recorded which therefore is a reference
    to him.  There is  confirmation  that  he  was  part  of  the  building
    committee which is an activity  that  put  the  Appellant  at  risk  in
    Pakistan.  Whilst it had been asserted that the  contents  of  the  FIR
    were inconsistent with his evidence, that was in fact  the  Appellant's
    case that the allegation  set  out  in  the  FIR  was  based  on  false
    information to implicate the Appellant.  It was not an account of  what
    had happened and that is the explanation as to why it  is  inconsistent
    with what he had said.  It had always been the  Appellant's  case  that
    this was a false account in  the  FIR  designed  to  be  the  start  of
    proceedings against him.  The FIR was an attempt to frame the Appellant
    and engender a prosecution.

43.   As to the interview, Mr Halim submitted  that  the  interview  record
    should be treated with a degree of caution.  It is clear that  at  some
    point there was some language used by the interpreter  which  may  have
    caused offence to the Appellant and that this had been an issue  before
    the Tribunal.  Indeed, amended Grounds of Appeal which  were  supported
    by a statement from  the  solicitor  advocate  conducting  the  hearing
    appeared to state that there had  been  some  concession  made  by  the
    Presenting Officer that  the  interview  should  not  be  relied  upon.
    However he conceded that it did not appear  that  any  issue  had  been
    taken concerning that when reaching the error of law and thus he  could
    not take that any issue any further.  But nonetheless, he  invited  the
    Tribunal to look at question 52 in the light of what had been  said  at
    question 51 and in the light of  the  Appellant's  propagation  of  his
    faith and proselytising that he had undertaken in the United Kingdom.

44. As to Article 8, he relied upon  what  was  set  out  in  the  skeleton
    argument and that the Appellant and his family members were a "value to
    the community" and thus it would  be  disproportionate  to  remove  the
    family to Pakistan.

45. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination.

Assessment of Evidence and Findings of Fact

46. I must make findings as to the credibility of  the  Appellant  and  the
    claim in the light of the totality of the evidence that is  before  me,
    including the background evidence.

47. The Appellant has provided a number of  documents  in  support  of  his
    claim.  Those documents can be found in the Appellant's  bundles  named
    "1" and "2". In the decision of  Tanveer  Ahmed  at  paragraph  35  the
    Tribunal stated that there was no obligation on the Home Office to make
    detailed enquiries about documents produced  by  individual  claimants.
    It was said that doubtless there were cost and logistical  difficulties
    in the light of the  number  of  documents  submitted  by  many  asylum
    claimants.  The Tribunal recorded as follows:-

         "In the  absence  of  a  particular  reason  on  the  facts  of  an
         individual case,  a  decision  by  the  Home  Office  not  to  make
         enquiries, produce in country evidence  relating  to  a  particular
         document or  scientific  evidence  should  not  give  rise  to  any
         presumption in favour of an individual claimant or against the Home
         Office."

48. The decision of Tanveer Ahmed is a starred decision and the Tribunal is
    bound by it.  When considering documentation, I remind  myself  of  the
    guidance given in the decision of the Tribunal in Tanveer Ahmed  [2002]
    UKIAT 00439 in  which  the  Tribunal  acknowledged  the  argument  that
    "documents and information contained in them may be either  genuine  or
    false; documents may be genuine but  that  information  itself  may  be
    false; documents may not be genuine but the information may nonetheless
    be true."  The Tribunal in that case went on to state

         "It is trite in immigration and asylum law that we must  not  judge
         what is or is not likely to happen in other countries by  reference
         to our perception of what is normal within the United Kingdom.  The
         principle applies as much to documents as  to  any  other  form  of
         evidence.  We know from experience  and  country  information  that
         there  are  countries  where  it  is  easy  and  often   relatively
         inexpensive to obtain 'forged' documents.  Some of them  are  false
         in that they are not made by whoever purports to be the author  and
         the information they contain is wholly or partially  untrue.   Some
         are 'genuine' to the extent that they emanate from a proper source,
         in the proper form, on the proper paper, with the proper seals, but
         the information they contain is wholly or  partially  untrue.   ...
         The permutations of truth, untruth, validity and 'genuineness'  are
         enormous.  At its simplest we need to  differentiate  between  form
         and content; that is whether a document is properly issued  by  the
         purported author and  whether  the  contents  are  true.  They  are
         separate questions. It is a dangerous oversimplification merely  to
         ask whether a document is 'forged' or even 'not genuine'."

    The only question is whether the document is one  upon  which  reliance
    should properly be placed.  Such documentation should be not looked  at
    in isolation but should be assessed along with other pieces of evidence
    and therefore "in the round".  I confirm that I have had in mind  those
    words of the Tribunal when making  an  assessment  of  the  variety  of
    documents that have been produced in this case.

49. I have considered  the Appellant's account with care and the  documents
    produced in support of it in the light of  Tanveer  Ahmed  and  in  the
    light of the background country materials.  At paragraph 33.01 -  33.06
    the COIR Report deals with the prevalence of  forged  and  fraudulently
    obtained official documents in Pakistan.

         "33.     Forged and Fraudulently Obtained Official Documents

         33.01    The Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (IRB) noted in
                a  Response  to   Information   Request   (RIR),   Pakistan:
                Fraudulent  documents  (2008-2010),  published  24  November
                2010, that:

                    'In an article published on 10 August  2010,  the  Daily
                    Times of Lahore reported that "fake passports are widely
                    available" in Pakistan. According to the Sydney  Morning
                    Herald,  the  Federal  Investigation  Agency  (FIA)   in
                    Pakistan arrests an average of six people a day  in  the
                    Islamabad  area  for  document  fraud...  An   assistant
                    director of the FIA stated that  tens  of  thousands  of
                    people have some sort of involvement in this industry...
                    According to a an article published on 12 November  2009
                    in another Lahore newspaper,  The  Nation,  the  current
                    British Home Office Minister responsible for Immigration
                    stated that  numerous  applications  for  British  visas
                    presented  by  Pakistanis  are  accompanied   by   false
                    documents. The Consul General of the  United  States  in
                    Pakistan  stated  that  in  July  2010,  nearly  98%  of
                    applications for American visas made by Pakistanis  were
                    refused  because  they   were   accompanied   by   false
                    documents...'

          33.02   The IRB also produced a

                    '...  partial  list  of  cases  reported  in  the  media
                    concerning fraudulent documents in Pakistan:

                    'The Supreme Court  asked  the  Election  Commission  of
                    Pakistan (ECP) to review the degrees  of  legislators...
                    Almost all of the nearly 1,100 elected officials have to
                    submit their diplomas for verification...  According  to
                    an article in the newspaper The News International on 14
                    October 2010, at the time the article was published, the
                    degrees of 67 Members of Parliament  had  been  declared
                    fake; however, the hearings into the  fake  degrees  was
                    still ongoing as of 1 November 2010...

                    'In September 2010, six Pakistanis went  to  Denmark  to
                    seek asylum... They were allegedly in possession of fake
                    visas and  were  aided  by  FIA  [Federal  Investigation
                    Agency]   agents   at   Benazir   Bhutto   International
                    Airport...

                    'In September 2010, the FIA arrested  four  people-three
                    women who  had  fake  Afghan  passports  that  had  been
                    provided to them by the  smuggler  accompanying  them-as
                    their airplane was about to take off for Oslo... An  FIA
                    agent and an immigration inspector allegedly helped  the
                    passengers clear the checks prior to boarding...

                    'On  20  June  2010,  Zimbabwean  police  arrested   two
                    Pakistanis with fake Kenyan passports...

                    'In March 2010, the FIA arrested a  forgery  expert  and
                    found  at  his  residence  various   forged   documents,
                    including  passports,   visa   stickers   and   security
                    papers...

                    'In  early  2009,  Pakistan's  National   Accountability
                    Bureau (NAB) announced that the former consul general of
                    Pakistan in the United States would soon be arrested for
                    issuing  300  fake   passports   to   Pakistanis...   He
                    subsequently admitted  in  court  that  his  office  had
                    indeed issued 300 fake passports...'

         33.03    The Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (IRB) noted in
                a Response to Information Request (RIR), dated  28  November
                2007, that:

                    'A July 2005 article in Dawn, a Karachi-based newspaper,
                    states that "tens  of  thousands  of  Pakistanis  manage
                    every year to reach [the] UK  on  forged  documents  and
                    through other means of human trafficking". In an article
                    on human trafficking [March 2005],  The  Daily  Times...
                    indicates that "illegal immigrants travelling with  fake
                    student visas" are also commonplace.  The  Human  Rights
                    Commission  of  Pakistan  (HRCP),   a   non-governmental
                    organization which promotes  the  advancement  of  human
                    rights in Pakistan indicates in their 2006  report  that
                    during the previous four years, over  33,000  Pakistanis
                    were returned to Pakistan after using fraudulent  travel
                    documents to enter Oman. The HRCP report also  estimates
                    that over 300,000 people were thought to leave  Pakistan
                    by illegal means each year.'

         33.04    The same source noted that:

                    'The Federal Investigation Agency (FIA), a Pakistani law
                    enforcement agency which generally investigates cases of
                    corruption and immigration control,  including  offences
                    under passport-related legislation states  that  it  was
                    aware of 131 passengers travelling on  forged  documents
                    in 2004 and 83 in the first six months of 2005.

                    'According to the Pakistan Press International (PPI), in
                    May 2006, the British government donated a machine  that
                    detects  forgeries  to   the   Pakistan   passport   and
                    immigration  office.  This  equipment,  which  magnifies
                    images on any document to a very  high  degree  and  can
                    identify the use of different inks in the preparation of
                    documents, is intended  to  help  Pakistani  authorities
                    identify  forged  or  fraudulent  documents,   such   as
                    national  identity  cards,  bank  statements  and  other
                    documents required to obtain visas. The FIA already owns
                    four such machines. The Director of Visa Services at the
                    British High Commission in Islamabad is  quoted  in  the
                    article as saying  that  approximately  two  percent  of
                    applications  for  United   Kingdom   (UK)   visas   are
                    fraudulent.'

         33.05    Another IRB RIR, dated 18 June 2004, stated that:

                    'During a presentation at the Ninth European Country  of
                    Origin Information Seminar held in Dublin,  Ireland,  on
                    26 and 27 May 2004, an Islamabad-based representative of
                    the United Nations High Commissioner of Refugees (UNHCR)
                    provided information on various  country  conditions  in
                    Pakistan. The UNHCR representative stated that there  is
                    a high level of corruption in Pakistan and  that  it  is
                    possible to obtain many types of fraudulent documents or
                    documents that are fraudulently authenticated by a  bona
                    fide stamp or authority.'

         33.06    The same report noted that:

                    'The Information Centre on Asylum and Migration  of  the
                    German Federal Office for  the  Recognition  of  Foreign
                    Refugees indicated that  '[i]n  nearly  all  cases,  the
                    documents presented [by asylum  seekers]  for  proof  of
                    persecution (reports under the penal code, warrants  for
                    arrest, court judgments, lawyers'  correspondence)  were
                    falsified or of incorrect content. In  Pakistan,  it  is
                    not...difficult   to   have   a   (simulated)   criminal
                    proceeding initiated against oneself, in  order  to  get
                    authentic documents (e.g. a "First  Information  Report"
                    or a decision to set the accused free until the date  of
                    the trial)... It is possible...either [to] pay for or to
                    use  private  contacts  to  have  a  newspaper   article
                    published depicting a situation of persecution'."

         "First Information Reports (FIRs)

         12.01    The United States Department of State  Country  Report  on
                Human Rights Practices 2011 (USSD Report 2011), published 24
                May 2012, stated that:

                    'First Information Report (FIR) is the legal  basis  for
                    any  arrest.  Police  ability  to  initiate  an  FIR  is
                    limited, but for certain crimes the police may  initiate
                    an FIR. Often a  different  party  must  file  the  FIR,
                    depending on the type of crime,  not  whether  there  is
                    reasonable proof of a crime. An  FIR  allows  police  to
                    detain a suspect for 24 hours, after which a  magistrate
                    can order detention for an additional 14 days if  police
                    show  that  the   detention   is   material   to   their
                    investigation. In  practice  some  authorities  did  not
                    observe these limits on detention.  There  were  reports
                    that authorities filed FIRs without supporting  evidence
                    to harass or intimidate detainees or did not  file  them
                    when  adequate  evidence   was   provided   unless   the
                    complainant paid a bribe...

                    'There  were   reports   that   some   police   detained
                    individuals  arbitrarily  without  charge  or  on  false
                    charges to extort payment for their release. There  were
                    reports that some  police  also  detained  relatives  of
                    wanted individuals to compel suspects to surrender.

                    'Police routinely did not seek a  magistrate's  approval
                    for investigative detention  and  often  held  detainees
                    without charge until a court challenged  the  detention.
                    When  requested,  magistrates   approved   investigative
                    detention without requiring  further  justification.  In
                    cases of insufficient evidence, police  and  magistrates
                    sometimes colluded to issue new FIRs, thereby  extending
                    detention beyond the 14-day period.'

         12.02    The Citizens Police Liaison Committee (CPLC)  of  Pakistan
                noted on its website, accessed 14 March 2011, that  a  First
                Information Report (FIR):

                    '...is a written document prepared by  the  police  when
                    they receive  information  about  the  commission  of  a
                    cognizable offence. It is a report of  information  that
                    reaches the police first in point of time  and  that  is
                    why it is called the First  Information  Report.  It  is
                    generally a complaint lodged  with  the  police  by  the
                    victim of a cognizable offence or by someone on  his/her
                    behalf. Anyone can report the commission of a cognizable
                    offence either orally or in writing to the police.  Even
                    a telephonic message can be treated as an FIR. It  is  a
                    duty of police to register  FIR  without  any  delay  or
                    excuses. Non-registration of FIR is an offence  and  can
                    be  a  ground  for  disciplinary  action   against   the
                    concerned police officer.'

         12.03    The CPLC  went  on  to  describe  a  cognizable  and  non-
                cognizable offence:

                    'Cognizable Offence: A  cognizable  offence  is  one  in
                    which the police may arrest a  person  without  warrant.
                    They  are  authorized  to  start  investigation  into  a
                    cognizable case on their own  and  do  not  require  any
                    orders from the court to do so.

                    'Non-cognizable Offence: A non-cognizable offence is  an
                    offence in which a police officer has  no  authority  to
                    arrest without warrant. The  police  cannot  investigate
                    such an offence without the court's permission.'"


50. I confirm that in reaching  my  findings  I  have  considered  all  the
    evidence "in the round" in making an assessment.

The Country Guidance

51. The Tribunal have dealt with the decision of Ahmadis most  recently  in
    the decision of MN and Others (Ahmadis -  country  conditions  -  risk)
    Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC).

52. In  MN and others (Ahmadis - country conditions  -  risk)  Pakistan  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00389(IAC) the Tribunal held that (i) This country guidance
    replaces previous guidance in MJ & ZM  (Ahmadis  -  risk)  Pakistan  CG
    2008 UKAIT 00033 and IA & Others (Ahmadis Rabwah) Pakistan  CG  [2007]
    UKAIT 00088. The guidance we give is based in part on the  developments
    in the  law  including  the  decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  in HJ
    (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31, RT (Zimbabwe) [2012]  UKSC  38  and  the  CJEU
    decision in Germany v. Y (C-71/11) & Z (C-99/11). The guidance  relates
    principally to Qadiani Ahmadis; but as the  legislation  which  is  the
    background to the issues raised in these appeals affects Lahori Ahmadis
    also, they too are included in the country guidance stated below.

53. The head note reads as follows:-

         "2.  (i)      The background  to  the  risk  faced  by  Ahmadis  is
                  legislation that restricts the way in which they are  able
                  openly to practise their faith. The legislation  not  only
                  prohibits preaching and other forms of  proselytising  but
                  also in practice restricts other elements  of  manifesting
                  one's religious beliefs, such as  holding  open  discourse
                  about religion with non-Ahmadis, although not amounting to
                  proselytising. The prohibitions include  openly  referring
                  to one's place  of  worship  as  a  mosque  and  to  one's
                  religious leader as an Imam. In addition, Ahmadis are  not
                  permitted to refer to the call to prayer as  azan  nor  to
                  call themselves Muslims or refer to their faith as  Islam.
                  Sanctions include a fine and imprisonment and if blasphemy
                  is found, there is a risk of the death  penalty  which  to
                  date has not been carried out although there is a risk  of
                  lengthy incarceration if the penalty is imposed.  There is
                  clear evidence that this legislation is used by  non-state
                  actors to threaten and harass Ahmadis. This  includes  the
                  filing of First Information Reports (FIRs) (the first step
                  in  any  criminal  proceedings)  which   can   result   in
                  detentions whilst prosecutions are being pursued.  Ahmadis
                  are also subject  to  attacks  by  non-state  actors  from
                  sectors of the majority Sunni Muslim population.


              (ii)     It is, and has long been,  possible  in  general  for
                  Ahmadis to practise their  faith  on  a  restricted  basis
                  either in private or  in  community  with  other  Ahmadis,
                  without infringing domestic Pakistan law;


         3.   (i)      If an Ahmadi is able to demonstrate  that  it  is  of
                  particular  importance  to  his  religious   identity   to
                  practise and manifest his  faith  openly  in  Pakistan  in
                  defiance of the restrictions in the  Pakistan  Penal  Code
                  (PPC)  under  sections  298B  and  298C,  by  engaging  in
                  behaviour described in paragraph (ii)(a) above, he or  she
                  is likely to be in need of protection, in the light of the
                  serious nature of the sanctions that potentially apply  as
                  well as the risk of prosecution  under  section  295C  for
                  blasphemy;


              (ii)     It is no answer to expect  an  Ahmadi  who  fits  the
                  description just given  to  avoid  engaging  in  behaviour
                  described in paragraph (ii)(a) above  ("paragraph  (ii)(a)
                  behaviour") to avoid a risk of prosecution.


          4. The need for protection applies  equally  to  men  and  women.
             There is no basis for considering that Ahmadi women as a whole
             are at a particular or additional risk; the decision that they
             should not attend mosques in Pakistan was made by the Ahmadi
             Community following attacks on the mosques in Lahore in 2010.
             There is no evidence that women in particular were the  target
             of those attacks;


          5. In light of the above, the first question  the  decision-maker
             must ask is (1) whether the claimant genuinely is  an  Ahmadi.
             As with all judicial fact-finding the judge will need to reach
             conclusions on all the evidence as a whole giving such  weight
             to aspects of that evidence as appropriate in accordance  with
             Article 4 of the Qualification Directive.  This is likely  to
             include an enquiry whether the claimant was registered with an
             Ahmadi community in Pakistan and worshipped and engaged there
             on  a  regular  basis.  Post-arrival  activity  will  also  be
             relevant. Evidence likely to be relevant includes confirmation
             from the UK Ahmadi  headquarters  regarding  the  activities
             relied  on  in Pakistan and  confirmation  from  the  local
             community in the UK where the claimant is worshipping.


          6. The next step (2) involves  an  enquiry  into  the  claimant's
             intentions or wishes as to  his  or  her  faith,  if  returned
             to Pakistan.  This  is  relevant  because  of  the  need  to
             establish whether  it  is  of  particular  importance  to  the
             religious identity  of  the  Ahmadi  concerned  to  engage  in
             paragraph (ii)(a) behaviour. The burden is on the claimant  to
             demonstrate  that  any  intention  or  wish  to  practise  and
             manifest aspects of the faith openly that are not permitted by
             the Pakistan  Penal  Code  (PPC)  is  genuinely  held  and  of
             particular importance to the claimant to preserve his  or  her
             religious identity.  The decision maker needs to evaluate all
             the evidence. Behaviour since arrival in the UK may also  be
             relevant. If the claimant discharges this burden he is  likely
             to be in need of protection.


          7. The option of internal relocation, previously considered to be
             available in Rabwah, is not in general reasonably  open  to  a
             claimant who genuinely wishes to engage in  paragraph  (ii)(a)
             behaviour,   in   the   light   of   the   nationwide   effect
             in Pakistan of the anti-Ahmadi legislation.


          8. Ahmadis who are not able to show  that  they  practised  their
             faith at all in Pakistan or that they did so on anything other
             than the restricted basis described in paragraph  2(ii)  above
             are in general unlikely to be able to show that their  genuine
             intentions or wishes are to practise and manifest their  faith
             openly on return, as described in paragraph 2(a) above.


          9.  A  sur  place  claim  by  an  Ahmadi  based  on  post-arrival
             conversion or revival in  belief  and  practice  will  require
             careful  evidential  analysis.  This  will  probably   include
             consideration of  evidence  of  the  head  of  the  claimant's
             local United   Kingdom Ahmadi   Community    and    from
             the UK headquarters, the latter particularly in cases  where
             there has been a  conversion.  Any  adverse  findings  in  the
             claimant's  account  as  a  whole  may  be  relevant  to   the
             assessment of likely behaviour on return.


         10. Whilst an Ahmadi who has  been  found  to  be  not  reasonably
             likely to engage or wish to engage in paragraph 2(a) behaviour
             is, in general, not  at  real  risk  on  return  to  Pakistan,
             judicial fact-finders may in certain cases  need  to  consider
             whether that person would nevertheless be reasonably likely to
             be targeted  by  non-state  actors  on  return  for  religious
             persecution by  reason  of  his/her  prominent  social  and/or
             business profile."

54. The first question I must ask is whether the claimant genuinely  is  an
    Ahmadi.  As noted by  the  country  guidance  decision  in  reaching  a
    conclusion on this aspect of  the  case,  the  Tribunal  is  likely  to
    include an  enquiry  whether  the  claimant  was  registered  with  the
    Ahmadiyya community in Pakistan and worshipped and engaged there  on  a
    regular basis.   Post  arrival  activity  is  also  relevant  including
    confirmation from  the  UK  Ahmadi  headquarters  regarding  activities
    relied on in Pakistan and confirmation from the local community in  the
    UK where the claimant is worshipping.

55. In this appeal it is accepted on behalf of the Secretary of State  that
    the Appellant and his family members are followers of the Ahmadi faith.
     Their faith is  prominently  set  out  on  their  passports.   I  have
    considered the  evidence  as  a  whole  concerning  their  worship  and
    engagement in the Ahmadiyya community in  Pakistan  from  the  evidence
    that has been produced before the Tribunal and in the light of the oral
    evidence that I have heard.  Having done so, I am  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant and his family members were  active  members  of  the  Ahmadi
    faith and of their community in Kotli in Pakistan.

56.   The Appellant applied for verification of  his  faith  and  preaching
    activities in Pakistan by making an application  to  the  UK  Ahmadiyya
    headquarters for such verification  to  take  place.   The  process  of
    verification is set out in a letter dated 20th November 2011  in  which
    it is noted that they carry out checks in Pakistan before they  confirm
    or verify any factual account given by any person making an enquiry  to
    establish their faith.  It is clear that they have no  vested  interest
    in the support of any particular Appellant and that is confirmed in the
    country guidance case of MN which further notes that  the  AMA  UK  are
    highly organised  and  have  an  information  gathering  capacity  (see
    paragraph 66 of the decision).  The enquiries that were  undertaken  by
    the UK Ahmadiyya headquarters into this  particular  Appellant  and  to
    confirm and verify his activities in the United Kingdom are set out  in
    a letter at page 52(a).  The documentation corroborates the Appellant's
    claim that he was an "Ahmadi by birth" and sets out  that  confirmation
    as to his activities had been confirmed by the president of  the  Kotli
    branch.  Specific confirmation concerning this particular Appellant and
    his family members are set out in that letter.  As to his claim that he
    comes from a longstanding Ahmadi  family,  that  is  confirmed  by  the
    letter noting that he was Ahmadi by birth therefore both  parents  were
    of the Ahmadi religion.  It noted that he had contact and  co-operation
    with  the  Ahmadiyya  community  and  that  he   had   paid   financial
    contributions regularly.  As to posts held in furtherance of his faith,
    it was noted that he was the naiib nazim isha'at  (assistant  secretary
    for publication and literature) between 2004 and 2005 and that he was a
    volunteer in  the  ziafat  (kitchen  and  catering)  between  2005  and
    September 2011 and that he was  a  member  of  the  committee  for  the
    construction of the local mosque from 2008 until September 2011 and his
    contributions to the Kotli city branch of the Ahmadiyya community  were
    confirmed by the UK AMA at page 177 of the bundle.  In respect  of  the
    Appellant's wife, she also held positions in the  Ahmadiyya  community,
    that she was  the  secretary  of  the  taalimo  tarbiat  lajha  imailah
    (education wing ladies) and a secretary of the  nasirat  (youth  girls'
    wing) and also a secretary of the dawat illaa (preaching) since 2009.

57. Having considered that evidence in the light of the oral evidence  that
    I have heard, I am satisfied to the lower standard that  the  Appellant
    has demonstrated that he was an active  and  prominent  member  of  the
    Ahmadi faith and sought advancement  of  that  faith  in  a  number  of
    respects shown by his  representation  on  various  committees  and  in
    particular seeking to be involved in the building and construction of a
    mosque.  It is  of  significance  that  the  objective  material  makes
    reference to the difficulties that members of the Ahmadi faith have and
    the restrictions they face on establishing places of worship.   Several
    Ahmadi mosques were reported as being desecrated and construction being
    stopped.

58.  I  have  also  considered  with  care  the  evidence  concerning   his
    participation in the United Kingdom and that of his family.  Whilst  it
    was submitted that he has only taken part in activities in  the  United
    Kingdom to bolster his claim and to bring himself  within  the  country
    guidance, as noted by Mr Halim, this is not a case where the  Appellant
    had not been a genuine follower  of  the  faith  in  Pakistan  and  was
    therefore trying to mount a sur place claim nor could it be  said  that
    he would have known what the country guidance case said it having  been
    promulgated a number of years after he had been in the  United  Kingdom
    and after having demonstrated his faith in the United Kingdom since his
    arrival.

59. There is an abundance of evidence concerning the  first  Appellant  and
    his family members' participation in the Ahmadi  faith  in  the  United
    Kingdom arising  out  of  their  membership  of  the  local  branch  in
    Hartlepool.  The evidence has been supported and confirmed by  the  AMA
    UK and the secretary of that association.  The letter from the  AMA  UK
    is set out at page 52.  It supports  the  Appellant's  account  and  is
    consistent with the activities that he has carried out  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It confirms that the first Appellant has participated in  the
    preaching programme of the branch by distributing leaflets to create an
    awareness of ISRA and to encourage  members  of  the  public.   He  has
    attended congregational prayers, Eid, attended monthly meetings and the
    annual convention in 2012.  He has participated in preaching activities
    known as "tabliq" involving door to  door  leaflets  and  that  he  has
    assisted in the food and hospitality work of the branch at meetings and
    that  he  is  also  given  the  responsibility  of  looking  after  the
    maintenance and cleaning programme of the branch.  At  page  53  he  is
    given the title of "mumtazim ziafar" and there is a document at page 56
    confirming  his  account  that  he  was  a  volunteer  for  the  annual
    convention in 2012 known as the "jalsa salana".

60. The Appellant has produced  photographic  evidence  that  confirms  the
    contents of the letter from the AMA  UK  relating  to  his  activities.
    They show him out on the streets in  Hartlepool  distributing  leaflets
    and preaching to members of the community.  He is shown at page 64 at a
    peace exhibition with a guest and there are photographs  of  him  (page
    63) with the national president and members of the executive committee.
     I do not  accept  the  assertion  that  they  only  demonstrate  three
    occasions.  I am satisfied from the evidence that has been verified  by
    the AMA UK that throughout the time that he  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom he and his family members have  been  involved  in  the  active
    propagation and participation in their faith in their  local  community
    and that these are simply examples of the propagation  of  that  faith.
    There are photographs showing him also with the spiritual head  of  the
    Ahmadi religion at page 198.  It shows the Appellant, his wife and  the
    spiritual leader of the Ahmadiyya community together in one photograph.
    Whilst photographs may be seen as self-serving, it is because they  are
    seen in conjunction with the verification of the AMA UK concerning  the
    totality of the activities that are carried out which gives  them  some
    force.

61. I also accept that he has made financial contributions to the Ahmadiyya
    Association in the United Kingdom.  It is of significance that the  AMA
    UK verified that in Pakistan he also had made  voluntary  contributions
    to his faith.  The contributions are set out at various pages, 57,  89,
    59, 60 and 61.  Those all relate to donations made  in  2011  and  when
    totalled together give a figure  of  72.   The  Appellant  was  cross-
    examined on the basis that those contributions were high for a  man  of
    limited means.  It is not clear  what  the  inference  was  from  that,
    either he did not pay them or he had been  working.   Nonetheless,  the
    evidence of the Appellant was that he had always provided contributions
    towards his faith when in Pakistan and had also done so in  the  United
    Kingdom.  His explanation of being able to afford it was that he  would
    "save little by little" and that he had given up cigarettes  which  had
    therefore meant some of his income could be used by  way  of  voluntary
    contributions.  I accept that he made those contributions.  As  to  the
    contributions of his wife, they are found at page 87 and they  comprise
    of a donation of 20 (15th July), 80 on 16th December and 27  on  9th
    June.  Those donations can be seen to have been spread over a period of
    six months.  The daughter's contributions are also found in the  bundle
    of 27, 24 and 10.  Again they are  over  a  period  of  six  months.
    Whilst it was submitted that they only demonstrated  a  "snippet  on  a
    weekly basis" that was not the evidence given.  At no  time  were  they
    asked if they made contributions weekly and that was not  the  evidence
    that was given by them.  I am satisfied that  they  live  as  a  simple
    family and are conducting themselves  in  the  way  that  they  did  in
    Pakistan by making voluntary contributions towards their religion.

62.   I have also considered the evidence of the family members, namely his
    wife and daughter.  The Appellant's wife did hold  different  positions
    in the Ahmadiyya Association in Pakistan and in particular education of
    the ladies wing.  That had been verified  by  the  UK  headquarters  in
    respect of activities in Pakistan.  She confirmed that she had preached
    her faith in the United Kingdom and further confirmed that she had felt
    the need to preach because it was part of their faith that they  should
    spread the word of God to people.  She  said  that  "even  knowing  the
    dangers this is the faith that we have  and  we  cannot  separate  from
    this".  She confirmed  in  cross-examination  that  she  was  the  only
    secretary in Kotli ladies wing held between 2009  and  September  2011.
    She said her daughter Atique did not have any actual  role  but  was  a
    member and would preach at college.  She confirmed her activity in  the
    AMA UK attending general meetings and taking part in classes,  bazaars,
    charities and classes for education.  She said that she did not  preach
    at the moment except for one occasion at a library where she had met  a
    woman and they  spoke  the  same  language.   She  confirmed  that  her
    daughter attended classes and that when they  had  meetings  she  would
    serve food.  She confirmed her daughter's  conduct  with  preaching  at
    school and college and that she had set up a group on the internet,  "a
    blog".

63. The evidence of the Appellant's  daughter  Atique  confirmed  that  she
    would preach by conversations in class  and  that  she  had  set  up  a
    Facebook page entitled "Rabwah" where  people  convert  to  the  Ahmadi
    faith and ask questions about the religion and that it was part of  the
    way to preach.  I would accept that  as  a  young  person  the  use  of
    Facebook is universally prevalent and that the way young  people  these
    days seek to display and send information is often used by  the  medium
    of Facebook  and  the  setting  up  of  a  site  entitled  "Rabwah"  is
    consistent with the way a young person would seek to engage other young
    people in their faith and is no less a part of preaching than going out
    and using more traditional methods.

64.   In her oral evidence she also explained why she had preached  despite
    experiences in Pakistan.   She said it was part  of  her  religion  and
    that she had to tell people about her religion even if in fear, however
    since she had been in the United Kingdom she was able to do  this  more
    openly.

65. In cross-examination she said that she had held meetings and had served
    food.  At school she had preached and had discussions with  others  who
    were not Ahmadis and that she had also watched the  MTA  channel.   She
    also referred to her mother organising meetings in  the  home.   Whilst
    the Presenting Officer  in  her  submissions  had  submitted  that  the
    witnesses had been inconsistent on the basis that her mother  had  said
    her daughter had only preached at college and not at meetings, I do not
    find that that is right.  The evidence  recorded  related  to  Pakistan
    where she said she had meetings at  home  and  that  her  daughter  had
    helped.  The evidence of the mother was that she had only  preached  to
    one lady in the library but she did say that she attended  meetings  at
    which her daughter had  helped.   She  was  not  saying  that  she  was
    preaching at  the  meetings  and  that  has  been  a  misunderstanding.
    Therefore I find no inconsistency in their evidence.   I  am  satisfied
    that both the Appellant's wife and  daughter  have  demonstrated  their
    adherence to and propagation of the Ahmadi faith not only  in  Pakistan
    but also in the United Kingdom and have given credible  reasons  as  to
    why they have continued their faith and why they would  continue  their
    faith if returned to Pakistan.

66. As to the issue of the  first  Appellant's  conduct  in  Pakistan,  the
    Appellant claims that he did preach or  proselytise  his  Ahmadi  faith
    whilst in  Pakistan.   The  Respondent  relies  upon  evidence  to  the
    contrary set out in the asylum interview.  At question 52 the Appellant
    was asked "Have you ever ... the Ahmadi faith with other non Ahmadis?".
     It is not possible to read part of  that  question  and  none  of  the
    advocates could assist in what that word actually was.  It  is  assumed
    that it is "preach" although it does not look like that.  In any  event
    the answer that is recorded is "no".   However that answer  has  to  be
    seen in the light of question 51, the preceding question, in  which  he
    was asked "Have  you  ever  proselytised  the  Ahmadi  faith?"  and  he
    answered "Never to any Molvis.  Only to people I  knew  and  people  of
    understanding.  We speak to other Ahmadis.  I ask them to pray  and  to
    do certain things."

67. It is the Appellant's evidence that he did preach to others in Pakistan
    as set out at question 51 but  also  that  he  preached  to  other  non
    Ahmadis.  He said that the answer to question 52  is  wrongly  recorded
    and that there were problems of interpretation  during  the  interview.
    It is apparent  that  following  the  interview  the  Appellant  voiced
    concerns that the interpreter had interpreted some evidence incorrectly
    and that at some point in the interview at question 94 it  was  alleged
    that a derogatory word was used to upset the Appellant.  It appears  to
    have been raised  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (see  paragraph  3
    entitled "preliminary issue") where the representative appears to  have
    withdrawn any  suggestion  that  the  Home  Office  interpreter  showed
    disrespect for the Appellant.  However there is no indication that  the
    general complaint that the interpretation was not  recorded  accurately
    was ever withdrawn.  Indeed it appears upon amended grounds before  the
    Upper Tribunal that were before Judge Deans related to an issue that  a
    concession was made by the Presenting Officer at the hearing  and  that
    parts of the interview were to be treated as unreliable  and  that  was
    supported by a signed  statement  by  the  solicitor  advocate  at  the
    hearing.  No finding appears to have been made on that issue  and  both
    parties accept that there is nothing else to take the  matter  further.
    However it may lend some support to the Appellant's case as it is clear
    at the answer given to question 51  that  he  had  preached  whilst  in
    Pakistan and set against the background evidence relating to the  risks
    of preaching in Pakistan and the fact that I  find  that  it  has  been
    amply demonstrated that he had prominence in Pakistan in respect of his
    Ahmadi faith; a matter verified by the AMA UK, that  there  is  a  real
    possibility that the answer recorded is not a correct one.   Indeed  in
    his evidence in cross-examination he said he did preach in Pakistan but
    that he was "in fear of the consequences, in the UK I am able to preach
    freely".  It was put to him that if he were  granted  asylum  he  would
    stop proselytising (on the basis that the evidence before the court  is
    that he is presently proselytising and propagating  his  faith  to  non
    Ahmadis).  He refuted this (stating that "I was born an Ahmadi").  That
    has to be seen in context with the evidence as a whole in which  he  is
    accepted that he is an Ahmadi and that he has held and  shown  to  hold
    positions within the Ahmadiyya community which shows  that  he  was  an
    active participant in the religion whilst in Pakistan.   This  is  also
    supported  by  his  general  evidence  concerning  the  importance   of
    preaching to him and the identity of the faith.

68. I now turn to the events in Pakistan themselves.  The  events  in  2008
    arise principally out of the extension work to  the  mosque  in  Kotli.
    The background material by reference to  the  area  of  Kotli  and  the
    Ahmadiyya community there, demonstrates that Ahmadis face  restrictions
    on establishing places of worship and that there was credible  evidence
    of several Ahmadi  mosques  being  reported  as  being  desecrated  and
    construction of such mosques being stopped (I refer to the USSD  Report
    of 2009).  Thus the events in relation to 2008  are  set  against  that
    general background material.

69.   The account given by the Appellant  is  that  the  extension  to  the
    mosque that began in June 2008 caused an outcry in the  area  of  Kotli
    and in particular for members of the Khatme Nabuwwat.   I  accept  from
    the evidence given that the Appellant was a member of the committee for
    the construction of the local mosque between 2008 and  September  2011.
    That is not taken solely  from  his  interview,  statements  and  other
    evidence but it has been confirmed by the AMA UK  from  a  verification
    request and taken from sources in Pakistan.  I  am  entitled  to  place
    weight upon that verification as it  is  referred  to  in  the  country
    guidance case and the information gathering services that are available
    to the AMA UK.  It is said that  an  open  FIR  against  the  Ahmadiyya
    community as a whole was issued.  The FIR  is  set  out  at  page  213.
    Cross-examination took place on the basis that  the  Appellant  himself
    was not named in the FIR.  However my understanding of the evidence  is
    that the Appellant did not produce the open FIR to demonstrate that  he
    was at risk but as I understand  it  to  demonstrate  the  strength  of
    feeling and conduct of those who were seeking to harass  and  harm  the
    Ahmadiyya community as a whole.  I find that that  is  consistent  with
    the background material set out in the US State Department Report  2009
    as to what was happening in relation to those who sought  to  construct
    places of worship for the Ahmadi faith and it is also  consistent  with
    the background evidence recorded by the Tribunal in the country case of
    MN and Others (as cited) when making reference to the  filing  of  FIRs
    (first step in any criminal proceedings) which are  being  used  in  an
    attempt to harass and persecute members  of  the  religious  community.
    The reason  it  is  said  that  it  was  "open"  is  that  it  is  done
    deliberately to keep the name and address of the accused blank so  that
    the police can simply make an arrest and add the name to it as and when
    required.   The  criminal  case  was  registered  against  the   entire
    population of Kotli for the construction of the mosque on 3rd June 2008
    (R23 open FIR).  By way of response it appears that an application  was
    sent to the district magistrates three days later on 6th June  2008  to
    investigate the matter for the members of  the  mosque  committee.   On
    this document (page 130) the Appellant is named and that is  consistent
    I find with the verified evidence from the AMA UK  that  the  Appellant
    was  a  member  of  the  mosque  committee.   It  is  clear  that  that
    application was in answer to the open FIR that was  registered  on  3rd
    June 2008 against the community as a whole.

70.   I have  considered  the  circumstances  of  the  dissent  around  the
    construction of the mosque.  There are a number of news  articles  from
    June 2008 that make reference to the issue of the  mosque  construction
    and what had happened.  At pages 256-260 the Daily Nawi-I-Waqt  records
    that there were  "restrictions"  placed  on  the  construction  of  the
    Quadari Centre in Kotli and that a  case  was  filed  under  "298B  and
    298C".  It records that one accused was arrested whilst raids conducted
    for others.  This is on 9th June and this was prior to  the  arrest  of
    the Appellant.  There is  a  similar  article  at  page  261  reporting
    restrictions were placed on the construction of the mosque and  in  the
    newspaper "the Daily Khabrin" recorded  on  11th  June  that  in  Kotli
    members of the Jamat-e-Islam offered to provide free  legal  assistance
    to  Muslims  who  filed  legal  complaints  against   "Qadianis"   (the
    derogatory name given to the Ahmadiyya community).  Thus  this  is  the
    background evidence to the events in  2008.   Whilst  I  have  set  out
    earlier in this determination the background evidence relating  to  the
    prevalence of documentation in Pakistan and that newspaper reports  and
    other documents can be provided, I am satisfied that in  general  terms
    those documents should merit some weight as they  are  consistent  with
    the general background evidence and the  evidence  when  taken  in  the
    round demonstrates that there were problems in 2008 arising out of  the
    mosque in Kotli and allied to that that this Appellant was a member  of
    that said committee.  There is no FIR in his name but I accept that  he
    was arrested on 16th June 2008 and detained for two days until  he  was
    bailed.  The circumstances  of  his  arrest  are  consistent  with  the
    newspaper report concerning raids on  others.   There  was  a  document
    relating to the bail (page 127) issued on  18th  June  2008,  two  days
    after his arrest.  He was cross-examined on the basis that this  was  a
    "court document for the appellant".  However on closer inspection  this
    is not a court document but is a bond agreement paid by Amir Dawood who
    is said to be the Appellant's relative.  While it gives  the  accused's
    name being that of the Appellant, it relates to the bond put forward by
    Mr Dawood and not to the Appellant.

71. Having considered the evidence in the light of the  oral  evidence  and
    the documents, I find that the Appellant, as a result of his activities
    on the committee for the extension to the mosque in 2008  came  to  the
    attention of the members of the Khatme Nabuwwat alongside others of the
    Ahmadiyya community and that he was arrested, detained but  was  bailed
    after two days.  There is no evidence before  me  from  this  Appellant
    that the proceedings are still ongoing nor is there any evidence of any
    further action taken after 2008.  Therefore I conclude that whilst I am
    satisfied that he was arrested and detained, I find that there  was  no
    further action taken against this Appellant that  arose  out  of  those
    particular proceedings and that he continued to live in Pakistan.  This
    is borne out by his own account that the next  incident  that  occurred
    was in 2011.

72. There is a document that the advocates have referred to as a "hit list"
    at page 135 that is dated August 2008 and is  said  to  have  been  re-
    issued on a date in 2009.  It is said to set out a  list  of  prominent
    and high profile members  of  the  Ahmadiyya  community  preaching  the
    "Qadiaiat".  It is clear that the document does not name the  Appellant
    himself.  However it does name his business at page 144 at entry number
    19 under the heading "Qadyan lawyers and businessmen".   The  entry  is
    "Nadim Khokar Electric Point".  Whilst he is not named  personally  his
    business is named.  I do not find that it demonstrates  that  he  is  a
    person of high profile but at best it demonstrates  that  his  business
    was seen as being associated with those who preached and were active in
    the propagation of the Ahmadi religion and its activities.

73.   The threatening letter that was said to arrive on 2nd September  2011
    (exhibited at page 157-158) was said to have been  delivered  over  two
    years later stating "you are on the hit list".  As I have  stated,  the
    so-called "hit list" was dated a significant time before 2008  and  the
    Appellant in any event is not listed by name in that list thus I do not
    attach weight to that document.

74.   As to the events in 2011, the Appellant claims that an FIR was issued
    on 15th September arising out of an argument that  he  had  in  a  shop
    where two men, who were out of the district, noticed  that  he  had  an
    Ahmadi newspaper on  his  counter  (see  page  17  of  the  ROP).   The
    Appellant's evidence was that the FIR was filed against him because  of
    the argument that ensued in his shop and he  confirmed  that  they  had
    filed the FIR after finding  out  that  he  was  an  Ahmadi  and  after
    accusing him of preaching and that the contents of the FIR  set  out  a
    false allegation against him because they were trying to  file  a  case
    against him.  The point made by the Presenting  Officer  was  that  the
    contents of the FIR are not consistent with the events.  However in  my
    judgment that is not surprising.  The  Appellant's  case  is  that  the
    whole contents of the FIR were false and were designed to cause trouble
    for him.  He was not saying that the events in the FIR  were  what  had
    happened but what was in the  FIR  was  to  found  a  false  allegation
    against him to begin the first step of criminal proceedings.

75. I accept the contents of the FIR.  He has been  consistent  about  that
    evidence when cross-examined about the events that occurred in the shop
    and it is consistent with his general background set against his Ahmadi
    faith.  Thus I have reached the conclusion  concerning  the  events  in
    Pakistan that he and his family  members  have  demonstrated  from  the
    evidence that they were active participants who  regularly  engaged  in
    their Ahmadi faith in Pakistan.  In  the  Appellant's  case  he  was  a
    member of a number  of  committees  including  the  committee  for  the
    construction  of  the  mosque,  family  members  had   paid   voluntary
    contributions and his wife was also a member of a committee (the ladies
    wing).  His daughter would preach whilst  at  school  and  that  it  is
    reasonably likely that the Appellant  himself  although  to  a  limited
    extent did preach or proselytise his faith whilst in Pakistan.  In 2008
    he became of interest to the members of the local Khatme Nabuwwat as  a
    result of the construction of the mosque which is consistent  with  the
    background material  concerning  events  at  that  time.   However  the
    interest in him did not lead to any further proceedings and I  did  not
    accept that he was on any "hit list"  arising  out  of  that.   I  also
    accept that in 2011 a further FIR was issued against him arising out of
    the events on 15th September.

76.   I have therefore considered the evidence relating to  the  claimant's
    intentions or wishes as to his faith if returned to Pakistan  and  also
    members  of  his  family.   I  have  set  this  out  earlier   in   the
    determination.  I have reached the conclusion on the evidence before me
    that there is a reasonable likelihood that they have demonstrated  that
    there is a  need  to  establish  that  their  faith  is  of  particular
    importance to them and to their "religious identity".  Both  the  first
    Appellant and his wife and daughter have  referred  to  the  particular
    importance it has to them to their own identity as being an Ahmadi  and
    I am satisfied that they  have  discharged  the  burden  upon  them  to
    demonstrate that they would wish to practice and  manifest  aspects  of
    their faith openly but are not permitted by the  Pakistani  Penal  Code
    (PPC).  I have reached the conclusion that it is genuinely held  and  I
    do not accept the submission that the conduct and  behaviour  that  has
    been well documented is simply designed to found a  claim  for  asylum.
    That is wholly contrary to the family's previous conduct which again is
    well evidenced in Pakistan which I  consider  gives  a  fuller  picture
    concerning their active participation and propagation of this faith  as
    a whole.

77.   I have therefore evaluated the evidence  taking  into  account  their
    behaviour since  their  arrival  but  also  in  the  context  of  their
    activities whilst in Pakistan.  I do  not  find  that  they  fall  into
    paragraph 8 of the head note, namely Ahmadis who were not able to  show
    that they practised their faith at all in Pakistan.  That  is  contrary
    to the evidence that I have set out above, nor  do  I  find  that  they
    conduct it on a restricted basis.  Similarly it is not  the  case  that
    this is a sur place claim based on post arrival conversion or a revival
    in belief and practice because as set out earlier it is well documented
    that this is a family who have been active in their  participation  not
    only in the United Kingdom but also in Pakistan.

78. Thus in summary I find that the Appellant and his  family  members  are
    genuine Ahmadis who have been  active  in  Pakistan  propagating  their
    faith and have been  active  members  of  the  Ahmadiyya  community  as
    evidenced by the AMA UK and the verification of that conduct.  I  found
    the first Appellant came to the attention and hostility of  the  Muslim
    community in Pakistan in 2008 although it appears no further action was
    taken in respect of that  and  that  he  also  came  to  their  adverse
    attention in 2011 culminating in the first step of the criminal process
    of a registration of an FIR.  I did not accept that he had been on  any
    "hit list" as he had not been specifically named but at its highest his
    business had been identified as a business run by someone who  actively
    preached  or  propagated  the  Ahmadi  faith.   He  has  practised  and
    propagated his faith in the United Kingdom as have his  family  members
    and has been able to do so on perhaps a more active basis than  he  did
    in Pakistan.  As his wife has pointed out, it is possible  to  practise
    in the United Kingdom with no fear of arrest, harassment  or  any  harm
    and that in Pakistan that had been at the forefront of their minds  and
    the consequent attention their religion would bring them.

79.   Thus I am satisfied that the family as a whole  are  genuine  Ahmadis
    and have taken part in their faith both in Pakistan and in  the  United
    Kingdom holding true beliefs.  Their behaviour in the United Kingdom is
    consistent with a longstanding active faith pursued in Pakistan.  I  do
    not find that the family can be reasonably  expected  to  abstain  from
    practising their faith to hold the beliefs that they have  if  returned
    to Pakistan.  Thus I conclude that the Appellant and his family members
    are reasonably likely to continue with the propagation of  their  faith
    and practice of  it  if  returned.   Such  restrictions  I  find  would
    undermine their religious identity as demonstrated in these appeals.

80. For the reasons that I have set out, I am satisfied that the  Appellant
    has demonstrated  that  he  has  discharged  the  burden  upon  him  to
    demonstrate  that  if  returned  to  Pakistan  there  is  a  reasonable
    likelihood that he would face serious harm or persecution as  a  result
    of his religious beliefs.  Applying the  country  guidance  in  MN  and
    Others I find that the Appellant would be at risk if he would  seek  to
    propagate his faith in Pakistan and  that  he  should  be  entitled  to
    refugee status on the principles of HJ Iran  because  his  reasons  for
    refraining from propagating  his  faith  would  be  because  he  feared
    persecution and that thirdly as  a  genuine  and  devoted  Ahmadi,  the
    propagation of his faith is of significant importance to the  Appellant
    in preserving his religious identity.

81.   In the light of those findings,  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  on
    asylum and Article 3 ECHR grounds.  Whilst I have made some findings in
    relation to the Appellant's wife and daughter, they are dependants upon
    the claim and therefore should be granted leave to remain  as  part  of
    the core family of the Appellant.

82. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  an
    error on a point  of  law.   The  determination  was  set  aside.   The
    decision is remade as follows:-

    The appeals are allowed on asylum and human  rights  (Article  3  ECHR)
    grounds.


Signed                              Date: 23/9/2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
