

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11152/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 February 2016                          |On 7 March 2016               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between


                          NAVAGEETHAN NAVARATNARAJA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr D. Coleman of counsel
For the Respondent:     Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                                  DECISION

   1. The appellant has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mozolowski who,  by  a  decision
      promulgated on 13 November  2015,  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
      against refusal of his asylum and human rights claims.




   2. As it is common ground and agreed between the parties that  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge made an error of law that was material to  the  outcome
      so that her decision cannot stand, it is necessary only to record that
      the parties are plainly right to reach that agreement and  for  me  to
      identify briefly the nature of the error of law.


   3. At the heart of the appellant's claim to be at risk of being subjected
      to persecutory ill-treatment on return to Sri Lanka was his account of
      being arrested, detained for a period after which he was  released  on
      bail and of an arrest warrant having been issued after  he  failed  to
      attend his scheduled court hearing so that he will, on  that  account,
      be on a stop list which would bring him to the  adverse  attention  of
      the authorities upon return. Central to the  reasoning  that  led  the
      judge  to  reject  that  account  as  untrue  was  her  reliance  upon
      information in the Sri Lanka Country  of  Information  Report  that  a
      warrant for arrest would not be issued   after  a  single  failure  to
      appear because the COIR recorded that:


           "A lawyer in Colombo agreed that a warrant for arrest is  served
           after the third occasion a person fails to appear"


      So that the judge concluded that the appellant's account was:


            "in direct opposition to the information in the COI Report"


   4. However, there was set out in the COI a range of views, one  of  which
      specifically supported the appellant's  account  of  a  warrant  being
      issued after a single failure to attend court.  Therefore,  the  judge
      has taken a selective approach to the country evidence  and  has  left
      out of account information supporting the appellant's claim and in  so
      doing has left out of account a material consideration and so made  an
      error of law. Given the central importance of this  finding  of  fact,
      plainly the error was a material one.


   5. There were, frankly, a number of other significant errors made by  the
      judge in arriving at her adverse credibility findings but,  as  it  is
      agreed that the error described above is sufficient to establish  that
      her decision cannot stand, it is not necessary to examine those  other
      errors.

   6.  The  parties  are  also  plainly  correct  in   agreeing   that   the
      determination must be  set  aside  in  its  entirety  and  the  appeal
      determined afresh. To that extent, the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is
      allowed.

   Summary of decision:


   7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Mozolowski made a material error of law such
      as to require that her decision be set aside in its entirety.


   8. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  determined
      afresh by a different judge of that Tribunal.


   9. To that extent, the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.





                               Signed              [pic]
                               Date:    29 February 2016

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

