
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number: AA
/11882/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |         Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12 May 2017                      |         On 25 May 2017                 |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                               A--- S--- N---
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Wilcox, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       appellant. Breach of this order can be punished  as  a  contempt  of
       court.  I  make  this  order  even  though  the  appellant  has  not
       established his claim to international protection because there is a
       chance that publicity could create a risk for him in  the  event  of
       his return.

    2. The appellant appeals with  permission  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Coker a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  on  13  February
       2017 to dismiss his appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of
       State  refusing  him  leave  to  remain  on   asylum,   humanitarian
       protection and  human  rights  grounds  arising  from  the  European
       Convention on Human Rights.

    3. The grounds of appeal do not challenge the decision  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal to dismiss the  appeal  on  any  ground  except  those
       raising Article 8 of the ECHR. Judge Coker said:

  "...The grounds assert that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  misdirected
  himself in his assessment of the appellant's private and family life with
  his father, with whom he has lived since the age of 15 i.e. the last five
  years.

  2  It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal failed to have  regard  to
  the possible family life the appellant has established with  his  father.
  It is not clear what evidence to this effect was called and this  may  be
  an issue [when] deciding whether there is a material error of law by  the
  First-tier Tribunal Judge."

    4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt with the claim based on  Article
       8 starting at  paragraph  39  of  the  decision.   There  the  Judge
       comments on the positive reference from the  Croydon  College  where
       the appellant was pursing a  BTEC  in  sports  science.   The  Judge
       explained why he did not  find  there  would  be  "very  significant
       obstacles  to   [the   appellant's]   integration   into   life   in
       Afghanistan".  The main reason given was that the appellant  was  20
       years old at that time and had lived in Afghanistan  for  the  first
       fifteen years of his life.

    5. At paragraph 41 that the Judge  accepted  that  the  "appellant  has
       established private life in the UK given he has lived here for  more
       than five years".  At paragraph 43 the Judge expresses  satisfaction
       that the appellant can speak English and at paragraph 44 found  that
       the appellant was not financially independent but was "reliant  upon
       his father for financial support".

    6. The Judge then went  on  to  say  that  the  Tribunal  was  under  a
       statutory obligation  to  accord  little  weight  to  "private  life
       established at a time when immigration  status  is  precarious"  and
       went on to dismiss the appeal.

    7. These findings are criticised at ground 2 of the grounds  of  appeal
       seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which state:

  "At paragraph 44  of  the  FTT  determination,  it  was  noted  that  the
  Appellant was financially dependent upon his father.  There  has  been  a
  failure to consider the mental and emotional dependency of the  Appellant
  upon his father having resided with him since he came to the UK since the
  age of 15 years and having regard to the fact that  the  Appellant  as  a
  young adult  has  no  family,  community  or  other  support  network  in
  Afghanistan.  As his father cannot return to Afghanistan due  to  ongoing
  fears for his safety, it is  submitted  that  the  Appellant's  extremely
  close family life would be irretrievably  broken  if  he  was  forced  to
  return to Afghanistan.  The FTT failed to consider the impact  of  return
  to Afghanistan holistically having regard  to  the  emotional  and  moral
  dependency of the Appellant."

    8. The grounds also criticise the Secretary of State for not  accepting
       that there was family life between the appellant and his father.

    9. Although  there  have  been  attempts  to  simplify  the  Article  8
       balancing exercise it is trite law that cases  are  intensely  fact-
       specific and the extent to which the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred
       in this case, if he did, might be  distilled  to  some  extent  from
       considering how the case was put for him to decide.

   10.  I  have  seen  Counsel's  skeleton  argument  from  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  It is drawn by  Mr  Mark  Blundell  of  counsel  who  has
       considerable experience in immigration and human  rights  cases  and
       can be expected to make full use of the available  points.  Most  of
       the skeleton argument was devoted to the  question  of  whether  the
       appellant was a refugee.  Paragraph 18 states simply:

  "In the alternative, the  appellant  will  submit,  in  reliance  of  the
  material in [AB3] in particular, his appeal should be allowed on  Article
  8 ECHR grounds."

   11. This appears to refer to the Further Bundle for the Hearing  on  the
       19.1.17 as the Bundle for the Hearing on  the  19.1.17  is  entirely
       made up of background material. The document AB3 is  a  letter  from
       Wendy Goldie who works as  a  Curriculum  Administrator  at  Croydon
       College. It confirms that the appellant  is  a  student  at  Croydon
       College but says nothing more that is relevant.

   12. The same ("Further") bundle includes a reference from Karianne Ford,
       a PE and Sport Lecturer at Croydon College praising the  appellant's
       attitude to his studies and confirming that he has made friends  and
       there are supporting letters from friends.

   13. I have considered the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       on 19 January 2017.  I am presently concerned with the relevance  of
       that evidence to the  claim  for  leave  to  remain  on  "article  8
       grounds".

   14. The appellant made  a  statement  on  13  January  2015.   There  he
       explained how his brother had been taken by the Taliban and had  not
       been seen since and how the appellant was well-settled in the United
       Kingdom having friends at college and how his father was working, as
       he was entitled to do, as a minicab operator.

   15. The appellant said:

  "I get on really well with my father and talk with him about  everything.
  I hope I am not made to separate from him as he is the  only  person  who
  truly understands and supports me.  I wish to say that  it  is  difficult
  enough living without my mother and siblings.  To be  separated  from  my
  father would be devastating."

   16. He then went on to say how his father was doing his best to  reunite
       the family.

   17. The  appellant  had  also  made  a  statement  dated  23  May  2016.
       Appropriately much of that was concerned with his unsuccessful claim
       for asylum.  However he did talk about his own "private  and  family
       life".  He referred to his commitment  to  his  college  course  and
       being very  close  to  his  father.   He  said  "there  would  be  a
       devastating impact upon my father if I was separated from him.  Both
       of us would feel like I would be being sent back to my death".

   18. The appellant's father made a statement dated 23 May 2016.  He  said
       there that  the  appellant  had  been  living  with  him  since  the
       appellant came to the United Kingdom and continued  "I  want  to  be
       able to continue to look after him and offer  him  moral,  financial
       and emotional support".

   19.  The  appellant's  statement  of  5  January   2017   repeated   his
       appreciation of the moral, financial and emotional guidance given to
       him by his father.

   20.  Mr  Wilcox's  submissions  followed  the  Grounds  Supporting   the
       Application for Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

   21. I reject the contention that was  any  material  deficiency  in  the
       First-tier Tribunal's arguments concerning the appellant being alone
       in Afghanistan. He has not been able to show that he risked  serious
       ill treatment in Kabul so that he was entitled to leave on  refugee,
       humanitarian protection or article 3 grounds. This appeal is limited
       to article 8 points  and  although  conditions  on  return  are  not
       irrelevant to the balancing exercise they could  not  in  this  case
       amount to sufficient reason  to  allow  the  appeal.  Indeed  it  is
       difficult to think of circumstances that fall short of  a  need  for
       international protection that would  tip  the  article  8  balancing
       exercise  in  favour  of  the  appellant  remaining.   A  degree  of
       disruption,  loneliness  and  isolation  are  innate   rather   than
       disproportionate consequence of removal.

   22. It seems that little was made of the "article 8"  point  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal. Nevertheless,  having  considered  Mr  Wilcox's
       submission, and with respect to the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  I
       find that it would have been more helpful if the First-tier Tribunal
       Judge had  had  more  to  say  about  the  evidence  concerning  the
       appellant's private and family life in the United Kingdom.

   23. The judge focused particularly on "private life" and, if I  may  say
       so, this may have been part of the problem.  The European Convention
       on Human Rights, which  the  Judge  was  obliged  to  apply,  refers
       distinctly to "private and family life"  where  the  word  "and"  is
       clearly  conjunctive.  It  is  sometimes  described  as  a  person's
       "physical and moral integrity". The Immigration  Rules  and  Section
       117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  tend  to
       divide "private life" and "family life"  as  though  they  were  two
       separate and distinct concepts with precise and exclusive  meanings.
       If that is what they do, then they are not applying  the  Convention
       properly.

   24. I am satisfied that the Judge should have decided that  there  is  a
       degree of "family life" between the appellant and his father.   This
       is because the appellant lives with his father  and  is  financially
       dependent on his father and emotionally dependent on his father in a
       difficult time.  There is no reason to doubt any of the evidence  to
       this effect and it would be remarkable  if  a  close  bond  had  not
       developed between a  father  and  son  who  live  together  and  are
       separated  from  their  country  of  nationality  and  their   other
       relatives and who, on any  version  of  events,  have  been  through
       trying times.

   25. I am satisfied that the bond is something over and above  the  usual
       ties of emotion. I am confident that there are more than  the  usual
       bonds here because the appellant is still a relatively young man and
       I accept that his father is a stabilising and  importance  influence
       in his life in a way that is more than usually the  case  for  young
       men of his age still living in the family  home.   This  is  not  to
       imply that the appellant is in particular need of  guidance.  Rather
       the evidence points to his being more  than  ordinarily  responsible
       for his age. However, although he clearly has  friends  outside  the
       home he has no close emotional support. Further there is no evidence
       that his father has any special relationships in the United  Kingdom
       except with the appellant. His efforts have been focussed  on  doing
       all the he properly can to unite his family in the  United  Kingdom.
       Put simply, neither the appellant nor his father  have  anyone  else
       that really matters to them in the United Kingdom.

   26. I am satisfied that on the proper application  of  the  decision  in
       Kugathas v SSHD  [2003]  INLR  170  the  appellant  has  established
       "family life".  This is consistent with the decision of the Court of
       Appeal in Etti-Adegbola v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1319 which emphasised
       that "family life" does not stop when a person reaches his majority.
       Further, although it was not argued before me, I have the benefit of
       the decision of the Court of Appeal in Rai v ECO  New  Delhi  [2017]
       EWCA Civ 320.  It is quite clear to me that the First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge should have decided that there was "family life"  between  the
       appellant and his father.

   27. It does not follow from this  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       erred materially.

   28. I have read the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision  carefully  and
       it is quite clear that he did have regard to all  of  the  evidence.
       He reminded himself, correctly, of the  strong  public  interest  in
       upholding immigration control but  did  say  at  paragraph  45  that
       although he was, in his judgment, "bound to accord little weight  to
       private life established  at  a  time  when  immigration  status  is
       precarious" he went on to say:

  "although the provision requires me to apply little weight I  assess  the
  strength of the private life established by the appellant (if I  may  use
  the phrase) at the higher end of little".

   29. It is quite clear to me that the judge  was  conducting  essentially
       the same balancing exercise that he would have conducted if  he  had
       not limited himself to "private life".

   30. Just as it is clear that the "family life"  element  of  a  person's
       "private and  family  life"  does  not  normally  have  bright  line
       boundaries it is clear that not  all  components  of  "family  life"
       carry equal weight. Although I am satisfied  that  the  relationship
       between the appellant and his father should have been recognised  as
       part of the "family" life of  both  the  appellant  and  his  father
       disrupting that relationship is  not  analogous  to  disrupting  the
       relationship between, for example, a mother and a small child.

   31. The First-tier Tribunal Judge may have been slightly facetious  when
       he coined the phrase "the higher end of little" but his  meaning  is
       clear enough.  He was recognising that the quality  of  private  and
       family life (he described it  only  as  private  life)  between  the
       appellant and his father was rather more  than  usual  and  deserved
       respect.

   32.  He  also  reminded  himself,  correctly,  of  the   importance   of
       maintaining  immigration  control  which   necessarily   means   the
       importance  of  enforcing  decisions   that   sometimes   would   be
       distressing to the people concerned.

   33. He commented favourably on the steps  the  appellant  had  taken  to
       establish  himself  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  his  ability   to
       understand English. These are factors in favour of permitting him to
       remain.

   34. What the judge did not identify, and I find this is  because  it  is
       not there to be identified,  was  any  factor  which  permitted  the
       appeal to be allowed on article 8 grounds after the matters set  out
       under Section 117A-D had been considered or at all.

   35. I find no material error.

   36. Nevertheless, out of an abundance of caution, I have looked  at  the
       additional evidence provided before the hearing before me.

   37. The medical report of Dr Tabe, dated 5 May 2017 finds marks  on  the
       Appellant's body and symptoms of stress that she attributes  to  the
       Appellant having been  tortured.  The  report  also  notes  that  an
       appointment has been made with a psychotherapist.  These  things  do
       not illuminate the article 8 balancing exercise. The appellant might
       want to suggest that Dr  Tabe's  report  and  any  report  from  the
       therapist support a fresh claim. That is entirely a matter for him.

   38. There is a written report from an organisation identified  as  "Talk
       To Us Off The Record".  It is prepared by  someone  described  as  a
       "counselling coordinator" and is dated 12 April  2017.  This  report
       outlines  the  organisation's  role  and  clearly   identifies   the
       appellant as its subject matter.   It  commented  on  the  fear  the
       appellant expressed about return  to  Afghanistan.   It  offers  the
       opinion (without indicating any clinical expertise  to  justify  it)
       that the appellant was showing "moderate to severe levels of anxiety
       and depression" and also referred  to  a  "high  level  of  suicidal
       ideation".  It then said  that  the  appellant  is  displaying  some
       symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder and was unable  to  sleep
       for more than one or two hours per night.

   39. The appellant had identified his  father  as  the  only  "protective
       factor" in his life and the writer  identified  the  father  as  the
       stable figure who offered personal  support  to  the  appellant  and
       appeared to give  the  appellant  the  money  he  needed  to  attend
       college.  It also said the appellant was supported  by  his  college
       teacher.

   40. Behind that in the bundle is a report from "Young Roots"  and  dated
       28 April 2017 by a "caseworker".  It describes the  appellant  as  a
       "very vulnerable young person" and comments on him  having  a  "very
       good relationship with his father, who has looked after him since he
       arrived in the UK". The author added  that  comment  "I  believe  he
       would be unable to cope if he was to live without his support".

   41. The writer who  claimed  to  have  had  experience  with  vulnerable
       migrant children and young people in Italy and France and the United
       Kingdom said that:

  "While most young people we work with  are  unaccompanied  and  for  this
  reason soon become quite independent, he has always had  the  support  of
  his father here in the UK and would not be able to deal also with  simple
  daily tasks without his help.

  His father helps him in everything, from waking him up in the morning  to
  go to college, in helping him reminding him appointments,  looking  after
  him in the house, preparing or buying his meals, helping him to enrol  in
  education, etc.

  A young person that is so mentally fragile and that has been looked after
  by his father for all this time and did not  develop  independent  living
  skills would be absolutely devastated if he was to  be  taken  away  from
  this."

   42. Again I  note  that  although  the  writer  refers  to  his  or  her
       experience, there is no  reference  to  professional  qualifications
       that would put the comments in context.

   43. I cannot  attach  much  weight  to  the  unexplained  quasi  medical
       opinions of community  workers  even  though  they  are,  no  doubt,
       sincere.

   44. I do attach weight to their description of the relationship  between
       the appellant and his father.  This additional  evidence,  taken  at
       its highest, can only confirm that refusing the appellant leave will
       hurt him and his father. It interrupts their relationship  and  will
       leave each of them isolated and unhappy.

   45. It cannot support a finding that refusal would be disproportionate.

   46. Enforced immigration control is unpleasant sometimes but  Parliament
       has decided that there is a strong public interest in  upholding  it
       and although this case does not fall tidily within the  Rules  there
       are no particularly telling elements in it  which  would  support  a
       finding that removal is disproportionate.

   47. It follows therefore that I find no material error in the First-tier
       Tribunal Judge's decision and I dismiss the appeal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 24 May 2017                    |



