
IAC-AH-CO-V3
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11048/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28th January 2015                       |On 16th April 2015               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                          MR GAFFOOR MOHAMMED ABDUL
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harris, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born  on  31st  December  1966.
    The Appellant applied for a UK student visa  on  8th  July  1999.   The
    Appellant's application for asylum was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of
    State on 22nd November 2012  and  that  Notice  of  Refusal  took  into
    account that the Appellant had been living in the UK  since  23rd  July
    1999, that his wife had joined him in the UK in 2003 and  that  he  had
    two children who were born in the UK.  It also took  into  account  the
    various returns during that period by the Appellant to Sri  Lanka  when
    the Appellant's claim for respect for family  and  private  life  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights were considered.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Foudy sitting at Manchester on 18th  January  2013.   The
    Appellant's claim was summarised in considerable detail by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge at paragraph 10  of  her  determination  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on 21st January 2013 the  Appellant's  appeal
    was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 6th February 2013 the Appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Permission was granted by Designated  Judge  Lewis  on
    12th March 2013.  The judge noted that it was contended that the  judge
    had not properly considered country information  evidence  and  country
    guidance authority, had not had regard to a  possible  explanation  for
    the passage of time between the Appellant having left Sri Lanka and the
    authorities having issued an arrest warrant for him, and that the judge
    had wrongly discounted  medical  evidence  without  giving  any  cogent
    reasons for doing so.

 4. On 22nd March 2013 a response to the Grounds of Appeal  under  Rule  24
    was provided by the UK Border Agency opposing the appeal.

 5. The appeal came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell  sitting  at
    Manchester on 8th May 2013.  In a determination promulgated on 13th May
    2013 Judge Birrell concluded that the case should be remitted  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal because the  Appellant  did  not  have  a  fair
    hearing due to the credibility findings being tainted by the failure to
    deal with the medical evidence  adequately  and  the  failure  to  have
    regard to background material about  risk  on  return.   Judge  Birrell
    found that none of the findings of fact were to stand  and  the  matter
    would be subject to a complete rehearing.

 6. The Appellant's appeal having been remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    was heard by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Simpson  sitting  at
    Manchester on 10th September 2013.  In a determination  promulgated  on
    18th November  2013  the  Appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed  on  both
    immigration and human rights grounds and the Appellant was found not to
    be in need of humanitarian protection.

 7. On 29th November 2013 fresh Grounds of Appeal against the  decision  of
    Judge Simpson were submitted to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Those  grounds
    contended:

      i) that the judge had failed  to  demonstrate  that  she  had  applied
         anxious scrutiny in considering the case;

     ii) that the judge's credibility  findings  were  flawed  for  lack  of
         clarity and for failing to consider all necessary materials; and

    iii) that the judge had failed to consider Article 8 lawfully.

 8. On 12th December 2013 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nightingale  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Nightingale noted that  it  was  contended
    that Judge Simpson had failed to consider  GJ  and  Others  (Post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) as the most recent
    country guidance case and that the judge had  failed  to  consider  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iv)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   In
    addition he noted that it was contended that the judge  had  failed  to
    make clear findings of fact or to consider relevant evidence  and  that
    it was arguable the judge erred in failing to consider paragraph 276ADE
    with regard to private life, the determination arguably moving directly
    to a consideration of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

 9. On 30th December 2013 the Secretary of State filed a  response  to  the
    most recent Grounds of Appeal under Rule  24  submitting  that  it  was
    apparent from the determination that the case of GJ was not relied upon
    by the Appellant and irrespective of the fact that GJ was  the  country
    guidance case at the date of hearing, the Appellant  could  simply  not
    have succeeded under the ratio  of  that  case  on  the  judge's  well-
    reasoned findings.  Further it was stated that the  judge  had  clearly
    considered the medical evidence at paragraph 38  of  the  determination
    and given valid and adequate reasons for not accepting that the  arrest
    warrant was issued in 2009.   As  for  Article  8  the  judge,  it  was
    contended, had summarised the submissions made at paragraph 29  of  her
    determination  and  dealt  fully  with  the  issues  raised  and   made
    appropriate findings from paragraph 44 through to paragraph 47  of  the
    determination.  The Secretary  of  State  consequently  submitted  that
    there were no material errors of law in the determination.

10. The matter was listed before me to determine if there  was  a  material
    error of law in the decision of Judge Simpson.  The issues before me at
    that time related to an appeal on asylum and on human  rights  grounds.
    At paragraphs 18 to 20 of my error of law findings I set out why  there
    was no material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge so far as the asylum decision was concerned but found that  there
    was a material error of law on the consideration of Article 8.

11. It is on that basis that the appeal comes back before me for rehearing.
     I note a couple of factors.  This is an appeal  solely  restricted  to
    the Appellant's claim under Article 8.  It is not an appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.   The  whole  thrust  of  the   Appellant's   arguments   have
    substantially changed since this matter first came  before  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  indeed  since  the   Appellant's   original
    application was submitted to the Secretary of State.  Secondly  I  note
    that Mr Harris appears on behalf of the Appellant  and  Mr  McVeety  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State.  Consequently the constitution of the
    attendees before me are exactly the same as those that were  before  me
    when I considered the error of law hearing last year.   In  addition  I
    note that there is now filed and served a substantial up-to-date bundle
    of evidence relating to the appeal under Article 8 running to some  137
    pages.  It is against that background that the appeal proceeds.

Evidence

12. The Appellant appeared and gave evidence.   He  confirmed  his  witness
    statement of 14th January 2015  as  being  his  evidence-in-chief.   He
    confirms that he first arrived in the United Kingdom on 23rd July  1999
    as a student and that his most recent entry was on 29th  October  2007.
    His wife had arrived in the United Kingdom in  February  2003  and  has
    remained in the UK ever since.  He has two children, Ishara born on 4th
    August 2006, and Ayman Mohammed born on 19th December 2010.  He  states
    that his whole family have resided in the United  Kingdom  since  those
    dates and that his first child has attended education  throughout  from
    nursery to primary school.  He points out the only time that Ishara has
    been out of the UK to Sri Lanka was for a period of nineteen days  when
    she was aged 11/2 and contends that she does not speak the language and
    she is unaware of the life and culture within Sri  Lanka.   He  further
    points out that he has effectively been away from Sri Lanka since 1993,
    i.e. a period in excess of twenty years and that he has no  social  and
    cultural ties with Sri Lanka and has no friends over there.  He  states
    that Ishara has been to classes on Tamil and they do try to  speak  the
    language to her but that her knowledge  is  limited.   Their  principal
    language is in English.  He confirms that he is a Muslim and attends  a
    mosque every  Friday  night  in  Longsight  and  that  Ishara  goes  on
    Saturdays and Sundays to Bible classes which are held in Arabic.   When
    asked as to whether he had ever discussed with Ishara the prospects  of
    returning to Sri Lanka he advises that he has but even as late  as  the
    day of this hearing Ishara, he indicates, has told him  that  she  does
    not wish to go back to Sri Lanka, that she is a British girl and wishes
    to remain being brought up as a British girl.  He confirms he is unable
    to work because he  was  stopped  from  working  in  2002  due  to  his
    immigration status, however he seeks to develop his career in IT  where
    his qualifications are.  Prior to arriving in the UK the Appellant  was
    a computer programmer in Saudi Arabia.

13. The Appellant is cross-examined by Mr  McVeety.   He  is  asked  if  he
    practised his religion in Sri Lanka and he advised that he did although
    it is still difficult he believes for Muslims out there.  When asked as
    to whether his daughter could undertake her studies in  Sri  Lanka,  he
    responds by pointing out that she has friends and family in the UK  and
    in any event lessons would not be in English.  He  also  believes  that
    she would be at risk from the majority population in Sri Lanka and that
    the only family member that remains there is his mother and  he  lasted
    visited her in 2007.

14. The Appellant acknowledges that his leave to remain ran out in 2008 and
    that the first time he went to court was regarding his  asylum  appeal.
    He acknowledges that he should have returned in 2008 but claims that he
    had failed to do so due to the security  position  in  Sri  Lanka.   He
    states that he is only in rare contact with his  mother  although  they
    have not fallen out, speaking to her on the  telephone  about  once  or
    twice a month.  He indicates she is not in good  health  and  that  her
    sister looks after her.  When asked as to the whereabouts  of  his  own
    siblings, he advised that his brothers and sisters live abroad and that
    the only family his wife has in Sri Lanka are her parents.

Submission/Discussions

15. Mr McVeety acknowledges that the test here turns very much  on  whether
    or not it is reasonable for the Appellant's  daughter  Ishara  Sathiena
    Gaffoor to return to Sri Lanka because if it is not reasonable for  her
    to return then it would not be reasonable  for  the  family  to  return
    without her and, similarly, if it is reasonable for her to return  then
    there is no reason why the rest of the family should  not  be  able  to
    return with her.  He submits that it was reasonable for her  to  return
    and that she would be returning with her family and at an age when  she
    can adapt.  He submits that the law has moved on since the decision  in
    ZH (Tanzania) and that it is necessary to differentiate between British
    and non-British citizens, pointing out that none of the Appellants  are
    British citizens.  He submits that we are not  the  "educators  of  the
    world" and that there is no other basis upon which this  appeal  should
    be allowed.

16. Mr McVeety acknowledges the documents produced in support of the appeal
    and the school reports in particular which show that  Ishara  is  doing
    well at school and is involved in activities in  the  UK.   However  he
    submits that there is no reason why she, nor indeed  any  other  family
    member, cannot practise the Muslim religion in Sri Lanka and  that  she
    can adapt to learn Tamil.  He points out that it is not a matter of her
    being able to rely on the preference of being in the UK and that people
    move with their jobs and that every move  that  takes  place  does  not
    create a breach of  Article  8.   He  refers  to  Section  117  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  pointing  out   that
    immigration control is in the public interest and  that  the  Appellant
    must meet the Rules and that he failed to go home when he  should  have
    done.  He emphasises that the family have no lawful right to be in  the
    UK and that the Appellant has never had indefinite leave to remain.  He
    refers to Section 117B(5) and asked me to give  little  weight  to  the
    Appellant's private life when his leave in the UK  is  precarious.   He
    acknowledges that such a decision would affect Ishara but she would not
    be returning on her own, she would be returning with her  parents,  and
    that there is no reason why the family cannot return.  He asked  me  to
    refuse the appeal.

17. Mr Harris acknowledges that the family  would  be  removed  as  a  unit
    therefore it is necessary to focus on the family's  private  life  and,
    because there are children involved,  it  is  necessary  to  take  into
    account their best  interests  and  that  it  would  be  necessary  and
    appropriate to look at Article 8 outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   He
    reminds me that the test under Razgar moved quickly to an  analysis  of
    proportionality and submits that under  paragraph  117B  introduced  by
    Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 a  similar  structure  is  given
    statutory authority.   He  acknowledges  that  the  starting  point  is
    Section 117B(1), namely that the maintenance of  effective  immigration
    control is in the public interest.  He points out  that  the  Appellant
    can speak English and therefore meets the public interest test at least
    in part in paragraph 117B(2)  albeit  that  he  acknowledges  that  the
    Appellant is not economically independent as  he  is  unable  to  work.
    However he indicates that that is purely  because  of  the  Appellant's
    immigration status and that the Tribunal should take into  account  the
    Appellant's qualifications, the fact that he has worked in the past and
    give some weight to this.

18. He takes me to Section 117B(6) and submits that if  this  paragraph  is
    engaged that can outweigh other matters.  He contends that  it  is  not
    disputed that Ishara is a qualifying child.  He  accepts  that  neither
    she nor her parents are British citizens but that she would come  under
    a child who has not been here for seven years at  date  of  application
    but is approaching the threshold and she  would  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Consequently the issue relates to the private life  of  Ishara.
    He acknowledges that she would return with her parents and accepts that
    there is a limited amount of family of the Appellant in Sri Lanka.   He
    relies very much on the  guidance  given  in  E-A  (Article  8  -  best
    interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315  (IAC)  and  the  finding
    therein that the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4  was  not
    ruling that the ability of a young child to readily adapt to life in  a
    new country was an irrelevant factor, rather that the  adaptability  of
    the child in each case  must  be  assessed  and  is  not  a  conclusive
    consideration on its own.  He considers therefore that the crux of  the
    matter relates to Ishara and the family's ties to the UK.

19. He takes me to the Appellant's bundle.  I am  referred  to  the  letter
    from the head teacher at St  James'  CE  Primary  School  where  Ishara
    attends and to the letter from Ishara dated 17th January 2015 where she
    sets out why she wants to remain in the UK.  He points out that  Ishara
    has begun to identify a life outside her family and  has  made  contact
    with friends and at the mosque.  He is not saying that  she  could  not
    follow her religion in Sri Lanka but that it is in her best interest to
    stay in the UK and for her family to stay with her.  He invites  me  to
    find that it is not reasonable to uproot Ishara and  to  relocate  her,
    nor is it in the public interest, and he asked me give extra weight  to
    the length of time that the Appellant and his wife have been in the  UK
    and that the Appellant's younger child has also been brought up in  the
    UK.  He asked me to find that any removal would be disproportionate and
    to allow the appeal.

Findings and the Law

20. The Appellant has had an extensive immigration history.  He arrived  in
    the UK in 1999 and benefited from the  UK  education  system.   Between
    2001 and 2007  the  Appellant  made  six  subsequent  applications  for
    further leave to remain in the UK  as  a  student  with  his  wife  and
    daughters as dependants.  The final successful application made by  the
    Appellant was granted until 30th June 2008.   On  20th  June  2008  the
    Appellant had applied for further leave to remain in the UK on the same
    terms.  That application was  refused  on  30th  September  2008.   The
    Appellant appealed and that appeal was  dismissed  following  which  an
    application for judicial review was refused on 16th December  2008.   A
    further application for judicial review was lodged and refused on  17th
    February 2009 when the Appellant's appeal rights  were  exhausted.   In
    April 2009  the  Appellant's  wife  was  encountered  and  arrested  by
    immigration officials whilst working in a shop, she was served  with  a
    151A notice on 15th April 2009 stating she was liable to  removal  from
    the UK  as  an  overstayer.   Consequently  as  at  February  2009  the
    Appellant became an overstayer in the UK with no right to remain  here.
    I note that he made an application for leave to remain under the  Human
    Rights Act in March 2010 but that that application was rejected in June
    2010 because no fee had been  lodged.   I  consequently  discount  that
    application.   Despite  being  an  overstayer  the  Appellant   finally
    graduated from the Chartered Institute of Management in November  2010.



21.  The  Appellant  finally  claimed  asylum  on  25th  October  2012.   I
    acknowledge that from then on his appeal has  been  going  through  the
    appeal process but it is clear that both the  Appellant  and  his  wife
    were overstayers between 2009 and 2012.  That is a  factor  I  have  to
    take into account.  At the time that the  Appellant's  application  was
    made for leave to remain for asylum the Appellant's  eldest  child  was
    aged 6.  It is accepted and acknowledged by both legal  representatives
    that the Appellant's appeal falls to be addressed pursuant to Article 8
    outside the Immigration Rules.   The  appeal  process  has  taken  some
    considerable time due to the fact that the matter has been  before  two
    First-tier Immigration Judges.  The basis of the Appellant's appeal now
    changes.  The findings of Judge Simpson that the Appellant was  not  in
    need of asylum nor could pursue a claim for humanitarian protection did
    not disclose any material errors of law have been upheld.   The  appeal
    purely relates to the Appellant's claim pursuant to Article  8  outside
    the Immigration Rules based on the fact that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge failed to address those issues.

22. In any consideration of an Article 8 claim the starting  point  is  the
    law itself.  Article 8 states:

    (a)  everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life,
         his home and his correspondence;

    (b)  there should be no interference by a public body with the exercise
         of this right except such as is in accordance with the law  and  is
         necessary in a democratic  society  in  the  interest  of  national
         security, public safety or the economic wellbeing of  the  country,
         for the prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the  protection  of
         health or morals, or for the protection of the rights  and  freedom
         of others.

23. In LD [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC) the Tribunal stated:

         "The interests of the  minor  children  and  their  welfare  are  a
         primary consideration in the balance of competing considerations in
         this  case  and  their  educational  welfare  as  part  of  the  UK
         educational system point strongly to their continued residence here
         as necessary to promote those interests."

24. The general approach to Article 8 cases is that in Nhundu  and  Chiwera
    (01/TH/00613).  In those cases the  Tribunal  said  that,  in  deciding
    claims under Article 8, there is  a  five  stage  test  which  must  be
    applied in order to determine whether a breach has occurred:

      i) does family life, private life, home or correspondence exist within
         the meaning of Article 8;

     ii) if so, has the right to respect for this been interfered with;

    iii) if so, was the interference in accordance with the law;

     iv) if so, was the interference in pursuit of  one  of  the  legitimate
         aims set out in Article 8(2); and

      v) if so, is the interference proportionate  to  the  pursuit  of  the
         legitimate aim?

    Those were essentially the five questions  endorsed  by  the  House  of
    Lords in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

25. There has been a very  considerable  amount  of  case  law  as  to  the
    approach to be adopted to a claim pursuant to  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  I  take  due  note  of  those  authorities  but  in
    particular  the  Tribunal  in  Gulshan  made  clear  and  has  repeated
    subsequently in Shahzad (Article 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT  00085
    (IAC) at paragraph 31:

         "Where an  area  of  the  rules  does  not  have  such  an  express
         mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) ([29]-[31]  in  particular)
         and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
         640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after applying the  requirements
         of the rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them."

26. The Court of Appeal in MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at paragraph 128 went on to state:

         "Nagre does not add anything to the debate save for  the  statement
         that if a particular person is outside the  Rule  then  he  has  to
         demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside  the  Rule
         that he has an arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside the  Rules.   I  cannot  see  much
         utility  in  imposing  this  further  intermediary  test.   If  the
         applicant cannot satisfy the Rule, then there either is or there is
         not a further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be determined  by
         the relevant decision maker."

    In Haleemudeen v the Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 558 Beatson LJ held at paragraph 17 that where the  Article  8
    ECHR element of  the  Immigration  Rules  is  not  met,  refusal  would
    normally  be  appropriate,  "but  that  leave  can  be  granted   where
    exceptional  circumstances,  in  the  result  of  'unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences' for the individual, would result".

27. There is a requirement to look at the  evidence  to  see  if  there  is
    anything which has not already been adequately  considered  within  the
    context of the Rules which could lead to a successful Article 8  claim.
    The further intermediary test as a preliminary to a consideration of an
    Article 8 claim beyond the relevant criterion based  Rules  is  now  no
    longer appropriate and in Ganesabalan, R (on the application of) v SSHD
    [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin), there was no prior threshold  which  dictates
    whether the exercise of discretion should  be  considered;  rather  the
    nature of the assessment and the reasoning which were called  for  were
    informed by threshold considerations.

28. It is against that general background that it is necessary to  consider
    this claim.  There are two factors however of  specific  importance  on
    the general approach to Article 8 that I need to give due consideration
    to.  First is the position expressed in children cases.   The  law  was
    considered in Zoumbas v the Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2013] UKSC 74.  Paragraph 10 of that determination sets out the  basis
    principles the court needs to follow:

      i) the best  interests  of  a  child  are  an  integral  part  of  the
         proportionality assessment under Article 8 ECHR;

     ii) in making that assessment, the best interests of a child must be  a
         primary  consideration,  although  not  always  the  only   primary
         consideration; and the child's best interests do not of  themselves
         have the status of paramount consideration;

    iii) although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed  by  the
         cumulative effect of other considerations, no  other  consideration
         can be treated as inherently more significant;

     iv) while different judges might approach  the  question  of  the  best
         interests of a child in different ways,  it  is  important  to  ask
         oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in order to  avoid
         the risk that the best interests of a child  might  be  undervalued
         when other important considerations were in play;

      v) it is important to have a clear idea of a child's circumstances and
         of what is in a child's best  interests  before  one  asks  oneself
         whether those interests  are  outweighed  by  the  force  of  other
         considerations;

     vi) to that end there is no substitute for a careful examination of all
         relevant factors when the interests of a child are involved  in  an
         Article 8 assessment; and

    vii) a child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she  is  not
         responsible such as the conduct of a parent.

 1. It is also necessary to consider Section 117B of the  2002  Immigration
    Act which was brought into force by the 2014 Immigration Act.   Section
    117B makes public interest considerations applicable to all  cases.   I
    appreciate that as the public interest provisions are now contained  in
    primary legislation they override existing case law, and while  Section
    117A(2) requires me to have regard  to  the  considerations  listed  in
    Section 117B and 117C, there is no duty upon me to reach  any  specific
    conclusions or findings as the  factors  listed  are  ones  that  would
    normally have always been taken into account.  I am though conscious of
    my statutory duty to take these factors into account when coming to  my
    conclusions.  I am also aware that Section 117A(3) imposes  upon  me  a
    requirement to carry out a  balancing  exercise  where  an  Appellant's
    circumstances engage Article 8(1)  in  deciding  whether  the  proposed
    interference is proportionate in all the circumstances.  In doing so  I
    remind myself  of  the  guidance  contained  within  Razgar  (mentioned
    above).

 2. Section 117B states  that  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    control is in the public interest and it is  in  the  interest  and  in
    particular the interests of   the  economic  wellbeing  of  the  United
    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
    are able to speak English.  I acknowledge that this threshold is met by
    the Appellant and from his evidence and indeed having seen  the  letter
    written by Ishara that she speaks English.  I further acknowledge  that
    the Appellant may well be someone whose academic  qualifications  would
    enable him in due course to  obtain  employment  that  would  make  him
    financially independent.  However his qualifications are of course such
    that he should be in a position to obtain such employment either in Sri
    Lanka or elsewhere.  I use the latter reference  bearing  in  mind  the
    Appellant's previous history.

 3. What is important is that at 117B(4) little weight should be  given  to
    the private life  established  by  a  person  when  he  is  in  the  UK
    unlawfully and when his immigration  status  is  precarious.   Applying
    that statutory consideration I give scant consideration to the  private
    life of the Appellant during the period he was an overstayer.

 4. Further it is necessary to consider paragraph 117B(6).  That states:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom".

    In this case neither child  is  a  qualifying  child.   It  is  however
    appropriate to consider whether or  not  it  is  reasonable  to  expect
    Ishara to leave the United Kingdom.   I  acknowledge  that  Ishara  has
    spent her life in the UK and I give due consideration to her request to
    be allowed to stay.  However I do not  consider  that  such  a  request
    outweighs the public interest in this matter and the requirement of the
    enforcement of immigration control.  The Appellant  is  an  overstayer.
    Both he and his wife have quite deliberately flaunted  terms  of  their
    immigration status since the Appellant's leave as a student expired  in
    2008.  He deferred several years before making an  asylum  claim  which
    was given very careful scrutiny and then dismissed.  There is no reason
    why the Appellant cannot return to Sri Lanka.  Further, it  has  to  be
    remembered that the children would be returning with their parents in a
    family unit.  The Appellant,  on  his  own  admission,  indicates  that
    Ishara is learning Tamil and I have no reason to assume that  Tamil  is
    not spoken at home.  She is also having religious  training  in  Arabic
    and speaks English.  She is  clearly  a  talented  child  who  has  the
    ability to be multilingual.

 5. Children should, save for the very most exceptional  of  circumstances,
    always be with their parents particularly at the tender  age  of  these
    two children.  Carrying out the  balance  of  proportionality  and  the
    legitimate  interest  of  immigration   control,   having   given   due
    consideration to the position of  Ishara  in  particular,  and  to  the
    guidance provided by the Supreme Court in Zoumbas, I am satisfied  that
    this is an appeal that cannot succeed under  Article  8  and  that  the
    public interest considerations outweigh other  considerations,  all  of
    which are given due and proper weight in consideration in  reaching  my
    conclusion.  There is a requirement imposed upon the judiciary to apply
    the  law  and  to  properly  exercise  their   discretion.    In   such
    circumstances I am satisfied that for all the above reasons this is  an
    appeal that cannot succeed pursuant to Article 8.   I  appreciate  this
    will be disappointing to the Appellants and I also appreciate that this
    case has a very extensive history of  appeals.   However  for  all  the
    above reasons I  am  satisfied  this  appeal  cannot  succeed  and  the
    Appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention  of
    Human Rights is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 8 of the European  Convention  of
Human Rights is dismissed.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  No application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Signed        Date 15th April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed        Date 15th April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
