
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11015/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 29 August and 19 December 2014               |On 13 January 2015         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between


                                    H A M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Masood instructed by Aden & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (29/8/14) and Miss A Everett (19/12/14),
Senior   Presenting Officers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Upper Tribunal made an anonymity direction in  its  decision  of  2
    September 2014. That direction is maintained.  The appellant is granted
    anonymity unless and until the  Tribunal  or  other  appropriate  court
    directs otherwise.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly  identify  the  appellant.  Failure  to  comply  with   this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a national of Somalia,  born  28  October  1996.   She
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 9 January 2013 and claimed  asylum  at
    the Asylum Screening Unit the  following  day.   This  application  was
    refused on 16 March 2013, however, the appellant was granted  leave  to
    remain until the age of 17� - in line with  the  Secretary  of  State's
    policy relating to unaccompanied minor asylum seekers.   The  appellant
    brought an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  decision  to
    refuse her asylum,  pursuant  to  Section  83(2)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. This appeal was dismissed on "asylum grounds", "humanitarian protection
    grounds" and "human rights grounds" in a  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Roopnarine-Davies of 30 April  2014.   Designated  Judge
    Beg granted the appellant permission to appeal against Judge Roopnarine-
    Davies' determination in a decision of 22 May  2014,  thus  the  matter
    came before me on 29 August 2014.

Error of Law

 4. For reasons set out in a decision of 2 September 2014[1]  I  set  aside
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal, directed that  the  Upper
    Tribunal would undertake the remaking of the decision and adjourned the
    hearing relating to such remaking in order to allow  the  appellant  to
    obtain up-to-date evidence as to the background situation in Somalia. I
    concluded in my decision of 2  September  2014  that  the  findings  of
    primary fact made by the First-tier Tribunal are  to  remain  standing.
    Neither party has sought to  persuade  me  since  the  making  of  that
    direction that this should not be so.

Re-making of decision

Legal Self-Direction

 5. By section 84(3) an appeal under section 83 must be brought on  grounds
    that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom would breach  the
    United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.

 6. It is for the appellant to show that she is a  refugee.  By  virtue  of
    Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention, a refugee is a person  who  is
    out of the country of his or her nationality and who, owing to a  well-
    founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion,  nationality
    or membership of a particular social group  or  political  opinion,  is
    unable or unwilling to avail him or herself of the  protection  of  the
    country of origin.



 7. On 9 October 2006 the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International
    Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations   2006   ("the   Qualification
    Regulations") came into force and some  consequential  changes  in  the
    Immigration Rules were inserted after paragraph  339  of  the  existing
    Rules. Under the Qualification Regulations a person is to  be  regarded
    as a refugee if they fall within the definition set out in  Article  1A
    of the Refugee Convention (see above) and are not excluded by  Articles
    1D,  1E  or  1F  of  the  Refugee  Convention  (Regulation  7  of   the
    Qualification Regulations).



 8. The  degree  of  likelihood  of  persecution  needed  to  establish  an
    entitlement to asylum is decided  on  a  basis  lower  than  the  civil
    standard of the balance of probabilities. This has been expressed as  a
    "reasonable chance", "a serious possibility"  or  "substantial  grounds
    for thinking" in the various authorities.  That  basis  of  probability
    not only applies to historical  fact,  but  also  to  the  question  of
    persecution in the future were the appellant to be returned to Somalia.

Country Guidance

 9. In the period between that two hearings before me, the  Upper  Tribunal
    promulgated  a  country  guidance   decision   in   relation   to   the
    circumstances in  Mogadishu:  MOJ  and  Others  (return  to  Mogadishu)
    Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442, the headnote to which reads as follows:

       i) The country guidance issues addressed in  this  determination  are
          not identical to those engaged with by the  Tribunal  in  AMM  and
          others (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia  CG
          [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC). Therefore, where country guidance has  been
          given by the Tribunal in AMM in respect of issues not addressed in
          this  determination  then  the  guidance  provided  by  AMM  shall
          continue to have effect.

      ii) Generally, a person  who  is  "an  ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.  not
          associated with the security forces; any aspect of  government  or
          official administration or any NGO or international  organisation)
          on returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence will  face  no
          real risk of persecution or  risk  of  harm  such  as  to  require
          protection under Article 3 of the ECHR or  Article  15(c)  of  the
          Qualification Directive. In particular, he will  not  be  at  real
          risk simply on account of having lived in a European location  for
          a period of time of being viewed  with  suspicion  either  by  the
          authorities as a possible supporter of Al Shabaab or by Al Shabaab
          as an  apostate  or  someone  whose  Islamic  integrity  has  been
          compromised by living in a Western country.

     iii) There has been durable change in the sense  that  the  Al  Shabaab
          withdrawal from  Mogadishu  is  complete  and  there  is  no  real
          prospect of a re-established presence within the  city.  That  was
          not the case at the time of the  country  guidance  given  by  the
          Tribunal in AMM.

      iv)  The  level  of  civilian   casualties,   excluding   non-military
          casualties that clearly fall within Al Shabaab target groups  such
          as politicians, police officers, government  officials  and  those
          associated with NGOs and international  organisations,  cannot  be
          precisely  established  by  the  statistical  evidence  which   is
          incomplete and unreliable.  However,  it  is  established  by  the
          evidence considered as a whole that there has been a reduction  in
          the level of civilian casualties since 2011, largely  due  to  the
          cessation of  confrontational  warfare  within  the  city  and  Al
          Shabaab's resort to asymmetrical  warfare  on  carefully  selected
          targets.  The present level of casualties does  not  amount  to  a
          sufficient risk to ordinary civilians  such  as  to  represent  an
          Article 15(c) risk.

       v) It is open to an ordinary citizen of Mogadishu to  reduce  further
          still his personal exposure to the risk of "collateral damage"  in
          being caught up in an Al Shabaab attack that was not  targeted  at
          him  by  avoiding  areas  and  establishments  that  are   clearly
          identifiable  as  likely  Al  Shabaab  targets,  and  it  is   not
          unreasonable for him to do so.

      vi) There is no real risk of forced  recruitment  to  Al  Shabaab  for
          civilian citizens of Mogadishu,  including  for  recent  returnees
          from the West.

     vii) A person returning to Mogadishu after a  period  of  absence  will
          look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the city,  for
          assistance in re-establishing himself and securing  a  livelihood.
          Although a returnee may also seek assistance from his clan members
          who are not close relatives,  such  help  is  only  likely  to  be
          forthcoming for majority clan members, as minority clans may  have
          little to offer.

    viii) The significance of clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has  changed.
          Clans now provide,  potentially,  social  support  mechanisms  and
          assist with access to livelihoods, performing less of a protection
          function than previously. There are no clan militias in Mogadishu,
          no clan violence, and no clan based discriminatory treatment, even
          for minority clan members.

      ix) If it is accepted that a person facing a return to Mogadishu after
          a period of absence has no nuclear family or  close  relatives  in
          the city to assist him in re-establishing himself on return, there
          will need to be a careful assessment of all of the  circumstances.
          These considerations will include, but are not limited to:

          . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;

          . length of absence from Mogadishu;

          . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;

          . access to financial resources;

          . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be  employment
            or self employment;

          . availability of remittances from abroad;

          . means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;

          . why his ability to fund the  journey  to  the  West  no  longer
            enables an appellant to secure financial support on return.

       x) Put another way, it will  be  for  the  person  facing  return  to
          explain  why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the   economic
          opportunities that  have  been  produced  by  the  economic  boom,
          especially as there is evidence to the effect that  returnees  are
          taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been away.

      xi) It will, therefore, only be those with no clan or  family  support
          who will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad and who have
          no real prospect of securing access to a livelihood on return  who
          will face the prospect of living in  circumstances  falling  below
          that which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.

     xii) The evidence indicates clearly that it is  not  simply  those  who
          originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to live  in
          the city without being subjected  to  an  Article  15(c)  risk  or
          facing a real risk of destitution. On the other  hand,  relocation
          in Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan with no former links
          to the city, no access to funds and no other form of clan,  family
          or social support is unlikely to be realistic as, in  the  absence
          of means to establish a home and some form  of  ongoing  financial
          support there will be a real risk of having no alternative but  to
          live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp where there  is
          a real possibility of having to live in conditions that will fall
          below acceptable humanitarian standards."

Facts of the Appellant's case

10. Turning to the relevant circumstances pertaining to this appellant:

         i) She is a female national of Somalia born 28 October 1996;

        ii) She originates from a village in Somalia called Awdheegle[2];

       iii) She is "fairly  well  educated"  [paragraph  12  of  the  FtT's
            determination];

        iv) Her close family members remain living in Awdheegle and she has
            kept in touch with them [14 & 21];

         v) She has an aunt from  the  Isaaq  clan  living  in  the  United
            Kingdom [16];

        vi) She also has family members living in Burao in Somaliland [21];

11. At the hearing Mr Masood also quite properly conceded that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had rejected evidence from the appellant, and  his  aunt,
    to the effect that the appellant belongs to the minority Begedi clan.

Discussion

12. It is necessary for me to first determine  whether  the  appellant  has
    established a well-founded fear of persecution  in  her  home  area  of
    Awdheegle or, alternatively, en route  from  the  point  of  return  to
    Somalia, which is accepted to be Mogadishu airport, to her home village
    of Awdheegle.

13. According  to  the  map  produced  before  me,  Awdheegle  is  situated
    approximately  50  kilometres   east   of   Mogadishu   airport.    The
    circumstances in Awdheegle and its surrounding area did  not  fall  for
    consideration by the Upper Tribunal in its decision in MOJ.

14. Having considered the entirety of the background evidence before  me  I
    am not satisfied, even to the  lower  standard,  that  Al  Shabaab  are
    currently in control of Awdheegle or the area surrounding  it.  However
    such area is one where fighters from Al Shabaab,  the  Somali  National
    Forces and AMYSOM all still have a presence.

15. The appellant has provided the Tribunal with two reports authored by  a
    Dr Hoehne.  Dr Hoehne has, inter alia, studied Somali culture,  history
    and politics since 2001 and has spent time in Somaliland and  Puntland.
    As well as monitoring news and country  reports  he  maintains  contact
    with a network of informants in the region by internet  and  telephone.
    He gave both written and oral evidence  to  the  Tribunal  in  MOJ.  Dr
    Hoehne's first report for the instant appellant, dated 25  April  2014,
    was before the First-tier Tribunal and pre-dates the decision  in  MOJ.
    His most recent report is dated 15 December 2014.

16. In this later report Dr Hoehne  asserts  that  the  likelihood  of  the
    appellant encountering Al Shabaab fighters  whilst  travelling  between
    Mogadishu to Awdheegle is "very high".  Taking into account what I  say
    below about Dr Hoehne's  evidence,  I  accept,  having  considered  the
    evidence before me as a whole - including evidence as to the history of
    significant fighting between Al Shabaab and the Somali  Forces  in  the
    region which the appellant's home village is situated - that there is a
    real risk that the appellant would encounter Al-Shabaab forces  if  she
    were to travel between Mogadishu airport and Awdheegle.

17. The Upper Tribunal, in its the country guidance  decision  of  AMM  and
    Others (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)  Somalia  CG
    [2011] UKUT 00445, identified the type of treatment  reasonably  likely
    to be meted out by Al Shabaab personnel to those whom it  perceives  do
    not to conform to its particular religious views  and  practices.  Such
    treatment without doubt amounts to persecution.

18. Although the appellant only left Somalia in 2012 I find that there  is,
    at least to the lower standard, a risk that Al Shabaab  would  perceive
    her as a westernised person not conforming to their ideals, this  being
    so given that the two year period she has spent in the  United  Kingdom
    encompassed  a  formative  time  in  her  life  between  childhood  and
    adulthood.  She is as a consequence in my conclusion at  real  risk  of
    suffering from persecutory treatment en route from Mogadishu airport to
    Awdheegle, given that I  have  already  found  there  is  a  reasonable
    likelihood of her encountering Al-Shabaab forces on such journey.

19. I next turn to the issue of internal relocation and whether it would be
    unduly harsh to require this appellant to live  elsewhere  in  Somalia,
    and in particular in Mogadishu.  In coming to my  conclusions  on  this
    issue I have applied the approach set out in the ratio of the  opinions
    of their Lordships House in AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49.

20. It is to the issue of internal relocation that the decision of MOJ  has
    most bearing in the instant appeal.

21. In his latest report written for this particular  appellant  Dr  Hoehne
    states, inter alia, as follows in relation to the decision in MOJ:

         "[26] ... In my view the severity  of  the  ongoing  fighting  ends
         security in Mogadishu (and southern Somalia,  which,  however,  was
         not at  stake  in  the  hearing)  was  not  adequately  taken  into
         consideration by the Tribunal in the case of MOJ & Ors  (Return  to
         Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC). While, as  mentioned
         above, Al Shabaab has  been  durably  evicted  from  Mogadishu  and
         pushed back in many parts of southern Somalia this does  not  mean,
         in my view, that Mogadishu in particular and  southern  Somalia  in
         general is becoming fine as we speak.

         [27].    A more realistic assessment in  my  view  would  recognise
         that, first, Al Shabaab is still  active  and  fighting  continues,
         albeit at a lower scale, with less  indiscriminate  use  of  force.
         Second, even if things continue  to  become  better  and  stability
         increases in southern Somalia, the region is at best approaching  a
         kind of zero hour comparable with Germany  in  May  1945  or  other
         fresh post war settings. One can hope for a  decisive  change  from
         here, which could unfold in years to come. But at the  moment  much
         is still unsettled, there is not yet durable stability and  respect
         for human rights, the government forces are not reliably respecting
         civilian and many people still  suffer  from  humanitarian  crisis,
         criminality  or  abuse  of  power  by  government  officials."  [Dr
         Hoehne's emphasis]

22. To the extent that Dr Hoehne disagrees with the conclusions in  MOJ,  I
    reject his evidence.  Although his views  are  clearly  based  on  more
    recent evidence than that which was considered by the Tribunal in  MOJ,
    the dates of hearing for MOJ being in February 2014 and September 2014,
    the evidence that Dr Hoehne identifies in his report does not  lead  me
    to conclude that the circumstances in Mogadishu have deteriorated since
    the decision in MOJ was promulgated.  Indeed that does not appear to be
    Dr Hoehne's position either. Dr  Hoehne  appears  to  assert  that  the
    Tribunal in MOJ were not accurate in its assessment of  the  background
    situation in Mogadishu and  southern  Somalia.   As  I  have  indicated
    above, there is nothing in the evidence put forward by Dr Hoehne in his
    report, including evidence contained in the footnotes  to  which  links
    have been provided, which leads me to conclude that I should not follow
    the findings in MOJ, and I do so.

23. Whilst the following passages in MOJ do not  represent the entirety  of
    the Tribunal's consideration of Dr Hoehne's evidence, they  do  reflect
    the general approach it took to such evidence:

         "Dr Hoehne provided very little evidence  directly  concerning  the
         circumstances facing an unexceptional or ordinary returnee from the
         Diaspora." [138]

         "At paragraph 26 of his report Dr Hoehne said  that  there  was  an
         additional risk for ordinary civilians from undisciplined  soldiers
         ... We  do  not  accept  this  evidence  of  Dr  Hoehne.   His  own
         interpretation of  this  does  not  appear,  on  its  face,  to  be
         justified." [151]

         "Dr Hoehne was asked in oral evidence how many people in  Mogadishu
         are living in IDP camps.  His response was 369,000.

         Once again, we can detect in that answer a  propensity  to  present
         information in the least positive manner possible. It seems  to  be
         clear that 369,000 is the number  of  people  living  in  Mogadishu
         whose place of residence has changed in response to  past  concerns
         about security in their home area and  not  the  number  of  people
         actually living in Mogadishu in  IDP  camps.  There  is  a  vitally
         important  distinction  to  be  made  in  that  respect  which  was
         identified by Dr Hoehne himself...He said  that  people  who  moved
         their place of residence within Mogadishu  are  still  regarded  as
         part of the IDP population..." [154 to 155]

         "This  illustrates  a  characteristic  that  is  apparent  from  Dr
         Hoehne's evidence generally that he consistently presents the least
         positive interpretation of the source material he draws upon. [158]

         Pressed further to explain  who  does  benefit  from  the  economic
         development in Mogadishu, Dr Hoehne said:

              "A very tiny fraction of the  elite.  The  vast  majority  of
             people are struggling to survive ..."

          We do not accept that to be a correct view.  The  evidence  is  of
         substantial inward  investment  in  construction  projects  and  by
         entrepreneurs  returning  to  Mogadishu  to  invest   in   business
         activity. In particular we heard much  evidence  about  hotels  and
         restaurants and a resurgence of the hospitality industry..." [159]

24. Dr Hoehne's propensity to present the least positive interpretation  of
    the source material was also apparent from his evidence before  me.  In
    paragraphs  29  to  31  of  his  latest  report  Dr  Hoehne  identifies
    background evidence relating  to  gender  based  violence  in  Somalia,
    quoting from (i) a report of 26 October 2014 that over 1,000  cases  of
    gender based violence had been reported in Mogadishu alone in the first
    six months of 2014 and (ii) from an article in The Guardian citing from
    a United Nations report that there had been 800  cases  of  sexual  and
    gender based violence in Mogadishu over  a  six  month  period  in  the
    previous year and that a majority of such cases go unreported.

25. The evidence referred to and relied upon by Dr Hoehne led him to  state
    as follows in this regard:

         "The fact that gender based  violence  is  an  endemic  problem  in
         Somalia was highlighted in ... my previous report" [31]

    And in paragraph 32:

         "Given the prevalence of gender based  violence  in  Mogadishu  and
         much of southern Somalia and given the fact that much of it is also
         perpetrated  by  security  forces  I  see  a  high  risk  for  [the
         appellant] as a young and unaccompanied female to become  a  victim
         of gender based violence ..."

    And then in paragraph 36:

         "Also upon encountering Somali national and AMISOM  Forces  in  the
         war zone between Mogadishu  and  Awdheegle  (the  appellant)  would
         certainly run a considerable risk of being  sexually  harassed.   I
         have outlined above (paragraphs 29-31) that gender  based  violence
         is endemic in southern Somalia."

26. I find that Dr  Hoehne's  conclusion  that  gender  based  violence  is
    endemic in Southern Somalia and prevalent in Mogadishu is not supported
    by the evidence he  relies  upon  to  found  such  conclusion.  On  the
    available evidence before me I find that it has been  established  that
    there is some sexual based violence in Mogadishu and southern  Somalia,
    but that the statistics and evidence relied upon Dr Hoehne come nowhere
    near supporting a conclusion that it is endemic  in  the  region,  even
    taking into account the fact that there is a likelihood of  significant
    under reporting of such incidents.

27. Having considered the evidence before me as a whole  I  do  not  accept
    that it has been established that the appellant would be at  real  risk
    of being subjected to gender based violence, or indeed violence for any
    other reason, in Mogadishu - this being despite her  age  and  lack  of
    familiarity with that city.

28. Turning then to further consider the features of this appellant's  case
    which are relevant to a consideration of whether  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for her to return  to,  and  live  in,  Mogadishu.   Clearly  the
    appellant's age is of significance, given that she has only just turned
    18.  She has no previous connections to Mogadishu and neither does  she
    have any family living there at present.

29.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  had
    demonstrated that she is  from  a  minority  clan  and  consequently  I
    proceed on the basis that she is from a  majority  clan.  Although  the
    economic situation in Mogadishu is improving the appellant would  still
    need to find accommodation and a means to support herself in Mogadishu,
    the likely consequences of her not doing so being that she would end up
    living in an IDP camp.

30. I accept, given her age, gender and her lack of knowledge of  Mogadishu
    that, absent some support structure in that city the appellant will not
    be able to readily obtain employment and  accommodation  there.  Whilst
    the  likelihood  of  her  obtaining  accommodation  and  employment  is
    increased by the fact that she is of a majority clan, having considered
    what is said in paragraphs 337 to 343 of MOJ  and  the  other  evidence
    before me, I find that if it were  to  be  established  that  the  only
    possible support mechanism for the appellant in Mogadishu would be from
    clan members outside of her close family network, it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for her to live there given the still  limited  prospect  of  her
    obtaining employment and accommodation in the short term.

31. The difficulty for the appellant in this appeal, however, derives  from
    the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion that she has failed to demonstrate
    that she has not kept in touch with her  family  members  in  Awdheegle
    [21]. It was decided not to call the appellant to give evidence  before
    the Upper Tribunal on this, or indeed  any  other,  issue.   Given  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal and the lack  of  further  evidence
    before me, I proceed to decide  this  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant has maintained contact with her close family members  in  her
    home village. I further find that it has not been demonstrated, even to
    the lower standard, that she could not make contact with  those  family
    members in advance of her departure from the UK in order to inform them
    of the time and place of her return to her home country.

32. It is to be recalled that Awdheegle is only approximately 50 kilometres
    away from Mogadishu.  The appellant has not established that  those  of
    her family members who currently live in Awdheegle would not be able or
    willing to travel to Mogadishu airport and/or the city itself in  order
    to assist and support her upon her return.

33. Although I have found that there would be a real risk to the  appellant
    if  she  were  to  travel  between  Mogadishu  airport  and   Awdheegle
    immediately upon her return, this was as a consequence of her  being  a
    lone female who would have recently arrived  in  Somalia  after  having
    spent a two-year period  during  her  formative  years  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The appellant's family members have lived in Awdheegle  for  a
    considerable period of time, including during a period when Al  Shabaab
    had a significantly greater presence in that area  than  they  do  now.
    The First-tier Tribunal did not accept that that the appellant  or  her
    family members had been persecuted in that area.  There is no  credible
    evidence before me  which  leads  me  to  conclude  that  it  has  been
    demonstrated, even to the lower standard, that the  appellant's  family
    members would have any difficulties in making the  short  journey  from
    Awdheegle to Mogadishu to provide support for the  appellant,  or  that
    they would be unwilling to do so.

34. Given this finding, I conclude that the appellant would not be  a  lone
    female upon return to Mogadishu but would have  a  support  network  in
    place, such support  being  provided  to  her  by  her  nuclear  family
    members. In addition, and relating to the financial circumstances  that
    the appellant may face upon return, the First-tier  Tribunal  concluded
    that the appellant's UK based aunt had spent considerable resources and
    time in travelling to Somalia and bringing the appellant  back  to  the
    United Kingdom. Thereafter, she continued to  provide  support  to  the
    appellant whilst in the United Kingdom. There is no  credible  evidence
    before me to the effect that the appellant's aunt would not be able  or
    willing to provide the appellant with some  financial  assistance  upon
    her return to Mogadishu  and,  in  the  absence  of  such  evidence,  I
    conclude that such support would be available to the appellant.

35. Furthermore, as identified in MOJ,  in  addition  to  the  support  the
    appellant would receive from her  aunt  there  is  also  provision  for
    financial  support  to  be  provided  to  her  by  the  United  Kingdom
    authorities, albeit this being limited to a lump sum payment.

36. There is currently an economic boom in Mogadishu and there are  clearly
    employment opportunities  there.   The  appellant  is  a  "fairly  well
    educated" woman and there  is  nothing  immediately  obvious  from  the
    evidence before me that there is anything that would prevent  her  from
    seeking and obtaining some level of  employment  in  Mogadishu,  albeit
    this may be in a 'low level job'. It maybe that such opportunities will
    not present themselves in  the  short  term,  given  that  she  has  no
    experience of the city and has not built up any connections there,  but
    she will return with a lump sum payment from the UK  authorities,  will
    have some financial support from her aunt and  will  have  her  nuclear
    family members, and to a lesser extent her  clan  members,  to  provide
    support and assistance to her in Mogadishu.

37. Drawing all of this together, whilst the appellant would no doubt  have
    some difficulties and challenges upon return to Mogadishu, she  is  not
    at real risk of being subjected to violent treatment there, neither  do
    I accept that she would find herself destitute on the streets  or  left
    with no option but to live  in  an  IDP  camp.  Having  considered  the
    circumstances the appellant is likely to face in Mogadishu as a  whole,
    and in particular the fact that she is from a majority clan, that it is
    reasonable to assume that her aunt in the United Kingdom would be  able
    and willing to provide for her financially at least for some time after
    her arrival in Mogadishu, and that her family  members,  who  currently
    live just outside of Mogadishu, would provide  support  and  assistance
    for her there, I conclude that it has  not  been  established  that  it
    would  be  unduly  harsh  to  require  the  appellant  to  relocate  to
    Mogadishu. The appeal must therefore be dismissed on Refugee Convention
    grounds.

38. This being an appeal brought pursuant to section 83 of  the  2002  Act,
    the appellant is not entitled to pursue any other grounds. However  for
    the sake of completeness I find that having considered the decision  in
    MOJ and the other evidence before me I am satisfied  that  it  has  not
    been established to the  lower  standard  that  the  circumstances  the
    appellant would face upon return to  Mogadishu  would  entitle  her  to
    Humanitarian Protection or that they would lead  to  a  breach  of  her
    Article 3 ECHR rights.

Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  for  the  reasons
previously given.

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 22 December 2014




                                 APPENDIX A

"4. It is prudent to set out the following key paragraphs  from  the  First-
tier Tribunal's determination:


         19.    Awdhigley is on the outskirts  of  Mogadishu.  The  expert's
         opinion is that Awdhigley is 'located in  an  area  that  has  been
         contested between Somali government forces and  Al  Shabaab  for  a
         long time. AS exercised control in the area until mid-2013 and  the
         group is still operating around  the  place.   As  recently  as  27
         February 2014 AS and government forces clashed  in  the  area'.   A
         single incident or intermittent clashes does not on any  view  show
         substantial grounds for believing that  there  is  a  situation  of
         internal armed conflict in the  appellant's  home  area  that  puts
         civilians at risk as obtains in Mogadishu.  The expert's view (para
         49) is that the group remains in control of most  of  southern  and
         central Somalia and 'Analysts say the group's resilience is  likely
         the  result  of  significant  support  from  local  clans  and  the
         perception among elders that it remains a plausible alternative  to
         corrupt institutions in Somalia'.  I have already found  that  this
         appellant and her family are not at risk from Al Shabaab.  She  has
         been in the UK for only 13 months.  She will not be returning as  a
         child or as a returnee  without  recent  experience  of  living  in
         Somalia and therefore at greater risk from Al Shabaab.  I find that
         it is in her best interests to be with her family.  She stated that
         she did not encounter any checkpoints on her  journey  out  of  her
         home area. In any event she will  be  able  to  show  that  she  is
         returning to her family who on the evidence before me are living in
         Awdhigley.


         20.    The security situation in Mogadishu city remains the same as
         confirmed the expert and the copious  background  evidence  in  the
         appellant's latest country information  and  supplementary  bundles
         (Key Passages index) is as in AMM above but the appellant will  not
         be returned to Mogadishu. Considering the evidence as a  whole  and
         applying the lower standard of proof I conclude that this appellant
         does not face a real risk of serious harm in Awdhigley  if  she  is
         returned there. The question of a safe relocation alternative  does
         not arise."


 5. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal by
    Designated Judge Baird, in a decision of 22 May 2014.  Thus the  matter
    came before me.


 6. At the hearing before me Mr Walker, quite properly, accepted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination contains a number of errors of law,
    which require it to be set aside. Given this concession I set out  only
    briefly why I agree that this is so.

 7. First, in paragraph 19 of the determination the  FtT  judge  identifies
    that he proceeded on the basis that the appellant would be returned  to
    Somalia as an adult. This, though, is not the case.  At the time of the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination the appellant was  only  17�  years
    old and, indeed, she still appears as a minor before me.  It  is  trite
    that when considering an appeal brought on asylum  grounds  a  Tribunal
    must determine whether there is a risk to the appellant on the basis of
    the circumstances as they appertain at the date of  its  decision.   In
    this case the FtT judge ought to have proceeded on the basis  that  the
    appellant would  be  returning  to  Somalia  as  a  minor.   The  judge
    therefore misdirected himself in paragraph 19 of the determination.

 8. Second, in paragraph 20 of the determination  the  FtT  judge  directed
    himself that the appellant would not be returned to  Mogadishu.    This
    direction is significant given what the judge says about  Mogadishu  in
    the passages  immediately  preceding  this  direction.   As  Mr  Walker
    accepted,  the  appellant  would  be  returned  to  Mogadishu  airport.
    Nowhere in the determination does the  FtT  judge  consider  what  will
    happen to the appellant on her arrival as a minor at Mogadishu airport.



 9. Third, and linked to the previous error, is the fact that the FtT judge
    was required, but failed, to determine the risk to the  appellant  when
    travelling from Mogadishu airport to her  home  village  of  Awdhigley.
    The closest the judge comes to considering this issue is  in  paragraph
    19 of his determination, where he observes that the appellant  did  not
    encounter any checkpoints on her journey from  her  home  area  to  the
    United Kingdom. The inference from this passage  is  that  it  was  the
    judge's view that because the appellant did not have  any  difficulties
    en route from her home village to her departure point from Somalia, she
    would not have such difficulties on the return journey.

10. This rationale is not, however, sustainable, given  that  (i)  the  FtT
    judge makes no finding as to where the appellant departed Somalia  from
    (ii) he misdirects himself as to her arrival point  (as  to  which  see
    above) and (iii) there has been no analysis of whether  the  conditions
    in Somalia, and more  particularly  on  the  route  of  travel  to  the
    appellant's home village, have changed since the appellant's departure.



11. Fourth, the judge took into account an irrelevant factor  in  paragraph
    19 of the determination when concluding that if stopped at a checkpoint
    any risk to the appellant would be ameliorated by the  fact  that  "she
    will be able to show that  she  is  returning  to  her  family".   This
    conclusion entirely fails to pay heed to what is said in paragraphs 613
    and 614 of the country guidance decision in AMM.

12. For these reasons, I find the First-tier Tribunal's consideration as to
    the level of risk the appellant would face upon her return  to  Somalia
    is flawed by legal error and I consequently set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination.

13. I notified the parties of my conclusion at the hearing. Having done so,
    Mr Masood initially invited me  to  proceed  directly  to  re-make  the
    decision on the basis of the evidence before me.  I  observed  that  it
    would be of great assistance to be directed to evidence relating to the
    journey the appellant would have to  take  from  Mogadishu  airport  to
    Awdhigley, as well evidence that this journey would  reasonable  likely
    take the appellant through areas, or  via  checkpoints,  which  are  Al
    Shabaab controlled.  Having considered his position Mr Masood  accepted
    that it would be more appropriate for the hearing of the appeal  to  be
    adjourned so that up-to-date evidence  on  these,  and  other  relevant
    issues, could be obtained.   Mr  Walker  was  in  agreement  with  this
    position. "

                           -----------------------
[1] The substance of which is attached hereto as Appendix A
[2] Spelling taken from Dr Hoehne's report

