


                                                      [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
AA/11206/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                         |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 18 April 2017 and Manchester            |On 15 June 2017            |
|On 12 June 2017                            |                           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     CS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain (Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
                    and Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.

Introduction

   1. I have anonymised the appellant's name because this decision refers to
      her international protection claim, as well as  the  circumstances  of
      her children.


   2. This is an appeal by the appellant, a  citizen  of  Malawi  against  a
      decision of the respondent ('the SSHD') dated 16  September  2011,  in
      which leave to remain was refused, following her asylum claim.

   3. The appellant fears that upon return to Malawi she will  be  subjected
      to ill-treatment from her  estranged  husband's  family  and  her  two
      daughters will  be  required  to  undergo  female  genital  mutilation
      ('FGM').

   4.  The  appellant's  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ('FTT')  was
      successful on asylum and human rights grounds.  The FTT  accepted  the
      credibility of the appellant's account  and  also  concluded  that  it
      would breach Article 8 of the ECHR to require her daughters  to  leave
      the United Kingdom, in light of, inter alia, their  lengthy  residence
      here.  The elder daughter has been in the United  Kingdom  since  2005
      and the younger daughter was born here in 2009, and has never left.

Procedural history

   5. In a decision dated 8 October 2012 the Upper Tribunal ('UT') held that
      the FTT's decision on asylum contained an error of law in  failing  to
      address serious credibility issues raised within  the  SSHD's  refusal
      letter.  The UT remade the asylum decision and dismissed  it.   In  so
      doing, the UT questioned the adequacy  of  the  medical  evidence  but
      refused to grant an adjournment  to  allow  the  appellant  to  obtain
      further medical evidence.


   6. The appellant appealed to the Court of Appeal.   In  a  consent  order
      dated 11 December 2013 the Court of Appeal remitted the appeal to  the
      Upper Tribunal:

                 "to consider this  matter  together  with  the  appellant's
                 witness statement dated 21 November 2013 and  the  addendum
                 report of Dr Lesley Lord dated 22 November  2013...together
                 with the Secretary  of  State's  response  to  the  further
                 evidence."

   7. The statement of reasons attached to  the  consent  order  notes  that
      permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal was granted on one  ground
      only: whether the Upper Tribunal should have granted  the  appellant's
      request for an  adjournment  of  the  hearing  after  it  called  into
      question the medical evidence of Dr Lesley Lord.








Hearing

18 April 2017

   8. At the beginning of the hearing the representatives agreed a number of
      matters, which assisted in considerably narrowing the issues for me to
      determine.  Both representatives agreed to the following:


   i) The appellant's Article 8 claim has been resolved in her favour and is
      no longer before me.  Indeed, the UT reminded itself that it was  only
      concerned with the asylum claim and the Article 8 appeal has not  been
      challenged  [65  and  85].   The   representatives   understood   that
      discretionary leave had been provided to both daughters.


  ii) Although only one error of law has been identified in relation to  the
      medical evidence, the adverse credibility finding made by the  UT  was
      based upon a cumulative approach [76 and  87].   It  followed  that  I
      should remake the credibility assessment in light of all the  evidence
      available including Dr Lord's addendum report.


 iii) The appellant gave detailed evidence before the UT, which is  recorded
      in its 25-page decision.  Mr Harrison represented  the  SSHD  at  this
      hearing as well and has already cross-examined the appellant  in  some
      detail - see [40-47] of the UT decision.  There was therefore no  need
      for this process to be repeated.  Both parties have a  record  of  the
      questions asked  and  the  evidence  provided  in  response.   It  was
      sufficient for Mr Harrison to merely rely upon  the  concerns  already
      identified without putting every matter to the appellant.  Mr  Hussain
      was well-aware of the issues of concern and he could ask the appellant
      to clarify these matters.

  iv) A number of factual matters are not in dispute: the appellant and  her
      daughters are Malawian citizens; the appellant  is  a  Christian;  the
      elder daughter gave evidence before the FTT and UT  and  her  evidence
      was accepted in its entirety  [88].   Importantly,  Mr  Harrison  also
      accepted that the medical evidence supports the claim that  the  front
      part of each of the inner lips of  the  appellant's  labia  have  been
      elongated.  Mr Harrison acknowledged that this was the  only  sensible
      position to take in light of the UT's findings on the  issue  [86  and
      89] and the two medical reports from Dr Lord.

   v) The core credibility issue in dispute is as follows: is it  reasonably
      likely that the appellant, a Christian woman, married her husband (who
      it is claimed was born Muslim but converted to Christianity)  and  his
      family members forcibly perpetrated the elongation of the  inner  lips
      of her vagina,  prior  to  her  marriage,  in  accordance  with  their
      traditions?

  vi) Mr Harrison conceded that if I  accept  the  appellant's  evidence  in
      relation to the core issue  described  above,  it  followed  that  the
      appellant and her daughters are at real  risk  of  ill-treatment  upon
      return to Malawi.  If the husband's family members have behaved in the
      manner alleged by the appellant in the past, Mr Harrison accepted that
      it is reasonably likely that they will seek to carry out  FGM  on  the
      daughters, if they are returned to Malawi.

   9. I then heard oral evidence from the appellant. She confirmed the truth
      of four witness statements made in 2011,  2012,  2013  and  2017.   Mr
      Hussain asked the appellant a number of additional questions regarding
      the concerns highlighted by Mr Harrison  during  cross-examination  in
      the previous Upper Tribunal proceedings, as well as  the  concerns  of
      the UT itself.  Although this took the form of examination in chief at
      the hearing before me, the process was more  akin  to  re-examination.
      This is because the appellant has already been  cross-examined  at  an
      earlier UT hearing and the record of the evidence provided  is  relied
      upon.  The UT obviously did not have the appellant's later  statements
      before it but Mr Hussain asked the appellant to explain why  her  2013
      statement was different to the  2011  statement  in  relation  to  the
      claimed process of forced labia stretching.  I asked several questions
      to clarify this matter as well.  Mr Harrison considered that  all  the
      relevant questions had been asked and answered and  did  not  wish  to
      cross-examine further.  He however  made  it  clear,  and  Mr  Hussain
      accepted that did not signal an acceptance of the evidence given.


  10. At the end of the appellant's evidence I heard submissions  from  both
      representatives.  Mr Harrison relied upon the credibility concerns set
      out in the UT decision together with the inconsistencies  between  the
      2011 and 2013 statements and asked me to  find  that  the  appellant's
      claim is not credible.   Mr Hussain invited  me  to  make  a  positive
      finding regarding the  core  credibility  issue.   He  submitted  that
      notwithstanding inconsistencies, the appellant's explanation  for  the
      elongated inner lips of her vagina is reasonably likely.

  11. At the  end  of  the  hearing  I  reserved  my  decision.   After  the
      completion of the hearing I decided that it was important to give  the
      parties an opportunity to provide further background country evidence.
       This is because neither party directed me to any background  evidence
      on the practice of FGM or  labia  elongation  /  labia  stretching  in
      Malawi.  The  previous  UT  also  had  very  little  relevant  country
      information before it, which it  summarised  at  [66-69].   Given  the
      inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence and the SSHD's claim  that
      her evidence was implausible, I considered it appropriate to give both
      parties an opportunity to rely on background evidence  in  support  of
      their respective positions and gave directions to that effect.

  12. I drew the parties' attention to background material available in  the
      public domain relevant to the issue of labia stretching in Malawi, and
      directed them to file and serve relevant country  background  evidence
      they wished to rely upon and to make further submissions on the matter
      at a further oral hearing.

  13. In compliance with directions the  appellant's  solicitors  filed  and
      served background evidence summarised below.  It was made  clear  that
      the appellant did not wish to provide  any  more  details  "about  the
      stretching that she was forced to undertake" and in the  premises  her
      previous statements continued to be relied upon.

12 June 2017

  14. Mr Harrison was unable to attend the hearing and Mr McVeety made brief
      submissions on behalf of the SSHD.  He submitted that there was little
      in the background evidence to support the appellant's claim  that  she
      was the victim of forced labia  stretching.   Moreover,  he  submitted
      that the evidence demonstrates that  labia  stretching  is  largely  a
      voluntary act done by girls in some communities in Malawi.


  15. Mr Hussain drew my attention to the appellant's own  evidence  of  the
      impact of the forced stretching upon her.  He submitted when  all  the
      evidence is considered in the round, and the lower standard  of  proof
      is applied, the appellant's account should be accepted  as  reasonably
      likely to be true.


  16. After hearing from both representatives I reserved my decision,  which
      I now give with reasons.

Background evidence

  17. The Wikipedia entry for "labia stretching" states as follows:

             "Labia stretching, also referred  to  as  labia  elongation  or
             labia pulling, is  the  act  of  elongating  the  labia  minora
             through manual manipulation  (pulling)  or  physical  equipment
             (such as weights).[1] It is a  familial  cultural  practice  in
             Rwanda,[1] Malawi, Uganda, Burundi and a few other countries in
             Sub-Saharan  Africa,[2]  and  a  body   modification   practice
             elsewhere. It is  performed  for  sexual  enhancement  of  both
             partners, aesthetics, symmetry and gratification.[1] The  early
             recordings of the results of the practice are perhaps among the
             Khoisan peoples of southern Africa, where the inner labia  were
             seen to be several centimeters longer than the outer labia."


  18. In "To pull or not to pull", an online article from the Nation  Online
      dated 28 August 2011, it is  claimed  that  many  cultures  in  Malawi
      demand elongated labia to make the husband happy and this practice  is
      emphasised in secondary schools and through counselling sessions  held
      before marriage (chilangizo).   It  is  said  that  during  initiation
      ceremonies (chinamwali) girls are sometimes checked  to  ensure  their
      labias are extended.  Another Nation Online article  dated  4  October
      2013 describes the mixed views regarding labia stretching  and  refers
      to it as a tradition mainly practiced in rural areas with the  support
      of traditional leaders but that "as evidenced from a  survey  done  on
      Facebook women have ceased to conduct this practice considered a  part
      of Malawian culture".


  19. The appellant  also  relied  upon  evidence  from  an  online  article
      published  by  Pushpa   Jamieson   describing   secretive   initiation
      ceremonies in Malawi, where FGM "is very quietly happening"  and  more
      generalised evidence regarding FGM.

  20. In "Elongation of the Labia Minora:  A  Violation  of  women's  bodily
      autonomy" by Chanda Katongo, 9 January 2014, the author describes  the
      practice of labia stretching in southern Africa, focusing  on  Zambia,
      from a more academic point of view.

Summary of the appellant's evidence

  21. The appellant relies upon her witness statements and the oral evidence
      provided before me.  It is only  necessary  to  summarise  her  claim.
      She is a Catholic.  She met her husband, a Muslim at college  in  1990
      and became pregnant in 1995 when she was  20  years  old.   Her  elder
      daughter was born in May 1996 and they got married  in  October  1996.
      She claims that her labia was  forcibly  stretched  by  her  husband's
      relatives before their wedding.  As set out above, it is  agreed  that
      the claim to be at prospective risk turns upon what is alleged to have
      taken place immediately before the marriage.


  22. In her 2011 statement the appellant describes some  of  her  husband's
      female relatives as having forcibly  grabbed  and  undressed  her  and
      forcibly pulled the lobes of her vagina  with  some  sort  of  device.
      They explained to her that 'circumcision' would be delayed until after
      the wedding.  The appellant's husband came to the UK in 2004  and  she
      joined him in 2007.  They had another daughter,  born  in  the  UK  in
      2009. The marriage broke down in 2011.  The appellant claimed that her
      husband was violent to her and together with his  family  members  was
      pressuring her to return to  Malawi  for  the  elder  daughter  to  be
      'circumcised'.  She left the family home, scared for their safety, and
      was rehoused by social services.

  23. In her 2013 statement the appellant  states  that  after  the  initial
      stretching with a device, she was checked on a daily  basis,  for  the
      next 5-7 days to ascertain whether she had  been  stretching  herself.
      If they believed she was  not,  she  would  be  pinched  and  forcibly
      stretched.

  24. As indicated above the elder daughter gave evidence before the UT  and
      this was accepted.  This evidence does not advance the main account of
      what happened to her mother in Malawi in any meaningful manner  -  she
      cannot remember anything about being in Malawi as she was only 8  when
      she left.

Medical evidence

  25. Dr Lord has provided two reports dated 28 October 2011 and 22 November
      2013. The first report describes the appellant's clitoris as  present,
      as were the inner lips but "the front part of each inner lip was  long
      in proportion to the rest".   Dr  Lord  regarded  this  to  be  highly
      consistent with the appellant's account.  In  the  2013  supplementary
      report, Dr Lord acknowledged that the appellant  only  described  "one
      time when her labia was  stretched"  for  the  purposes  of  the  2011
      report.  Dr Lord referred to the appellant's 2013 statement and opined
      that the appearance of the labia is typical of the activity described.




Factual findings

Approach to the evidence

  26. In making my factual findings I have applied  the  lower  standard  of
      proof applicable to asylum claims and considered all the  evidence  in
      the round.


  27. The evidence adduced on behalf of the appellant  is  not  particularly
      clear in relation to whether she has been a victim of FGM.  In some of
      her statements she claims that she is a victim of FGM.  At the hearing
      this was clarified: the appellant claims to  have  been  a  victim  of
      forced labia stretching; she has not been 'cut' or 'circumcised' in  a
      manner consistent with what is known to be the more invasive types  of
      FGM.  FGM generally entails the removal of at least part of the female
      genitalia for  non-medical  reasons.   Some  sources  refer  to  labia
      stretching as meeting the definition of FGM.  As observed by FTT Judge
      Birrell at [64] labia stretching qualifies as FGM in the broader sense
      of the term.  It is  not  in  dispute  that  forced  labia  stretching
      constitutes an egregious form of serious harm.  For  this  reason,  it
      matters not whether it meets the definition of FGM.


  28. The label given to forced labia stretching is not as important as  the
      substance of the claim.  However, it is important that correct  labels
      and terminology are used  to  avoid  confusion  and  misunderstanding.
      For the avoidance of doubt, I do not draw any adverse inferences  from
      the appellant using FGM and forced labia  stretching  interchangeably.
      The appellant has clarified that she has not been  'cut'  or  had  any
      part of her genitalia removed.  She claims to have been  a  victim  of
      forced labia stretching only.  In this decision I shall refer  to  the
      appellant's claim to have had her  labia  forcibly  stretched  by  her
      husband's relatives  as  forced  labia  stretching.   This  is  to  be
      distinguished from labia stretching that takes place in Malawi amongst
      some girls as a voluntary act.  The appellant claims that she has been
      a victim of forced labia  stretching  but  fears  that  her  husband's
      family will carry out FGM on her daughters.  By this  she  means  that
      their genitalia will be 'cut' or 'circumcised', and they will also  be
      the victim of forced labia stretching, like she claims she was.


  29. If, as claimed, labia stretching was forced upon the appellant i.e. in
      the context of pre-wedding  initiation  arrangements,  then  the  SSHD
      accepts that this constitutes serious harm, and her daughters  are  at
      real risk  of  FGM.   This  is  because  their  paternal  family  have
      demonstrated  an  ability  and  willingness  to  forcibly  carry   out
      demeaning and risky procedures in the past, in the name of religious /
      cultural traditions, and there is a real risk of the  paternal  family
      forcing FGM upon the daughters in the future.  If, on the other  hand,
      the  appellant's  claim  that  she  was  subjected  to  forced   labia
      stretching is not accepted, then it is also agreed that  the  risk  of
      the paternal family seeking to carry out FGM on the daughters  is  not
      reasonably likely - the family have not shown any interest in carrying
      out traditional practices in the past.   Much therefore turns  on  the
      credibility of the appellant's claim as to what  happened  before  the
      wedding, to which I now turn.  Before doing so,  it  is  important  to
      underline that when making  specific  findings  regarding  the  forced
      labia stretching claim, I have not  done  so  in  isolation.   I  have
      considered all the evidence in the round including all the appellant's
      statements, the elder daughter's accepted  evidence,  the  appellant's
      oral evidence, the asylum interview,  the  medical  evidence  and  the
      country background evidence.

Forced labia stretching claim

  30. I  have  significant  concerns  regarding  important  aspects  of  the
      appellant's evidence relevant to the core of her claim.  There  is  an
      obvious inconsistency between the  appellant's  account  in  her  2011
      statement and her supplementary 2013 statement.  In the 2011 statement
      the appellant said that on one occasion before her  wedding  in  1996,
      her husband's family members used force to extend  the  lobes  of  her
      vagina against her will.  The appellant  went  on  to  say  that  they
      wanted to "take off something" but she resisted and kicked  out.   She
      then said they discussed it  and  decided  that  as  she  was  getting
      married soon and "it would take a long time to heal that  it  wouldn't
      be a good idea to do it now as people would notice so they would do it
      later on".

  31. Dr Lord's 2011 report describes what she was told happened before  the
      wedding in the following terms:

                 "She was in a relative's house and two people held her down
                 on the ground.  A third then started pulling at  her  inner
                 lips in order to stretch them.  They wanted to also cut her
                 but she was struggling so much that they did not manage  to
                 do this"


  32. The appellant saw Dr Lord on 27 October 2011 after her asylum
      interview on 5 August 2011.  Her 2011 statement was made shortly after
      this in December 2011.


  33. The 2011 statement and Dr Lord's 2011  report  were  before  UT  Judge
      Chalkley when he dismissed the appellant's appeal after a  hearing  on
      31 August 2012.  In his decision UT Judge Chalkley noted at [73]  that
      Dr Lord did not give any indication  as  to  the  likely  duration  of
      stretching in order for the inner lips to  be  permanently  stretched,
      and he had a difficulty with the  account  that  her  labia  was  only
      stretched on one occasion at [86].  He noted  that  Dr  Lord's  report
      does not rule out it having been caused by some other  means,  by  the
      appellant herself or some other congenital defect.


  34. It is only after this finding was made in the 2012  UT  decision  that
      the appellant adds to her evidence in her 2013 statement, that she was
      forcibly pinched and stretched over the course of 5-7 days before  the
      wedding.  Prior to this, all the evidence provided  by  the  appellant
      pointed to a  'one-off'  forced  act  against  her  by  her  husband's
      relatives before the wedding: see the asylum interview at Q93-102,  Dr
      Lord's report and the 2011 statement.


  35. The asylum interviewer seems to have assumed that  the  appellant  was
      'circumcised' in the sense that she was 'cut'.  The appellant did  not
      clarify the position at the asylum interview.     I  draw  no  adverse
      inferences from this.   This  is  because  it  would  have  been  very
      difficult to explain the detail of what happened to her to a  stranger
      and to distinguish between circumcision, cutting and labia stretching.
       However, the surrounding circumstances of the asylum interview can be
      distinguished from the circumstances of  providing  information  to  a
      qualified medical expert and her own solicitor.  The  appellant  would
      have been in a position of trust and confidence with Dr Lord  and  her
      solicitors.  The 2011 statement is a detailed document that  addresses
      very sensitive and difficult matters.  The 2013 statement provides  no
      explanation for the failure to refer  to  important  aspects  of  what
      happened to her in the 2011 statement or when she saw Dr Lord.  At the
      hearing before me the appellant explained that she just  answered  the
      questions  she  was  asked  and  did  not  volunteer  any   additional
      information.  I gave her an opportunity to expand on  this  and  asked
      her to explain why she did not describe the  whole  experience  to  Dr
      Lord.  She said "they just told me to answer questions asked".   I  do
      not accept the  appellant's  explanation  for  omitting  the  repeated
      forced attempts to elongate her labia in her 2011  statement  or  when
      seen by Dr Lord.  This  was  significant,  relevant  information.   It
      related to a sensitive subject but the appellant had already disclosed
      that she had been the victim of forcible  stretching.   The  appellant
      has failed to provide a  credible  explanation  for  this  significant
      omission.


  36. Mr Hussain invited me to find that the flashbacks  that  followed  the
      appellant's treatment  by  her  husband's  relatives  would  not  have
      happened if her account is not true.  I accept that the appellant  has
      referred to having suffered mentally, as a result of the forced  labia
      stretching.  However, there is no medical evidence supportive  of  the
      claim to have suffered flashbacks.  Although  Dr  Lord  described  the
      appellant's  'present  state'  in  the  2011  report,  no   meaningful
      reference was made  to  any  adverse  mental  state  or  psychological
      effects.


  37. I bear in mind that the wedding took place a very  long  time  ago  in
      1996 and it is therefore necessary to consider  the  passage  of  time
      when assessing the credibility of what is said to have happened before
      the wedding.  At no point has the appellant blamed the passage of time
      or any difficulty in recalling detail.  She has simply  said  she  was
      not asked a direct question and therefore only disclosed one  incident
      of forcible labia stretching.  I do not accept that  explanation,  for
      the reasons I have already provided.


  38. I do not accept the appellant's evidence  that  her  husband  and  his
      family have followed up interest in 'circumcising' her children  since
      they have been in the UK.  This is an  additional  factor  undermining
      the appellant's claim that the family acted in  the  manner  they  did
      before the wedding.  The appellant claimed that she was told that  she
      would be cut another time yet  no  attempt  was  made  to  commit  FGM
      between the wedding in 1996 and  2007  whilst  the  appellant  was  in
      Malawi after the marriage.  The appellant confirmed  this  during  the
      course of cross-examination at the previous UT hearing -  see  the  UT
      decision at [42].

  39. In addition, the appellant's claim that her husband wanted to have the
      children  and  also  wanted  FGM  to  be  carried  out  upon  them  is
      inconsistent with him having no contact whatsoever with them from  the
      day he left in 2011 (see Q 70-79).  He did not  even  attempt  contact
      with them at school.  The appellant has explained that her husband was
      too scared to do so whilst they are in the UK.  This explanation  does
      not explain the inconsistency  in  the  one  hand  claiming  that  her
      husband is determined that the daughters belong to him and his failure
      to take any steps to have contact with them whatsoever, on  the  other
      hand.  The appellant also  claims  that  her  husband's  sisters  have
      contacted her to request the elder daughter return for FGM,  yet  this
      has not been pursued by the husband at all.

  40. I have considered the inconsistencies identified above  together  with
      all the relevant evidence  before  me,  and  in  the  context  of  the
      background evidence.  The background evidence supports the appellant's
      claim that traditional  practices  continue  and  this  includes  FGM.
      There is little to support the appellant's specific claim that she was
      subjected to forced labia stretching over the course of many days.   I
      note that 'counselling' and 'initiation' sessions are  held  prior  to
      marriage and this can include checking that labia stretching has taken
      place and FGM.  I also note the  evidence  that  secrecy  and  silence
      surrounding FGM can make it difficult to paint an accurate picture  of
      what happens at such sessions.  However, in this case,  the  appellant
      repeatedly highlighted that her husband's  family  forcibly  stretched
      her labia because they are Muslim, and as  a  Christian  she  and  her
      family do not support the practice.  This claim is  not  supported  by
      the background country information drawn to my attention.   There  was
      no cogent evidence to support the claim that  labia  stretching  takes
      place  in  Malawi's  Islamic  communities  and   not   the   Christian
      communities.  Rather, the  evidence  suggests  that  labia  stretching
      takes place as a traditional as opposed to a  religious  practice,  in
      mainly rural communities in Malawi.  One article referred to  Churches
      being called upon to "sensitize women  on  the  importance  of  having
      their labia stretched".

Conclusion


  41. Drawing the threads of all the  evidence  together  and  applying  the
      lower standard of proof, I do not accept it to  be  reasonably  likely
      that the appellant's labia was forcibly stretched in the  manner  that
      she has claimed.  I accept that  her  labia  has  been  stretched,  as
      described by Dr Lord but do not accept  that  there  is  a  reasonable
      degree of likelihood that it was  done  forcibly  by  members  of  her
      husband's family as part of an 'initiation' before the wedding or  any
      other time.


  42. I have also considered whether it is reasonably likely that the events
      described took place at another point but it is difficult to see  what
      opportunity there might be for this to take place outside of the  pre-
      wedding arrangements / initiation.


  43. For the avoidance of doubt, I do not accept the appellant's claim that
      any member  of  her  daughters'  paternal  family  has  maintained  an
      interest in  them  having  FGM.   Their  father  has  played  no  role
      whatsoever in their lives and seems to have relinquished all  interest
      in them from as long ago as 2011.  Although the appellant has  claimed
      that the family demonstrated continuing interest I do not  accept  the
      credibility of this claim.  It is inconsistent with how the family has
      acted in the past.  In my  judgment,  the  paternal  family  permitted
      their son to marry the appellant  even  though  she  is  a  Christian.
      There  is  no  reasonable  likelihood  that  the   appellant's   labia
      stretching was caused in the manner that she has claimed.  I therefore
      reject her claim that that she has been the  victim  of  forced  labia
      stretching and the claim that she was  threatened  with  FGM  and  her
      daughters have been threatened with FGM.


  44. It follows that I do not accept the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
      evidence on the core issue  in  dispute,  and  it  follows,  with  the
      agreement of the representatives,  that  her  asylum  appeal  must  be
      dismissed.

Decision

  45. I dismiss the appellant's appeal  under  the  Refugee  Convention  and
      Article 3 of the ECHR.




Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
15 June 2017
