
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11130/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 July 2014                                |On 10 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                         Mr Vethanaygam Antonnobert

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant whose date of birth is 18 August 1974  is  a  citizen  of
    Sri Lanka.  This matter comes before me for consideration as to whether
    or not there was a material error of law in the determination  dated  8
    February 2014 before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Napthine  in  which  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

Background

2.    The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum   under
    paragraph 336 of HC 395 (as amended).  The reasons for refusal were set
    out in a letter dated 3 December 2013.  The appellant arrived in the UK
    on either 22 March 2011 or 22 May 2011 and claimed  asylum  on  22  May
    2011 and was served with a notice as an illegal entrant.

3.   The respondent accepted that the appellant was a  Sri  Lankan  national
    of Tamil ethnicity , that he worked for the LTTE and  was  arrested  by
    the Sri Lankan Army on 15 February 2009, detained and tortured  by  the
    army and escaped from  detention  on  23  May  2009.   The  only  issue
    challenged by the respondent was the appellant's  claim  that  the  CID
    continued to visit his home since he left Sri Lanka  asking  about  his
    whereabouts. The respondent considered that the situation  had  changed
    since the appellant left Sri Lanka. The  respondent  relied  on  GJ  (&
    Others)post civil war - returnees) on the grounds  that  the  appellant
    was not an LTTE member ,  was not an activist  seeking  to  destabilise
    the country and it was not reasonably likely that he would be  detained
    on return.

4.   The First tier Tribunal took as the starting  point  the  agreed  facts
    and concession made by the respondent. It further took into account  an
    expert report which confirmed that injuries to  the  appellant's  back,
    upper arms and legs were consistent with his claim of being beaten  and
    assaulted.

5.   At  [34]  of  the  determination  the  Tribunal  found  it  lacking  in
    credibility that the Sri Lankan authorities would continue to visit the
    appellant's home over two years after he had left and  gone  to  India.
    Reasons were cited in [35 to 37].   At  [36]  the  Tribunal  took  into
    account that the  appellant's  brother,  a  former  LTTE  fighter,  was
    detained in 2009, (when the appellant  left)  but  was  released  after
    three days and no further action was taken.  At [38] the  determination
    took into account  matters  under  Section  8  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 concluding that the appellant's
    failure to claim asylum in France and his visit  to  India,  undermined
    the credibility of his claim.  GJ & Others (post civil war - returnees)
    Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  was  considered.  The  Tribunal
    concluded that the appellant did not come within the risk factors cited
    therein and compared his situation to that of NT, the second  appellant
    in GJ & Others.

Grounds of Appeal

6.   The appellant argued that the Tribunal erred by failing  to  take  into
    account that the appellant escaped from custody ; he was not  (as  with
    NT) released on payment of a bribe.  That factor rendered it  plausible
    that the Sri Lankan authorities would visit the home of a detainee  who
    had escaped, in order to question family members as to his whereabouts.
     Further, the Tribunal failed to  take  into  account  that  after  his
    escape the appellant left Sri Lanka illegally by boat to  India,  there
    would be no  record  of  his  leaving  Sri  Lanka  and  visits  by  the
    authorities were conducted to find out whether  the  family  had  heard
    from him not simply to see if he was there.

7.   The Tribunal further erred by confusing the  appellant's  two  brothers
    and what happened to them post-arrest.

8.   The third ground was that the Tribunal Judge   failed  to  put  to  the
    appellant his concerns as to the plausibility of visits to  the  family
    after the appellant had left Sri Lanka.

Permission to Appeal

9.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Reid granted permission on 26 February  2014.
     Her reasons are as follows,

         "The judge in his determination at paragraphs 33 to 37 came to what
         appear to be speculative conclusions about the credibility  of  the
         appellant's claim that the Sri Lankan authorities continued to call
         at his home after he left Sri Lanka  without  specifically  putting
         his concerns or having them put to the appellant  at  the  hearing.
         There was procedural unfairness."

Error of Law Hearing
Appellant's submissions

10.  At the hearing before me Mr Solomon relied on the detailed  grounds  of
    appeal.  He emphasised that the respondent had in the main accepted the
    appellant's account and that the only dispute was as regards whether or
    not the authorities visited the family home  after  he  left,  although
    this was accepted  as  consistent  evidence  by  the  respondent  .  In
    assessing the evidence the judge failed to engage with the  appellant's
    claim that he escaped from custody and left illegally  by  boat.   This
    was material to his claim as to whether or not he would be  pursued  by
    the authorities.

11.  Mr Solomon argued  that  the  judge  appeared  to  have  conflated  the
    factual aspects relating to the appellant's two brothers.  His  brother
    Anton Rosen had LTTE links, but it  was  his  brother  Westin  who  was
    arrested on the day of the appellant's escape,  not  the  brother  with
    LTTE links as incorrectly found by the Tribunal Judge.

12.  As regards procedural unfairness Mr Solomon relied on ST (child  asylum
    seekers) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 292 (IAC) and Kalidas  (agreed  facts  -
    best practice) [2012] UKUT 00327 (IAC).

13.  He further argued that the Tribunal  erred  in  finding  no  difference
    between the appellant and NT the second appellant  in  GJ.  Mr  Solomon
    emphasised the distinction which was supported by the Court  of  Appeal
    decision MP & NT v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 829.  Mr Solomon submitted that
    the Tribunal failed to consider and apply  the  UNHCR  risk  categories
    which were relevant and must be read together with the guidance in GJ.




Respondent's submissions

14.  Mr Duffy conceded that the  grounds  in  relation  to  credibility  and
    going behind concessions of the Secretary of State were  accepted.   He
    further accepted the position as regards risk on return with  reference
    to MP & NT and in particular the Court  of  Appeal's  treatment  of  NT
    whose case was remitted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  rehearing.   In
    essence Mr Duffy conceded that as regards this latter point he  was  in
    difficulties and could not argue to support the determination.

Decision

15.  Having heard the submissions made by Mr Solomon and the  realistic  and
    sensible concessions made by  Mr  Duffy,  I  found  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal Determination.  I  now
    give my reasons. I find that there was a material  error  in  that  the
    judge confused  the  facts  as  regards  the  appellant's  two  younger
    brothers.  He took into account that the  appellant's  brother  (  with
    LTTE links) was released following his arrest,  in  his  assessment  of
    risk and the credibility  of  whether  or  not  the  authorities  would
    continue to visit the family home.  I  find  that  his  assessment  was
    flawed because the brother that was in fact arrested had no links  with
    the LTTE, which was material. I find further that the determination was
    flawed procedurally to the extent that the Judge failed to put  to  the
    appellant his  concerns  as  to  the  credibility  of  the  authorities
    visiting after he left Sri Lanka. In particular having in mind that the
    Secretary of State accepted that evidence as consistent,  I  find  that
    the judge was effectively going behind the concessions made.  Further I
    find that the judge in comparing the  appellant  with  NT,  the  second
    appellant in GJ, failed to have regard to the fact  that  there  was  a
    significant difference  between  NT  and  the  appellant.   The  latter
    escaped from custody and left Sri Lanka illegally which in my view  was
    a material fact relevant to the assessment of the  credibility  of  his
    account and as to risk on return.

16.   There is a material error of law in the  determination.  I  set  aside
    the determination.  Having regard to  the  nature  and  extent  of  the
    judicial fact finding and  heard  from  Mr  Solomon  and  Mr  Duffy,  I
    directed a rehearing de novo before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Hatton
    Cross) (excluding First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Napthine)  in  accordance
    with the Senior President's Practice direction .  I preserve the agreed
    findings as set out above in paragraph 3.

Directions

17.  The appeal is listed for rehearing at Hatton Cross on 12  January  2015
    with a time estimate of two hours, one witness and a Tamil interpreter.



Signed                                  Date 9.7.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
