
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/11305/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 20th November 2015                |On 14th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                               Xoai Van Nguyen
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C Record of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is from Vietnam.  His appeal against  refusal  of  asylum
    and removal to his home country was dismissed by Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal D Mathews in a  decision  promulgated  on  16th  February
    2015.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge found the Appellant's claim to  be
    at risk because of an unpaid loan made to him by  a  corrupt  policeman
    and on account of his claimed part Chinese ancestry not to be made  out
    to the lower standard.

 2. The Appellant applied for permission  to  appeal,  asserting  that  the
    judge had failed adequately to assess risk on return. He  claimed  that
    he would be at risk because of his attendance at demonstrations in this
    country, including meeting a person who had been granted asylum and who
    gave evidence at the hearing, and that his evidence had  been  that  he
    would continue to demonstrate if returned to Vietnam.

 3. Permission was originally refused by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    but was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith on 7th July 2015.  In the
    grant of permission Judge Smith commented as follows:

         "The Appellant seeks permission  to  appeal  on  two  grounds  -  a
         failure by the judge to properly  assess  the  risk  on  return  by
         reference to his circumstances,  heightened  by  his  part  Chinese
         ethnicity and a failure by the judge to properly consider the  risk
         on return by reference to the Appellant's sur place activities.   I
         do not  consider  there  is  any  arguable  error  in  the  judge's
         determination in relation to the first of those grounds.  There may
         though be an error in the approach to the sur place  activities  as
         the judge has failed to note that the  Appellant  had  attended  at
         least one demonstration since December 2011 (in December 2014), has
         failed to note the Appellant's inference in evidence that he  would
         be at increased risk of interest from the authorities  due  to  his
         association with Mr Mai at that demonstration  and  has  failed  to
         consider the risk to the Appellant if, as he says he would, he were
         to continue to demonstrate on return to Vietnam.".

    In a response under Upper Tribunal Procedure  Rule  24  the  Respondent
    contended that there was no material  error  of  law  and  opposed  the
    appeal.

 4. At the hearing before me Miss Record stated that the basis of the grant
    was the Appellant's sur place activities.  He said  he  had  associated
    with Mr Mai and that even if  arrested  in  Vietnam  he  would  protest
    there.  He said that he had been on  demonstrations  in  Vietnam.   The
    judge had looked at the situation as it was known in  Vietnam  but  had
    not looked at the risk on return.  He had failed to  look  ahead.   She
    referred to objective evidence in the Appellant's bundle which had been
    submitted for the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  notably
    information from the Country of Information Report which indicated that
    there was a lack of independent judiciary and a risk of  detention  for
    those opposing the government.  She submitted that the judge  had  only
    looked at past risk and not to the future, which he should have done in
    the light of the sur place activities.  She added  that  the  Appellant
    had since been on other demonstrations although she accepted  that  any
    evidence in that regard was not relevant in considering  whether  there
    was a material error of law in the  decision  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 5. In response Mr Mills said that there appeared to be  an  error  in  the
    grant of permission and there might have been some  misreading  of  the
    decision of Judge Mathews.  The judge at first instance had  said  that
    the Appellant had been on two demonstrations,  the  first  in  December
    2011, but he had not said that that was the last one.  He  had  focused
    on the first demonstration  because  it  was  surprising  that  if  the
    Appellant were sought by the authorities his family had not encountered
    any problems.  That demonstration had been more than three years before
    the hearing and there had been no adverse  impact  in  Vietnam  on  the
    Appellant's family.  The judge was  clearly  aware  also  of  the  more
    recent demonstration.

 6. He continued that in the Appellant's bundle there were photographs  and
    there was no dispute that he had been on the two demonstrations in this
    country but there was no country guidance to the effect that there  was
    monitoring of attendance at such demonstrations which would  be  likely
    to give rise to a risk on return and the judge was not  bound  to  find
    that such a risk arose.  The judge had found with good reasons that the
    Appellant had not been credible as to his  core  account.   He  had  no
    profile before he left Vietnam.  Not a great deal had occurred  in  the
    United Kingdom and there had been no repercussions for his family.  The
    judge had been justified in reaching the conclusion that there  was  no
    future risk.  Mr  Mills  accepted  that  there  had  been  no  specific
    findings on the evidence of the other  witness  who  was  a  recognised
    refugee.  However the determination  of  the  appeal  of  that  witness
    before the First-tier Tribunal had been produced for the hearing of the
    appeal and it was apparent that that witness had  been  granted  status
    because of his religion, not because of his political opinions.  He had
    demonstrated on a religious basis and there was  evidence  that  people
    who practised religion openly faced a problem.  He said it was hard  to
    see that if the judge had gone into the evidence of the witness in more
    detail that could have made any  difference.   The  Appellant  made  no
    claim to be opposed to the government on religious  grounds  and  there
    was no suggestion that  he  was  known.   He  submitted  there  was  no
    material error which could arise out of a photograph which  showed  the
    two persons together.  There was also no evidence adduced to show  that
    the photographs had been made publicly available.

 7. The other aspect was whether the Appellant would, as he had stated,  in
    fact demonstrate in Vietnam.  Mr Mills accepted that the judge had  not
    addressed the point directly but said that in the light of the  adverse
    credibility findings there was no basis why the judge would accept that
    he would demonstrate on return.  If there were  an  error  it  was  not
    material.

 8. Finally in reply Miss Record said the point was risk  on  return.   She
    said it was significant  that  the  Appellant  had  met  Mr  Mai  on  a
    demonstration  and  Mr  Mai  had  been  detained  by   the   Vietnamese
    government.  The  Appellant  himself  did  say  that  he  had  been  on
    demonstrations in Vietnam.  The fact that parts of his  evidence  might
    be incredible did not dispose of risk on return.

 9. Having heard those submissions I reserved my decision which I now give.
     The judge found the Appellant's claim to be at  risk  because  of  his
    failure to repay a loan to a corrupt police official and on account  of
    alleged Chinese ancestry  not  to  be  made  out,  even  to  the  lower
    standard.  That finding is not challenged but that does not  of  course
    mean that for other reasons he might not face some risk  on  return  to
    Vietnam.  The judge noted that at paragraph 29  of  his  determination.
    His principal findings now subject to scrutiny were as follows:

         "24. The Appellant states that he has attended  two  demonstrations
             whilst in the UK.  I have considered  the  objective  evidence
             advanced and accept that there is  [a]  regime  of  government
             that suppresses  opposition.   But  the  Appellant  was  never
             viewed as an opposition activist in Vietnam and, significantly
             in my view, his family have made no  mention  to  him  of  any
             adverse interest from the  authorities  since  he  attended  a
             (sic) demonstrations in the UK.  I found that the Appellant on
             his own account has only attended two  demonstrations  in  the
             UK, and the first of those was now some time ago,  it  was  in
             December 2011.  I make that finding in view of the photographs
             and corroborative evidence of Mr Mai.  I find the  Appellant's
             account of one demonstration since then, no membership of  any
             particular party, inability to name the newspaper  or  website
             said by him to have coverage of the demonstration, and lack of
             any continuing political activity, fails to show that he has a
             profile of opposition that comes within the compass  of  those
             said in the Appellant's objective evidence to be at  risk.   I
             find this to be supported by the lack of any interest  in  his
             family despite his attendance at a demonstration in 2011.

         25.  I view all evidence and issues of credibility in the round,  a
             series of concerns are set out above, and whilst  individually
             some  of  the  concerns  may  not   entirely   undermine   the
             Appellant's account when taken  together  and  viewed  in  the
             context of the objective evidence, they drive me  to  conclude
             that I find the Appellant's account lacking in credibility for
             the reasons set out above and I keep in mind the low  standard
             of proof required.  I do  not  find  that  the  Appellant  has
             satisfied me as to any difficulties in Vietnam as claimed, any
             interest in him or his family by the authorities or Mr Phuong.
              I do not find any eventual basis for any interest in  him  in
             the event of his return to Vietnam."

10. It is clear from the above that the judge was well-aware in fact of the
    Appellant having attended  two  demonstrations  and  his  reference  in
    particular to that which took place in  December  2011  appears  to  be
    because of his point that there had been no adverse interest  shown  to
    the Appellant's family in Vietnam notwithstanding the passage  of  time
    since that demonstration took  place.   The  second  demonstration,  of
    which the judge was clearly aware, had taken place in 2014.  In my view
    the judge did not misunderstand that evidence.

11. Miss Record submitted that the Appellant was at  risk  because  of  his
    association with Mr Mai.  The judge made no  specific  finding  on  the
    evidence of Mr Mai and there is no reason to  think  that  he  did  not
    accept it  insofar  as  it  related  to  matters  directly  within  his
    knowledge.   Mr  Mai  said  that  he  had  met  the  Appellant   on   a
    demonstration  and  they  discovered  that  they  had  the  same  legal
    representative.  He said in his statement  that  he  was  a  recognised
    refugee as a persecuted Christian in Vietnam and the basis of his claim
    is clear from the determination of his appeal.   Mr  Mai  said  in  his
    statement that the Appellant was frightened of  a  gangster  called  Mr
    Phuong but the judge dismissed that claim on the part of the  Appellant
    giving adequate reasons for that finding.

12. The only other evidence which Mr Mai gave was to the effect that he had
    met the Appellant at a demonstration in  December  2014  and  they  had
    discovered that they had the same legal representative.  The  Appellant
    had told him that he was frightened to return  because  of  a  gangster
    called Mr Phuong.  That is the claim which the judge found  not  to  be
    made out.  Mr  Mai  confirmed  that  the  Appellant  had  attended  the
    demonstration and said  that  he,  Mr  Mai,  was  due  to  go  on  more
    demonstrations.  He said he was now friends with the Appellant whom  he
    thought would suffer if he had go back to Vietnam  but  that  view  was
    clearly on the basis of the alleged fear of Mr Phuong.   That  evidence
    takes the Appellant's case no further.  The judge  did  not  find  that
    there was evidence of the photographs  having  been  on  a  website  or
    otherwise published in a newspaper.   On  the  evidence  before  him  I
    cannot see that the judge could have found  that  the  Appellant  would
    face any risk because he had stood next to Mr Mai  at  a  demonstration
    when Mr Mai was a religious refugee and when there was no evidence that
    images of the demonstration were in  the  public  domain  or  that  the
    identity of individuals at the demonstration had been  established  and
    monitored by the Vietnamese authorities.  I find no material  error  of
    law made out in this respect.

13. Finally it was said that the Appellant had in evidence  indicated  that
    he would demonstrate on return to Vietnam.  There is no mention of this
    in his original statement, which concentrated  on  the  alleged  threat
    from the corrupt policeman and  his  colleagues,  but  it  was  briefly
    mentioned in the penultimate paragraph of his statements  prepared  for
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal when he stated (at paragraph
    15):

         "Even if I was going to be arrested in Vietnam, I would still go on
         a demonstration.  I just can't  live  without  a  proper  and  safe
         system of government.  I now know  why  I  went  on  demonstrations
         against the Vietnam government  and  I  will  carry  on  protesting
         against the poor human rights record in Vietnam."

14. The judge found with adequate  reasons  why  in  numerous  regards  the
    Appellant's account was not credible.  The whole of his story as to why
    he had left Vietnam was comprehensively disbelieved.   The  judge  also
    found, as set out above, at paragraph  24  of  his  decision  that  the
    Appellant had a lack of any continuing political activity.   Whilst  he
    could have made his findings more explicit,  his  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant had a lack of  any  continuing  political  activity  and  had
    failed to show that he had a profile of opposition and bearing in  mind
    that he found that the Appellant's original story had  been  concocted,
    indicates that the judge was of the view, albeit  obliquely  expressed,
    that the Appellant would  not  in  fact  go  on  demonstrations  if  he
    returned to Vietnam.  Accordingly I find that on  the  evidence  before
    him the judge did not make any material error of law  in  reaching  his
    decision.  The appeal therefore fails.

Notice of Decision

15. There was no material error of law in the making of the decision by the
    First-tier Tribunal and the  decision  that  the  appeal  be  dismissed
    therefore stands.

16. There was no request made to me for the making of  an  anonymity  order
    and no such order is made.

Signed   Date 03 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French
