
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/11407/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 August 2016                       | On 19 October 2016                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                    k n s
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Cole, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I have written this decision following a resumed  hearing  at  Bradford
    having found (in a decision promulgated on 15 June 2016) that the First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell  to  be  set
    aside.  My reasons for making that decision were as follows:

         1.   The appellant was born on 25  December  1980  and  is  a  male
         citizen of Iraq.  He appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
         Birkby) against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  him
         asylum and to make directions for his removal to Iraq.  The  First-
         tier Tribunal, in a decision and reasons promulgated  on  25  March
         2015, dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
         permission to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   Both parties agree that this appeal turns on the  question  of
         internal flight.  Having said that, Judge Birkby did not  find  the
         appellant to be a credible witness and  I  can  see  no  reason  to
         interfere with his findings as to credibility.  For  reasons  which
         will be  explained  later,  this  does  have  an  impact  upon  the
         assessment of the  Tribunal's  treatment  of  the  internal  flight
         alternative.  He is from a disputed area of Iraq  to  which  it  is
         safe for him  to  return.   The  respondent  proposes  that  he  is
         returned to Baghdad.  At [39], the judge wrote:

         However the respondent asserted it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
         appellant to relocate to Baghdad and it would not be  unduly  harsh
         for him to do so.  I find that it  is  clear  from  the  background
         documentation that there was a significant degree  of  violence  in
         Baghdad.  There was a significant  Kurdish  population  in  Baghdad
         although the majority are either Shia, Arab ethnicity or Sunni Arab
         ethnicity.  There is significant evidence that  the  Shia  militias
         target Sunnis.  There is  some  evidence  that  Kurdish  people  in
         Baghdad who are generally Sunnis as  is  the  appellant  have  been
         targeted although it is clear from the documentation  that  Kurdish
         Peshmergers and other Kurdish groups are fighting against  ISIS  in
         the same way that Iraqi Shias are fighting against  ISIS.   Clearly
         if the appellant were to return to Baghdad he would have difficulty
         settling down.  He has on the face of the evidence no relatives  in
         Baghdad.  He has not lived in Baghdad.  Nevertheless he is an Iraqi
         citizen and despite the difficulties would be able to obtain  Iraqi
         documentation on returning to Baghdad.   Such  documentation  could
         well be obtainable from the Iraqi Embassy  in  the  United  Kingdom
         before he were to return.  The Appellant himself is a young man  he
         is 23 years of age who had the wherewithal to come  to  the  United
         Kingdom when he did travelling all the way across Europe.  He has a
         partial secondary education in Iraq.  He is  of  Kurdish  ethnicity
         and there are a significant number  of  Kurdish  people  living  in
         Baghdad.   Despite  the  difficulties  I  find  that  it  would  be
         reasonable for the appellant to return to Baghdad and it would  not
         be unduly harsh for him to do so.  Pursuant to Article 15(c) of the
         Qualification Directive I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  level  of
         violence is so indiscriminate in Baghdad so as  to  make  a  person
         returning to Baghdad without any  profile  save  that  he  is  from
         Nineveh which is now under the control of ISIS that  the  appellant
         would be at real risk of any form of serious harm or ill-treatment.
          He would be able to re-establish his life in Baghdad which is part
         of the country of his heritage.  He has no relatives in the  United
         Kingdom.  I am not satisfied that he has  proved  that  he  has  no
         relatives in Iraq.

         3.   This appeal has taken a very long  time  to  reach  the  Upper
         Tribunal (more than a year).  In the interim,  the  Upper  Tribunal
         was given country guidance regarding returns  to  Iraq  (AA).   The
         question of the re-documenting of returnees to Iraq is addressed at
         length in the case of AA. Obviously, the judge cannot be criticised
         for failing to anticipate the findings of the Tribunal in AA though
         it does appear that some of the evidence before him at  the  First-
         tier Tribunal was the same or very similar to that before the Upper
         Tribunal.  Having said that, I am not satisfied that the judge  has
         addressed  adequately  the  question  of  documentation  for   this
         particular appellant on return to Iraq.  The central  part  of  the
         paragraph which I have quoted in full above  [39]  contains  little
         reference to the evidence which was actually put before the  judge.
         It alludes,  somewhat  cryptically,  to  "difficulties"  which  the
         appellant might encounter obtaining documentation upon returning to
         Baghdad.  It would have been helpful if the judge had given details
         of those difficulties or to have explained how the appellant  might
         expect to be able to overcome them.  Likewise, the judge  make  the
         rather unhelpful finding that  the  documentation  "could  well  be
         obtainable" by the appellant from the Iraqi Embassy in  the  United
         Kingdom.  Again, there is an absence of detail in the analysis.

         4.   In the circumstances, I set aside the decision and  shall  re-
         make it in the Upper Tribunal following a resumed hearing.  All the
         findings of fact made by Judge Birkby shall stand including all his
         findings as regards credibility.  As Judge Birkby noted at the  end
         of [39] the appellant had failed to prove that he has no  relatives
         living in Iraq; the assessment of  internal  flight  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal shall be on the basis that the appellant has relatives  or
         friends in Iraq who may be able to assist him; to  put  it  another
         way, he will not be returning to a country where he has no personal
         contacts whatever or has nobody to whom he may look for assistance.
          The Upper Tribunal will examine the question of internal flight in
         the light of the latest country guidance of AA.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 25
         March 2015 is set aside.  All of the findings of fact shall  stand.
         The Upper Tribunal will re-make the decision at a  resumed  hearing
         but shall consider only the issue of internal flight  (to  Baghdad)
         within Iraq.



 2. At the resumed hearing, both parties agreed that the only issue  before
    the Upper Tribunal was that of the internal  flight  alternative  (IFA)
    for this appellant in Baghdad.  Since Judge Birkby gave his decision in
    the First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal has delivered  its  country
    guidance in respect of Iraq in AA (Article 15(C)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT
    544 (IAC).  The relevant parts of the head note of AA are B, C and D:

         B. DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (excluding IKR)

         5. Return of former residents of the  Iraqi  Kurdish  Region  (IKR)
         will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will  be  to  Baghdad.  The
         Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P)  in  the  United
         Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of  a  current  or
         expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a laissez passer.

         6. No Iraqi national will  be  returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
         possession of one of these documents.

         7. In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq)  and
         Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ
         1276, an international protection claim made by P cannot succeed by
         reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from  an  absence  of
         Iraqi identification documentation, if the Tribunal finds that  P's
         return is not currently feasible, given what  is  known  about  the
         state of P's documentation.

          C. POSITION ON DOCUMENTATION WHERE RETURN IS FEASIBLE

         8. It will only be where the Tribunal is satisfied that the  return
         of P to Iraq is feasible that the issue of  alleged  risk  of  harm
         arising from an absence of Iraqi identification documentation  will
         require judicial determination.

         9. Having a Civil Status Identity Document (CSID)  is  one  of  the
         ways in which it is possible for an Iraqi national  in  the  United
         Kingdom to obtain  a  passport  or  a  laissez  passer.  Where  the
         Secretary of State proposes to remove P by means of a  passport  or
         laissez passer, she will be expected to demonstrate to the Tribunal
         what,  if  any,  identification   documentation   led   the   Iraqi
         authorities to issue P with the passport or laissez passer  (or  to
         signal their intention to do so).

         10. Where P is returned to Iraq on  a  laissez  passer  or  expired
         passport, P will be at no risk of serious  harm  at  the  point  of
         return by reason of not having a current passport or other  current
         form of Iraqi identification document.

         11. Where P's return to  Iraq  is  found  by  the  Tribunal  to  be
         feasible, it will generally be necessary to decide whether P has  a
         CSID, or will be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after  arrival
         in Iraq. A CSID is generally required in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to
         access  financial  assistance  from  the  authorities;  employment;
         education; housing; and medical treatment. If P shows there are  no
         family or other members likely to  be  able  to  provide  means  of
         support, P is in general likely to face a real risk of destitution,
         amounting to serious harm, if, by the time any funds provided to  P
         by the Secretary of State or her agents to assist P's  return  have
         been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still  have  no
         CSID.

         12. Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID,  P  should
         as a general matter be able to obtain one  from  the  Civil  Status
         Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using  an  Iraqi  passport
         (whether current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such
         a passport, P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend  on  whether  P
         knows  the  page  and  volume  number  of  the  book  holding   P's
         information (and that of P's family). P's ability to  persuade  the
         officials that P is the person named on the relevant page is likely
         to depend on whether P has family members or other individuals  who
         are prepared to vouch for P.

         13. P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely  hampered
         if P is unable to go to the Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  P's
         Governorate because it is in an area where  Article  15(c)  serious
         harm is occurring. As a result of  the  violence,  alternative  CSA
         Offices for Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in
         Baghdad and Kerbala. The evidence does  not  demonstrate  that  the
         "Central Archive", which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able  to
         provide CSIDs to those in  need  of  them.  There  is,  however,  a
         National Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for formal
         recognition of identity. The precise operation of  this  court  is,
         however, unclear.

         D. INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN  THE  IRAQI  KURDISH
         REGION)

         14. As a general matter, it will  not  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
         harsh for a person from a contested area  to  relocate  to  Baghdad
         City or (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.

         15. In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh  for
         P to relocate to  Baghdad,  the  following  factors  are,  however,
         likely to be relevant:

         (a) whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain one (see Part  C
         above);

         (b) whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are less likely to
         find employment);

         (c) whether P has family members or  friends  in  Baghdad  able  to
         accommodate him;

         (d) whether P is a lone female  (women  face  greater  difficulties
         than men in finding employment);

         (e) whether P can find a sponsor to access a  hotel  room  or  rent
         accommodation;

         (f) whether P is from a minority community;

         (g) whether there is support available for P bearing in mind  there
         is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers  are  provided
         with the support generally given to IDPs.

 3. To summarise, the circumstances of the appellant are that he has  never
    lived in Baghdad. He is a Sunni  Muslim.   He  has  no  Iraqi  identity
    documents and would have to return  to  Iraq  on  an  emergency  travel
    document only.  His home area of Iraq is Nineveh where it is unsafe for
    him to return.  As will be noted from my decision on error of  law  [4]
    the resumed hearing proceeded on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  has
    relatives and friends in Iraq who may be able to assist him.   However,
    there was no evidence to show that those relatives are living  anywhere
    other than in Nineveh and  there  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant has friends or relatives living in Baghdad who may be able to
    assist him.  The appellant is a single male who is now  aged  25  years
    and who appears to be in good health.

 4. Mr Cole, for the appellant, submitted that it was not feasible for  the
    appellant to obtain a CSID prior to returning to Iraq.  If he  returned
    on an emergency travel document or laissez passer there was no evidence
    that he would be able to obtain a CSID in Baghdad.  He has  no  friends
    or relatives in Baghdad who would be able to assist him or  accommodate
    him.  It would be unsafe for him to  travel  to  Nineveh  in  order  to
    obtain a CSID (see [13] of the head note of AA).  There was no evidence
    that friends or relatives living in Nineveh could travel to the  office
    on his behalf and obtain from there CSID  or  other  identity  document
    which would be of use for the appellant in Baghdad.  As AA noted, there
    was no evidence that the National Status Court in Baghdad would be able
    to assist the appellant as "the precise operation of the court  ...  is
    unclear."  Mr Cole submitted that the appellant would,  in  consequence
    of these circumstances, face  destitution  in  Baghdad.   He  would  be
    unable to support himself and, as  a  failed  asylum  seeker,  may  not
    necessarily be recognised or assisted as an internally displaced person
    (IDE).  It is likely the  circumstances  would  lead  to  a  breach  of
    Article 3 ECHR but, even if that were  not  the  case,  the  individual
    circumstances would be such that it would be unduly harsh  for  him  to
    relocate to Baghdad (Januzi [2006] UKHL 5).

 5. For the respondent, Mr Diwnycz submitted it would not  be  unreasonable
    to expect the appellant to contact his family  in  Nineveh  (there  was
    evidence that there was a "duplicate government office" at Najaf  which
    may be able to assist the appellant) and that, within  reasonable  time
    certainly before the appellant fell into  destitution,  CSID  could  be
    obtained for him to enable him to continue living in Baghdad.

 6. Mr Cole submitted it would not be safe to  expect  any  member  of  the
    appellant's family to travel to Najaf, through its contested area.   He
    submitted that the appellant fell into the  category  of  returnee  for
    whom return would not be feasible.  He referred me to  paragraph  [203]
    of AA:

         On the evidence before us, whilst we accept that for a  person  who
         has no family or other support in Baghdad and  who  also  does  not
         have a CSID, and cannot obtain one reasonably soon  after  arrival,
         it would be unreasonable and unduly harsh to relocate  to  Baghdad,
         for the generality of Iraqis,  despite  difficulties  that  may  be
         experienced in respect of such matters such  as  access  to  health
         care, education and jobs, we consider that relocation to Baghdad is
         safe and not unreasonable or unduly harsh - one reason being that a
         person can only be returned to Baghdad if such person has a current
         or expired Iraqi passport or a laissez-passer.

 7. This paragraph appears to illustrate the somewhat  circular  nature  of
    the argument; it is likely that a person who actually returns from  the
    United Kingdom to Baghdad can reasonably relocate to that city  because
    he or she will be able to obtain a CSID and he or she will be  able  to
    obtain such a document because they will only  have  been  returned  to
    Baghdad in the first instance  because  they  had  an  Iraqi  passport.
    Further, the Tribunal  in  AA  went  on  to  consider  AA's  particular
    circumstances at [207]:

         Given that the appellant's return  is  not  currently  feasible  it
         could be said that it is unnecessary to hypothesise any risk to him
         upon his return to Iraq. However, as identified in  paragraphs  169
         and 170 above, there may be cases where it will be evident that the
         person concerned would be at real risk of  persecution  or  serious
         harm  irrespective  of  the  lack  of  documentation  and  that  an
         applicant  should  not  be  precluded  for  pursuing  a  claim   to
         international protection in circumstances where the  asserted  risk
         of harm is not (or not solely) based on factors (such  as  lack  of
         documentation) that  currently  render  a  person's  actual  return
         unfeasible.

 8. A distinction is made here by the  Tribunal  between  problems  arising
    from a lack of documentation for those  living  in  Iraq  and  problems
    which a lack of such documents may pose to entering Iraq in  the  first
    instance.  In the latter case, return is  "unfeasible"  and,  following
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in HF (Iraq) [2013] EWCA Civ  1276,
    an appellant cannot succeed in a  claim  for  international  protection
    where the "asserted risk of harm is ... based on factors (such as  lack
    of documentation)  that  currently  render  a  person's  actual  return
    unfeasible."

 9. I am aware the Court of Appeal has granted permission on AA in order to
    consider this very issue.  I have, of  course,  written  this  decision
    unaware of the eventual outcome of that appeal but, on the basis of the
    appellant's current circumstances, I have concluded that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect him to relocate to Baghdad.  I am aware that the
    appellant has relatives living in Iraq but, given that they are  living
    in Nineveh, I am unable to conclude that they are likely to be able  to
    assist the appellant even assuming he was  able  to  establish  contact
    with them.  I do not consider it reasonable to expect such relatives to
    put their own lives at risk travelling to a government office where, in
    the light of the appellant's lack of documentation, they are not likely
    to be successful in  obtaining  by  proxy  a  CSID  or  other  relevant
    document which might assist the appellant in Baghdad.   Notwithstanding
    the appellant's youth and good health, I accept  Mr  Cole's  submission
    that his lack of local contacts in Baghdad together with his  inability
    to access government services through the agency or a  CSID  or  to  be
    accommodated by friends and relatives whilst having no prospect even in
    the medium term of obtaining any of those comforts, would expose him to
    conditions rendering internal flight unduly  harsh  in  his  particular
    case.  For that reason, I allow the appeal.  The appellant is  at  real
    risk of serious harm in his home area of Iraq whilst it is unduly harsh
    to expect him to relocate to Baghdad.  The appellant is entitled  to  a
    grant of humanitarian protection.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on the grounds that the appellant  is  entitled  to  a
grant of humanitarian protection.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 1 October 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.







Signed                              Date 1 October 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
