



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11198/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |                  Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 31st July 2015                     |                 On 14th August 2015 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                                Mr a H m m s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Soltani of Iris Law Firm (Gateshead)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal By  the  Appellant  A  S,  with
    permission, against  the  decision  of  a  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Shimmin) in which it  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse his application for asylum.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Egypt born 30th August 1996.  He  entered
    the UK clandestinely on 7th May 2014,  aged  17  years.  He  claims  he
    cannot return to Egypt on account of his fear from the security  forces
    there.  He  states  that  his  father  was  a  member  of  the   Muslim
    Brotherhood, and he the Appellant, was arrested  and  tortured  by  the
    security services on account of  his  father's  involvement  with  that
    organisation.

 3. Because of his age, the Appellant was  placed  in  the  care  of  North
    Yorkshire County Council and was accommodated in the Scarborough  area.
    He was assigned a youth worker.

 4. The Appellant's appeal in the First-tier  Tribunal  was  set  down  for
    hearing at Bradford on 26th January 2015,  before  Judge  Shimmin.  The
    Appellant did not attend, nor did  any  representative  attend  on  his
    behalf.

 5. Judge Shimmin after making what enquires he could, proceeded  with  the
    hearing in the absence of the Appellant and  went  on  to  dismiss  the
    appeal. No criticism attaches to the Judge in his proceeding as he did.
    He made great efforts to ascertain why the Appellant had  not  attended
    as shown in [10] of his decision.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal and the grant  of  permission
    neatly sets out the issue before me. It is reproduced here below.

         "It is submitted that  the  Appellant  was  unable  to  attend  the
         hearing because his youth worker who had agreed to take him to  the
         venue was ill and due to the Appellant's limited  understanding  of
         English he was confused and  misinterpreted  the  necessity  to  be
         there. It is an arguable error of law that had the  Appellant  been
         able to attend, the evidence may have made a material difference to
         the outcome or to the fairness of the proceedings."

     Thus the matter comes before me.

The UT Hearing

 7. Both representatives made submissions at the  hearing  before  me.  The
    Appellant also attended accompanied by a  youth  worker  (not  the  one
    referred to in the grant of permission).  It  became  apparent  in  the
    course of hearing  from  the  Appellant  and  his  youth  worker,  that
    arrangements had originally been made for the Appellant to  be  brought
    to the hearing on 26th January 2015 by  his  youth  worker.  The  youth
    worker fell ill and according to the youth worker who  accompanied  the
    Appellant to the UT hearing, a letter  was  written  to  the  Appellant
    informing him that his youth worker was ill. Regretfully no  check  was
    made on whether the Appellant understood  the  position,  nor  was  any
    check made to ensure that the Appellant attended  the  hearing  in  any
    event.

 8. Having considered that evidence,  I  am  grateful  to  Mr  Diwnycz  who
    indicated that he accepted, that despite  the  terms  of  the  Rule  24
    response, it was apparent the Appellant had been let down by the  Youth
    Services. Mr Diwnycz accepted that the Appellant should not be punished
    for that. I agree with those sentiments and  for  those  reasons  I  am
    satisfied that the Appellant has not had  the  opportunity  of  a  fair
    hearing, although I emphasise (as did both representatives  before  me)
    no criticism attaches to Judge Shimmin.  Nevertheless  I  informed  the
    parties that Judge Shimmin's decision is set aside for legal error.

 9. Both representatives submitted that as the decision  could  not  stand,
    they were in agreement that the appropriate course of  action  in  this
    appeal is to remit the matter  to  the  FtT  for  a  full  hearing.  No
    findings of fact are preserved.

Decision

10. The decision of the FtT is set aside for legal  error.  The  matter  is
    remitted to the FtT (not Judge Shimmin) for a full rehearing  with  all
    matters at large.

Direction regarding anonymity - Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
2008 Rule 14

The appellant is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings, unless  and
until the Tribunal directs otherwise. No report of these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.



Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


