
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11536/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 23rd October 2015                 |On 3rd November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     OA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A J White (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Jerromes, promulgated on 13th February 2015, following a  hearing
    at  Birmingham  Sheldon  Court  on  10th   February   2015.    In   the
    determination, the judge dismissed the appeal  of  the  Appellant,  who
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen  of  Iraq,  who  was  born  on  20th
    September 1979.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent  to
    refuse his claim for asylum for fear of being persecuted and  subjected
    to ill-treatment.  The applicable provisions are paragraph 336 and 339M
    of HC 395 and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim essentially is that he worked  for  international
    organisations, including the IRD and IOM, and was an Iraqi national  of
    Sunni Muslim faith.  Both his brother and father  were  in  the  Ba'ath
    Party.  He received threats by text and by telephone for having  worked
    for these  international  organisations.   He  received  a  threatening
    letter in July 2013.  His brother was then killed in a mistake for him,
    and his house was attacked by ISIS when  they  were  looking  for  him.
    These claims were all rejected by the Secretary of State.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge accepted that the Appellant was a national of Iraq,  a  Sunni
    Muslim, and a former employee of IOM.  It was also accepted that one of
    his brothers had associations with the Ba'ath Party as did his  father.
    The judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant  received  threats  by  phone
    (including texts) whilst working for the IOM.  She did not accept  that
    he received the letter of 30th July 2013 which stated,  "We  know  your
    past working with the foreigners and your punishment day will come.  We
    know your location".  Neither did the judge accept that the Appellant's
    brother was murdered  on  the  basis  that  he  was  mistaken  for  the
    Appellant.  She said that there was  no  evidence  of  this.   Equally,
    there was no evidence that his home was ransacked.  Finally, the  judge
    went on to hold that there would be  no  risk  on  return  because  the
    country guidance case of HM and Others  should  not  be  followed  when
    considering return to certain governorates  including  Salahaddin,  "as
    these are contested areas and meet the circumstances of internal  armed
    conflict" (see paragraph 34.2).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  misinterpreted  the
    evidence, did not give sufficient weight to the police report, and  the
    reason for why he delayed leaving Iraq for some  five  years,  and  the
    reason for resigning from his work with the IOM.

 7. On 2nd June 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

The Hearing

 8. At the hearing  before  me  on  23rd  October  2015,  Mr  David  Mills,
    appearing as Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent authority, said at the outset that he would have  to  accept
    that the judge had failed to give proper regard to the "internal flight
    alternative" or to what is known as  "internal  relocation".   She  had
    accepted that Salahaddin was a contested area, and once this was  done,
    she had to consider whether the Appellant could  reasonably  return  to
    Baghdad.  It was simply not clear what she meant at paragraph 34.2 when
    considering the application of HM and Others.  Mr Mills submitted  that
    in these circumstances the matter would have to go back for a  de  novo
    hearing before a First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Moreover, before the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge there was a request  to  adduce  medical  evidence,
    although none was then available, but such evidence  is  now  available
    and so it should properly be considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    because the Appellant is on medication  and  the  availability  of  the
    required medical treatment is an issue that should be determined.

 9. Finally, my attention was drawn to the recent country guidance case  of
    AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544.  This makes it quite  clear
    that in assessing whether it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for
    a person to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are likely to be
    relevant.  First, whether the Appellant has a CSID or will be  able  to
    obtain one; second, whether the Appellant can speak Arabic (since those
    who cannot are less likely to find  employment);  thirdly  whether  the
    Appellant has family members or friends in Baghdad able to  accommodate
    him; fourthly whether the  Appellant  is  a  lone  female  (women  face
    greater difficulties than men in finding  employment);  fifth,  whether
    the Appellant can find a  Sponsor  to  access  a  hotel  room  or  rent
    accommodation;  sixth  whether  the  Appellant  is  from   a   minority
    community;  seventh,  whether  there  is  support  available  for   the
    Appellant bearing in mind that there is  some  evidence  that  returned
    failed asylum seekers are provided  with  support  generally  given  to
    IDPs.  Mr Mills submitted that this was the only ground, namely, ground
    1, which was conceded, ground 2 was not conceded.

10. For her part, Ms White submitted that it was enough for this matter  to
    be categorised as one inviting the finding of an error of  law,  if  Mr
    Mills accepted that ground 1 was conceded.  On that  basis,  she  would
    have to agree that the proper course of action was for this case to  go
    back to the First-tier Tribunal for there to be a de novo  hearing.   I
    heard submissions as to what should be preserved in  the  determination
    below.

11. I have no hesitation in saying that insofar as the judge  accepts  that
    the Appellant has the profile that he claims to have,  being  a  former
    employee of IOM, with family association with the Ba'ath Party, and the
    receiving of threats by phone, all of which are set  out  at  paragraph
    33, that these findings should be preserved.

12. As to other matters, Ms  White  submitted  before  me  that  there  was
    evidence, for example in the form of an e-mail, to which reference  had
    been made at the hearing, and which existed in the Respondent's bundle,
    but which could not be provided.  She submitted that the Appellant, who
    was in the court room, was able to access this e-mail himself, and upon
    doing so, it transpired that there were other e-mails as well.

13. If this is the case, then  upon  a  remittal  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, this evidence should properly be brought to the attention  of
    the Tribunal.

14. Equally, Ms White drew my attention to the letter by  Dr  Malik,  dated
    16th February 2015, from the Leicester City NHS Practice which confirms
    that the Appellant is registered at the Assist Service.  A copy of this
    letter was handed up to me and I have placed it in the  Tribunal  file.
    This should  also  be  adduced  and  a  copy  sent  to  the  Respondent
    authority.

15. The matters raised in relation to paragraph 9 of the skeleton  argument
    by Ms White, refer to "inadequate findings of fact" and  these  matters
    can be revisited again before the First-tier Tribunal on the  basis  of
    additional evidence.

16. Such evidence has consisted, for example, of the Ministry of  Interior,
    Police  Forces  Operation  Command  letter  which  confirms  that   the
    Appellant was threatened by militias, and Ms White raised the  question
    as to why the judge below had referred to this as being "inconclusive".
     Again, this is a matter that falls to be considered by the judge on  a
    de novo hearing below, with all previous  findings  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant preserved in tact for his benefit.

17. I direct that the matter is heard at the first available opportunity at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court, with the provision of  an  Iraqi  interpreter
    for the Appellant, and that the matter be listed for two hours.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This matter is  remitted
back to be determined by a judge other than  Judge  Jerromes  at  Birmingham
Sheldon Court, with  the  Appellant  to  have  liberty  to  adduce  any  new
evidence that appertains to the time of the decision  by  the  Secretary  of
State.  I also direct that not later than seven days before the  day  listed
for hearing of this appeal, each party shall serve  on  the  other  and  the
Tribunal a paginated bundle containing all  documents  on  which  the  party
seeks to rely,  including  statements  from  any  witness,  that  the  party
intends to call, drawn to stand as evidence-in-chief, so as to minimise  the
need for additional questions.

An anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    2nd November 2015

