
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12134/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 24th April 2017                  |On 5 May 2017                           |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                             Khaled Omar Zentani
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer of Broudie Jackson Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Taylor
    made following a hearing at Stoke on 31st October 2016.



Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Libya, born on  17th  January  1978.   He
    arrived in the UK in October 2001 and says that he made an asylum claim
    on the basis that he would have problems on return to Libya because  of
    a land dispute.  The respondent has no record of that claim.   Be  that
    as it may he claimed asylum on  14th  August  2013  after  having  been
    encountered during an enforcement raid.

 3. The appellant says that he comes from the Zentani Tribe based in a town
    a few miles southwest of Tripoli.  He says  that  his  father  and  two
    brothers participated in criminal activities in the name of the Gaddafi
    regime and as a consequence he would be at risk on return.

 4. The judge did not accept any aspect of the appellant's story.  He  said
    that, even taking the appellant's case at its highest, his  father  and
    brothers were not high ranking officials  or  associated  at  a  senior
    level with the regime  and  as  a  family  member  of  his  father  and
    brothers, without more, he would not be at risk.  Whilst satisfied that
    there was an internal armed conflict within Libya he was not  satisfied
    that it was uniform across all of Libya in places such as  Tripoli  and
    Zintan where the appellant had a tribal connection through his  father.
    Those areas are much less prone to  indiscriminate  violence.   In  any
    event  the  powerful  Zintan  militia  supports   the   internationally
    recognised authorities and it would not be unreasonable or unduly harsh
    for the appellant to seek their protection if necessary.

 5. On that basis he dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  reaching   his   adverse
    credibility findings.  The appellant's claim to asylum was  sur  place,
    following  the  overthrow  of  Colonel  Gaddafi.   It   was   therefore
    irrational for the judge, for example, to hold it against him  that  he
    failed to claim asylum en route to the UK in 2001 some ten years before
    the Gaddafi regime was overthrown.

 7. Second the judge had misapplied the country guidance  case  of  AT  and
    Others (Article 15(c) risk categories) CG [2014] UKUT 318 in concluding
    that the appellant would not be at  risk  because  of  his  father  and
    brothers' activities, and had erred in  stating  that  he  could  avail
    himself of the protection of the Zintan militia.  In AT and Others  the
    Tribunal said that they had considerable misgivings in holding that  an
    individual could look to the protection of a militia by declaring their
    support for it.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Keane on 21st December  2016.
    Judge Keane highlighted the reliance on Section 8 of the  2004  Act  by
    the  original  judge,  and  suggested  that  excessive  weight  to  the
    appellant's conduct by reference to Section 8 might have been given  in
    the determination.

 9. On 18th January 2017  the  respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

10. Mr Greer relied on his grounds.  He argued that the judge had in effect
    taken Section 8 as the end point as well as the beginning point in  his
    assessment of credibility and had set the bar impossibly high.  He  had
    also misconstrued the appellant's case, which was on the basis that his
    relatives had committed criminal acts on behalf of the  Gaddafi  regime
    and therefore had a different risk  profile  to  those  who  were  high
    ranking officials.

11. Mr Bates defended the determination and submitted that the judge had in
    fact considered all  of  the  evidence  in  the  round,  made  findings
    properly open to him and had reached the  sustainable  conclusion  that
    the appellant could safely return to his home area in Libya.

Findings and Conclusions

12. I am satisfied that the judge did not materially err in law.

13. It is quite right to say that the judge's reference to the route  which
    the appellant took to the UK is irrelevant if he arrived here  in  2001
    when the reason for his claiming  asylum  did  not  arise  until  2011.
    However the respondent has no record of an asylum claim in 2001 and  it
    cannot simply be assumed that he did in fact leave Libya then.

14. There is no doubt that the appellant's conduct is properly relevant  to
    Section 8.  Even if he could not be criticised for failing to apply for
    asylum between 2001 and 2011, the fact is that he did not do  so  until
    14th August  2013,  after  he  had  been  encountered  by  Home  Office
    officials during an enforcement raid.  It is also apparent that he  has
    been working in the UK using at least three different aliases.

15. The judge was quite right to say that these must be matters  which  are
    designed or likely to mislead and  should  be  taken  into  account  as
    damaging the appellant's credibility.  There is  no  misapplication  of
    the law.  The weight which the judge attached to these  matters  was  a
    matter for him.  He noted that the appellant's various accounts in  his
    screening interview, asylum interview and witness  statement  and  oral
    evidence were all broadly consistent, but that is not determinative  in
    his favour.  He was entitled to conclude that the  appellant's  conduct
    outweighed the fact that he had given a consistent account.

16. So far as Ground 2 is concerned, if the  judge's  credibility  findings
    are sustainable, it falls away.   The  appellant's  account  of  having
    relatives who have committed crimes has been found not to be  credible.



17. In AT the Tribunal states

         "144.    The UNSMIL Report dated October 2013 states that those who
                had been arrested include the family members  of  those  who
                were suspected of having fought on the side of or of  having
                supported the Gaddafi regime.

         145.     It appears to us that  there  is  limited  support  for  a
                proposition that family members of those associated with the
                former regime or those suspected of being such are now as  a
                matter of course at risk on return.  The background evidence
                to that effect is limited and the expert  evidence  was  not
                entirely consistent.  We had one example only cited  to  us.
                If there was such a risk to family members we consider  that
                there  would  be  more  evidence  of  it  in  the  extensive
                background materials to which we were referred."

18. AT and Others is not authority for the proposition that family  members
    of persons associated with the Gaddafi regime or who  committed  crimes
    in their name are at risk.  Indeed it stated  that  there  was  limited
    support for it.  The judge was entitled to say that the  appellant  was
    merely asserting a risk but had not provided any specific  evidence  of
    it.

19. Finally, it was not an error for the judge to find that  the  appellant
    could seek the protection of the Zintan militia if  necessary.   Again,
    in AT at paragraph 81 the Tribunal said

         "There  may  be  cases  where  an  individual  could  look  to  the
         protection of a militia where there is reason to believe that  that
         person would be protected, for  example  because  of  a  family  or
         tribal  link  to  a  particular  militia.   We  have   considerable
         misgivings however  in  adopting  or  endorsing  an  approach  that
         embraces Dr Porter's evidence of a person  being  able  to  achieve
         protection by turning to the militia leadership and declaring their
         support for that militia, in the absence of any evidence in a given
         case that such a declaration is  feasible  and  would  achieve  the
         object of securing protection."

20. The judge did not say that the appellant's access to the protection  of
    the Zintan militia was based upon a declaration of support for it,  but
    because of his family links to it, which is  entirely  consistent  with
    the country guidance case of AT and Others.

21. The original judge did not err  in  law.   His  decision  stands.   The
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed[pic]                             Date 1 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

