
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12819/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st October 2016                 |On 31st October 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                 Rukshan [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, Counsel, instructed by Theva Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka whose date of birth is recorded
    as 19th June 1991.  He made application for international protection as
    a refugee but on 18th March 2015 a decision  was  made  to  refuse  the
    application and the Appellant appealed.  On 28th April 2016, his appeal
    was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mace  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross.  The basis of the appeal is  set  out  at  paragraph  2  of  the
    grounds and given the very realistic approach taken by  Mr  Bramble  in
    this case it suffices to set out simply that which is summarised in the
    grounds.

 2. In 2010 the Appellant came to  study  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  in
    August/September 2012 when visiting Sri Lanka he had been detained  and
    tortured by the security forces on suspicion  of  assisting  the  LTTE.
    The basis of the accusation was that a friend of  the  Appellant's  had
    been detained and was said to have confessed himself to being a  member
    of that organisation.  The Appellant was assisted in  his  escape  from
    detention by way of bribes paid by his father; a local politician acted
    as an intermediary.  That  politician  was  a  friend  of  the  family.
    Subsequently the Appellant's father was detained and required to report
    regularly to the authorities.

 3. In support of his case the  Appellant  had  medical  evidence  from  Dr
    Martin dealing with scarring and from Dr  Dhumad,  clinical  consultant
    psychiatrist.  Judge  Mace  went  on  to  dismiss  the  appeal  finding
    notwithstanding the  medical  evidence  that  the  Appellant's  account
    lacked credibility.

 4. Not content with that Decision by  Notice  dated  19th  July  2016  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Permission was eventually  granted  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    itself on 5th September 2016.  Thus the matter comes before me.

Was there an Error of Law?


 5. I am very grateful to Mr Bramble for his  realistic  approach  to  this
    case.  He immediately accepted  that  the  decision  was  fundamentally
    flawed.  That was because despite the  strong  medical  evidence  which
    went to the scarring on the Appellant's person, and  the  consideration
    by Dr Martin of alternative causes of that scarring, it was clear  that
    the medical evidence was to the  effect  that  the  scarring  had  been
    caused deliberately as a result of torture and whilst  the  possibility
    of the  injuries  being  self-inflicted  were  not  ruled  out  it  was
    unlikely, indeed, he went on to say "extremely unlikely in view of  the
    position of some of the scars".  That was something  which  Judge  Mace
    noted and recognised at paragraph 14 of the decision.

 6. I remind myself that the burden of proof in a case such as this is upon
    the Appellant but it is the lower standard which is to  be  applied  so
    that when one sees the words "extremely  unlikely"  the  judge  has  to
    exercise considerable caution if he or she is  to  reject  the  medical
    evidence.  That is not to say that there will not be  circumstances  in
    which it is appropriate to do so.  The medical evidence forms  part  of
    the totality of the evidence: Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367.   The  judge
    recognised that also but it seems to me that he did not properly  apply
    that principle because he clearly jumped to finding that these injuries
    were self-inflicted (that being the only basis upon which he might have
    been able to reject the medical evidence) but without that having  been
    put in issue by the Secretary of State.  This is an adversarial  system
    and it was for the Secretary of  State  to  raise  the  matter  if  she
    thought it appropriate in the course of  cross-examination.  Of  course
    not every matter must be cross-examined upon but if it goes to the core
    of the claim it should at least be addressed.

 7. Mr Bramble quite properly reminded me that it was open to the judge  to
    deal with the matter if he thought it appropriate.  That of  course  is
    correct but the right time to do that was during the hearing and not as
    an afterthought.  If it occurred to the judge that  there  was  a  real
    possibility on the basis of the evidence  of  the  injury  being  self-
    inflicted then the right, proper and fair thing to do would  have  been
    to bring the matter back before him in order that  the  question  could
    have been put.  That was not done.  Given that it  is  not  in  dispute
    that there is an error of law the issue for me now is whether to  remit
    the matter or remake it.  I come to the view that there is no reason to
    remit this matter to the First-tier  Tribunal.   There  are  sufficient
    findings in the decision and there is sufficient evidence before me  to
    deal with the matter.

    The remaking

 8. The Appellant has, as I have said, strong supportive  medical  evidence
    that he was tortured.  It puts him, given the interest that there would
    be, I accept, on his return within the  risk  categories  in  GS.   The
    Appellant's evidence was supportive by other evidence coming  from  Sri
    Lanka and I would observe that it may be  unfair  to  hold  against  an
    Appellant the production of evidence towards the date  of  the  hearing
    when reasonably those advising the Appellant may have taken steps which
    he, the Appellant, may not have taken himself.

 9. The bottom line in this case is that when there is no sufficient  basis
    for finding that the injuries were self-inflicted it follows  that  the
    finding has to be that  they  were  not.   Once  they  were  not  self-
    inflicted it follows from the remaining  evidence  that  the  Appellant
    falls into a risk category and that he is entitled to succeed.

10. For the avoidance of doubt all of the core of his claim, I find is made
    out.  I need say no more than that because of  the  realistic  approach
    taken by Mr Bramble to the manner in  which  I  should  deal  with  the
    matter.

Notice of Decision

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal was materially flawed and  contained
an error of law such that it is to be set aside.  I remake the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal by allowing the appeal on  asylum  grounds  and,  it
follows, also on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker           31st October 2016
