
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12999/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th May 2016                             |On 3 June 2016                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                    b i i
                         (anonymity direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Anonymity having previously been ordered  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
there being no application to remove the order, I see no  reason  to  do  so
and the order remains in  place.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

 1. The Appellant appeals, with permission from the First-tier Tribunal,  a
    decision  of  Judge  Talbot  promulgated  on  16th  March  2016.    The
    Respondent has now conceded that on  the  findings  of  the  judge  the
    Appellant is entitled to leave to remain on private life grounds  under
    paragraph 276ADE of HC  395.   In  that  context  the  grounds  in  the
    alternative complaining about the Article 8  consideration  fell  away.
    The grounds remaining before me  are  to  the  point  that  this  Iraqi
    Appellant, originating  from  Kirkuk,  should  have  succeeded  on  his
    Grounds of Appeal in relation to Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.

 2. Following AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544.   The  judge
    found that because the Appellant comes from Kirkuk he faces a real risk
    of being subjected to  indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to  serious
    harm, as per head note A 1.  The judge found that the Appellant was not
    returnable to Baghdad re head note B 2, because he has not provided the
    documentation required by the  Iraqi  authorities  i.e.  a  current  or
    expired Iraqi passport or a laissez passer.  Using the  terminology  of
    the country guidance case the judge found that the  Appellant's  return
    "is not currently feasible" [27].

 3. The judge continued to consider  whether  or  not  return  to  Baghdad,
    outwith the documentation difficulties, would give rise to a real  risk
    of persecution or serious harm. The judge found that the Appellant is a
    young healthy man from Kirkuk of Kurdish  ethnicity  who,  in  Baghdad,
    would have access to a sizeable Kurdish community so that  even  though
    he did not  speak  Arabic,  and  did  not  have  any  family  or  other
    connections in Baghdad, he could in the event of being returned  there,
    live there.  In this regard the judge  found  that  return  to  Baghdad
    would not be unreasonable or unduly harsh, nor give rise to a  risk  of
    Article 3 mistreatment, or violate Article 15(c) of  the  Qualification
    Directive.

 4. The grounds argue that the question of  internal  relocation  would  be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh because absent documentation he  would  be
    unable to access services, accommodation and a  livelihood.   In  those
    circumstances there was no viable internal relocation and the Appellant
    was entitled to humanitarian protection.

 5. AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 states in its head note:

                              "COUNTRY GUIDANCE

         Note: References to Iraq  herein  are  to  the  territory  of  Iraq
         excluding  the  autonomous  Iraqi  Kurdish  Region  ("IKR")  unless
         otherwise stated.

         A.    INDISCRIMINATE  VIOLENCE  IN  IRAQ:  ARTICLE  15(C)  OF   THE
         QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE

         1.   There is at present a state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
         certain  parts  of  Iraq,  involving  government  security  forces,
         militias of various kinds, and the Islamist group  known  as  ISIL.
         The intensity of this armed conflict in  the  so-called  "contested
         areas", comprising the governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk,  (aka
         Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah Al-din,  is  such  that,  as  a  general
         matter, there  are  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  any
         civilian returned there, solely on account of his or  her  presence
         there, faces a real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  indiscriminate
         violence amounting to serious harm  within  the  scope  of  Article
         15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

         2.   The degree of armed conflict in certain parts of the  "Baghdad
         Belts" (the urban environs around Baghdad  City)  is  also  of  the
         intensity described in paragraph 1 above, thereby giving rise to  a
         generalised Article 15(c) risk.  The parts  of  the  Baghdad  Belts
         concerned  are  those  forming  the  border  between  the   Baghdad
         Governorate and the contested areas described in paragraph 1.

         3.   The  degree  of  armed  conflict  in  the  remainder  of  Iraq
         (including  Baghdad  City)  is  not  such  as  to  give   rise   to
         indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to  such   serious   harm   to
         civilians, irrespective of their individual characteristics, so  as
         to engage Article 15(c).

         4.   In accordance with the principles  set  out  in  Elgafaji  (C-
         465/07) and QD (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2009] EWCA Civ 620, decision-makers in Iraqi cases  should  assess
         the individual characteristics of the person claiming  humanitarian
         protection, in order to ascertain whether those characteristics are
         such as to put that person at real risk of Article 15(c) harm.

         B.   DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (excluding IKR)

         5.   Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish  Region  (IKR)
         will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will be  to  Baghdad.   The
         Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P)  in  the  United
         Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of  a  current  or
         expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a laissez passer.

         6.   No Iraqi national will be returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
         possession of one of these documents.

         7.   In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)
         and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA
         Civ 1276, an  international  protection  claim  made  by  P  cannot
         succeed by reference to any alleged risk of harm  arising  from  an
         absence of Iraqi  identification  documentation,  if  the  Tribunal
         finds that P's return is not  currently  feasible,  given  what  is
         known about the state of P's documentation.

         C.   POSITION ON DOCUMENTATION WHRE RETURN IS FEASIBLE

         8.   It will only be where  the  Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the
         return of P to Iraq is feasible that the issue of alleged  risk  of
         harm arising from an absence of Iraqi identification  documentation
         will require judicial determination.

         9.   Having a Civil Status Identity Document (CSID) is one  of  the
         ways in which it is possible for an Iraqi national  in  the  United
         Kingdom to obtain a  passport  or  a  laissez  passer.   Where  the
         Secretary of State proposes to remove P by means of a  passport  or
         laissez passer, she will be expected to demonstrate to the Tribunal
         what,  if  any,  identification   documentation   led   the   Iraqi
         authorities to issue P with the passport or laissez passer  (or  to
         signal their intention to do so).

         10.  Where P is returned to Iraq on a  laissez  passer  or  expired
         passport, P will be at no risk of serious  harm  at  the  point  of
         return by reason of not having a current passport or other  current
         form of Iraqi identification document.

         11.  Where P's return to Iraq  is  found  by  the  Tribunal  to  be
         feasible, it will generally be necessary to decide whether P has  a
         CSID, or will be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after  arrival
         in Iraq.  A CSID is generally required in order  for  an  Iraqi  to
         access  financial  assistance  from  the  authorities;  employment;
         education; housing; and medical treatment.  If P shows there are no
         family or other members likely to  be  able  to  provide  means  of
         support, P is in general likely to face a real risk of destitution,
         amounting to serious harm, if, by the time any funds provided to  P
         by the Secretary of State or her agents to assist P's  return  have
         been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still  have  no
         CSID.

         12.  Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P  should
         as a general matter be able to obtain one  from  the  Civil  Status
         Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using  an  Iraqi  passport
         (whether current or expired), if P has one.  If  P  does  not  have
         such a passport, P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend on whether
         P knows the  page  and  volume  number  of  the  book  holding  P's
         information (and that of P's family).  P's ability to persuade  the
         officials that P is the person named on the relevant page is likely
         to depend on whether P has family members or other individuals  who
         are prepared to vouch for P.

         13.  P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered
         if P is unable to go to the Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  P's
         Governorate because it is in an area where  Article  15(c)  serious
         harm is occurring.  As a result of the  violence,  alternative  CSA
         Offices for Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in
         Baghdad and Kerbala.  The evidence does not  demonstrate  that  the
         "Central Archive", which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able  to
         provide CSIDs to those in need  of  them.   There  is,  however,  a
         National Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for formal
         recognition of identity.  The precise operation of this  court  is,
         however, unclear.

         D.   INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IRAQI  KURDISH
         REGION)

         14.  As a general matter, it will not  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
         harsh for a person from a contested area  to  relocate  to  Baghdad
         City or (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.

         15.  In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for
         P to relocate to  Baghdad,  the  following  factors  are,  however,
         likely to be relevant:

             (a)  whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain  one  (see
         Part C above);

             (b)  whether P can speak Arabic (those  who  cannot  are  less
         likely to find employment);

             (c)  whether P has family members or friends in  Baghdad  able
         to accommodate him;

             (d)   whether  P  is  a  lone  female  (women   face   greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);

             (e)  whether P can find a sponsor to access a  hotel  room  or
         rent accommodation;

             (f)  whether P is from a minority community;

             (g)  whether there is support available for P bearing in  mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.

         16.  There is not a real risk of an  ordinary  civilian  travelling
         from  Baghdad  airport  to  the  southern  governorates,  suffering
         serious harm en route to such governorates  so  as  engage  Article
         15(c)."

 6. I find that the grounds are no more than a  straightforward  misreading
    of AA.  Although Mr Fripp, who had not drafted the  grounds,  valiantly
    sought to persuade me that the findings in relation to those  for  whom
    return is feasible and who had  not  provided  and   could  not  obtain
    documentation, and  whom  AA  confirms  would  find  it  unduly  harsh/
    unreasonable to relocate to Bhagdad, could assist this  Appellant.  The
    argument fails to recognise the different starting points in respect of
    those in a position to establish, through factors including for example
    documentary difficulties outside of the context of the narrow issue  of
    return, a factual matrix sufficient to establish entitlement within "C"
    of the head note,   and the Appellant, who falls squarely  within  "B".
    Even for those of Kurdish ethnicity who are in "C"  there  remains  the
    issue of  possible  internal  relocation  to  the  Kurdish  areas,  not
    considered here because the consideration satisfactorily stops at  "B".



 7. Mr Fripp mooted the possibility that AA had  been  incorrectly  decided
    through a misunderstanding of the proper approach to the  earlier  case
    of HK (Iraq) but this was not an  avenue  which  he  pursued  with  any
    vigour, and I find that the position is not established.

 8. I find that the judge has made no material error in respect of  Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive and his decision in respect of the
    same stands.

 9. As mentioned above it is  now  conceded  by  the  Respondent  that  the
    judge's decision in respect of paragraph  276ADE  is  flawed  by  legal
    error and I am invited to set the decision aside on  that  ground,  and
    remake the decision allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  Immigration
    Rules 276ADE grounds.

Notice of Decision


10. The judge's decision dismissing  the  Appeal  on  Asylum,  Humanitarian
    Protection and Article  8  grounds  stands.  The  judge's  decision  on
    Immigration Rules grounds is, by consent,  flawed  by  legal  error  in
    respect of paragraph 276ADE, and I  set  the  decision  aside  on  that
    ground, and remake the decision  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  on
    Immigration Rules 276ADE grounds.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Date 3 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
