
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12395/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 2nd August, 2016                           |On 10th August, 2016          |
|Signed 4th August, 2016                       |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                    [I C]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Chandran of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
& Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of  the  Gambia  born  on  [  ]  1982.   She
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision made  on  16th  May,
    2015 to direct her removal from the United  Kingdom  after  failing  to
    accept her asylum claim.  Her appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Gribble at Birmingham on 20th April, 2016.

2.    Both  representatives  indicated  that  they  were  agreed  that   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge did contain an error  of
    law as identified in the grounds, namely that the judge failed to  take
    account of the appellant's evidence that  the  police  never  took  the
    appellant's claims  of  domestic  violence  seriously  when  they  were
    reported; she failed to give any or adequate  reasons  as  to  why  she
    arrived at the conclusion she did at paragraph 34 of the determination;
    and that she does not believe that the appellant's husband was  unaware
    of the appellant's visit to the United Kingdom. The judge  also  failed
    to demonstrate  that  before  making  findings  of  fact,  he  properly
    considered the background objective evidence submitted to him in  order
    that he could put the appellant's claim into context.

3.   Both representatives agreed that the determination should be set  aside
    and the matter remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  hearing  afresh
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Gribble.

4.   Accordingly I find errors of law as identified by  the  representatives
    and set the determination aside.  Given the length of  time  likely  to
    elapse before the matter could come back for  hearing  before  me  (and
    given that I am  sitting  part-time)  I  believe  that  it  is  in  the
    interests of justice that the matter should be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for hearing afresh  by  a  judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gribble.



Notice of Decision

I find an error of law and set aside the judge's determination.  The  matter
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh by a  judge  other
than Judge Gribble.

It is respectfully suggested that two hours should  be  set  aside  for  the
hearing of the appeal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity  under  Rule  13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

The First-tier Tribunal granted the appellant anonymity.  I  have  not  been
asked to vary that direction and accordingly it shall continue.   No  report
of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant  or
any member of the appellant's family.  This direction applies  both  to  the
appellant and to the respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
