
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12920/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 November 2016                       |On 05 December 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     SD
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, Counsel instructed by Malik and Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 1 May 1987. On 15 July
      2014 she entered the UK unlawfully and shortly thereafter, on 4 August
      2014, applied for asylum. On 21 September 2014 she gave birth to a
      daughter.


   2. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim is that she is a victim of
      trafficking who was forced into prostitution by a former boyfriend.
      She claims that if returned to Albania she would be at risk from, and
      the state would not provide sufficient protection from, both the
      trafficker and her father. The appellant's asylum application was
      refused and her subsequent appeal to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"),
      which was heard by FtT Judge Robertson, was dismissed. The appellant
      now appeals the decision of the FtT.


   3. The factual background to this appeal is not in dispute and can be
      summarised as follows:

   a. The appellant is from a traditional Muslim family. She is separated
      from her husband, who left her in 2010.


   b. In August 2013, whilst living with her parents and attending a
      seamstress course, she met a man called Artur, with whom she commenced
      a relationship and moved to Tirana against her father's wishes. Her
      father threatened to kill her because of the shame she was said to
      have caused the family.


   c. Artur forced the appellant to work as a prostitute. He was violent,
      confined her to the flat where she worked, and threatened to kill her.


   d. The appellant became pregnant (the identity of the father is not
      known).


   e. In around June 2014, Artur took the appellant to an abortion clinic.
      She escaped and was sheltered by a friend.


   f. The appellant contacted her mother who told her that she was unable to
      assist her as her father may kill her and that Artur had threatened to
      kill her family if they did not reveal where she was.


   g. The appellant went to a police station where she was treated without
      sympathy and no report was made.


   h. With the assistance of her friend's father, she left Albania through
      an agent and travelled to the UK by lorry.


   i. She has a brother in the UK who initially assisted her but has now
      distanced himself.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   4. In a decision promulgated 18 July 2016 the judge stated that neither
      the appellant's credibility nor her account had been challenged and
      that the only issue was the risk she would face and the sufficiency of
      protection she would receive on return to Albania.


   5. The judge cited the recently reported Country Guidance case concerning
      trafficked women from Albania TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016]
      UKUT 00092 (IAC) and at paragraph [13] set out the headnote in full.


   6. At paragraph [14] the judge considered the appellant's mental health,
      finding that she was depressed but not at the level of a serious
      psychiatric condition leading to particular vulnerabilities. The judge
      compared her mental health to that of the appellants in TD and AD and
      concluded that her condition was not as severe.


   7. At paragraph [15] the judge considered the appellant's relationship
      with her family, and concluded that she would not receive any support
      and assistance.


   8. At paragraph [16] the judge considered the appellant's contact with
      the police and stated:

         "I accept the attitude of the police when she approach[ed] them was
         not helpful, but I also note that she made only one attempt. I do
         not accept that this one instance should reasonably prevent the
         appellant seeking protection from the police in the future
         particularly given the implementation of the National referral
         mechanism as detailed in TD and AD."

   9. At paragraph [17] the judge considered the implications of the
      appellant having a child and found that although she would face
      discrimination she would be able to benefit from the state's reception
      and reintegration programme.


  10. At paragraph [17] the judge also considered the appellant's education
      and possibility for employment. The judge found that the appellant had
      only a basic education but because she had completed a seamstress
      course had a trade with which she could obtain employment. The judge
      stated that the appellant is now 29 and will have the maturity to
      build a life for herself and a child.


  11. The judge then concluded that there is viable support available to the
      appellant in Tirana and that she could - and would - avail herself of
      state protection.


  12. The judge also considered whether removing the appellant from the UK
      would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR and found that it would not.


Grounds of appeal and submissions

  13. The grounds argue that the judge failed to properly apply TD and AD.


  14. It is argued that the judge failed to take account of the guidance in
      TD and AD about the difficulties faced by victims of trafficking with
      little education and vocational experience or recognise similarities
      between the appellant's circumstances and those of TD in TD and AD.

  15. The grounds also argue that the judge failed to address the
      appellant's submissions about the difficulties of having an
      illegitimate daughter or take account of the practical difficulties
      she would face as a consequence after leaving a shelter, as
      highlighted in TD and AD.


  16. A further argument is made that TD and AD identifies being disowned by
      family as a characteristic indicating risk on return but the judge
      failed to "extrapolate this conclusion from her findings".


  17. At the error of law hearing, Mr Dhanji argued that the judge had
      failed to apply TD and AD comprehensively or to address the factual
      similarities between the appellants in that case and the appellant in
      this appeal. TD was a similar age with similar employment prospects to
      the appellant. Yet, in contrast to the judge in this appeal who found
      that the appellant was likely the find employment, the panel in TD and
      AD were pessimistic about TD's future and concluded that she was
      likely to end up working in the "grey economy". Mr Dhanji's argument,
      in sum, was that the judge had not properly grappled with the analysis
      in TD and AD concerning employment prospects for a returned victim of
      trafficking.


  18. Mr Dhanji also contended that the judge had failed to address that the
      appellant's circumstances, as the mother of an illegitimate child,
      were similar to those of AD in TD and AD, where the panel highlighted
      the social stigma and practical challenges AD would face as a single
      mother after leaving a shelter.


  19. Mr Singh's response was that the judge had addressed the factors in TD
      and AD and that the appellant's arguments amounted to no more than a
      disagreement with the judge's findings.


Consideration

  20. The panel in TD and AD found that in general there is Horvath standard
      sufficiency of protection in Albania for victims of trafficking but
      that it will not be effective in every case and therefore that when
      considering whether there is sufficiency of protection the particular
      circumstances must be considered.


  21. The panel in TD and AD also found that unless an individual has
      particular vulnerabilities such as physical or mental health issues,
      the option of staying in a shelter upon return "cannot be said to be
      unreasonable" and "whether it is must be determined on a case by case
      basis". They found that once a woman leaves a shelter she will face
      significant challenges and that some women will be able to manage
      without undue hardship whereas others will have "characteristics, such
      as mental illness or psychological scarring, from whom living alone in
      these circumstances would not be reasonable".


  22. The panel emphasised that whether a woman would be at risk or would
      have access to sufficiency of protection in Albania will depend on her
      individual circumstances. Relevant factors include, but are not
      limited to:

            . The social status and economic standing of her family


            . The level of education of the victim of trafficking or her
              family


            . The victim's health, particularly her mental health


            . The presence of an illegitimate child


            . The area of origin


            . Age


            . What support network will be available

  23. The focus of Mr Dhanji's argument was that the judge had not dealt
      properly with the implications of the appellant having limited
      education/qualifications and having an illegitimate child. However,
      the judge did consider these factors. At paragraph [17] the judge
      explained why she was of the view that the appellant would be able to
      obtain employment notwithstanding her limited education (she had
      completed a seamstress course) and why she would be able to cope even
      though she has an illegitimate child (it was found that she would be
      able to make use of the reception and reintegration programme and did
      not have any particular vulnerabilities). There is no inconsistency
      between these findings and the country guidance in TD and AD.


  24. Mr Dhanji argued that the judge had overlooked, or failed to properly
      take account of, the similarities between the appellant and the
      appellants in TD and AD. I do not agree.


  25. The judge's unchallenged finding about the appellant's mental health,
      as set out in paragraph [14], was that she "is depressed which can be
      worsened with stress but this is not in the realms of a serious
      psychiatric issue leading to particular vulnerabilities". This stands
      in stark contrast to the appellants in TD and AD, both of whom were
      found, on the basis of expert evidence from a clinical psychologist,
      to have mental health illness of the utmost severity that impeded
      their ability to cope and function. This finding about the TD and AD
      appellants' mental health was integral to how their individual
      circumstances were assessed. Given the difference in mental health
      between the appellant in this case and those in TD and AD any attempt
      to compare aspects of their lives, such as their capacity to find work
      or look after a child, is of limited value.


  26. What TD and AD requires is not an attempt to compare the individual
      circumstances of the appellants in that case to those of the appellant
      in this case but rather that the appellant's individual circumstances
      are properly considered. I am satisfied that this is what the judge
      has done.  It is evident from the decision that the judge has
      understood and applied the relevant Country Guidance case TD and AD.
      In accordance with that case, she has considered all of the material
      information before her about the appellant, such as her mental health,
      age, potential isolation, prospect of employment, the presence of an
      illegitimate child and her background, and based on this evidence
      reached a conclusion about appellant's risk on return. There is no
      error in the approach taken by the judge and the decision she reached
      was one that was open to her based on the evidence and a proper
      application of TD and AD.



Decision

A. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
   material error of law and shall stand.

B. The appeal is dismissed.



|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 5 December 2016               |




