
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/12300/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|on 12 October 2016              | On 14 December 2016            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                   ABIDA RAFIQ
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Imamovic instructed by Iqbal Law Chambers Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge S
        J Pacey promulgated on the 24 May 2016 in which the Judge dismissed
        the appeal against the refusal of the appellants claim  for  asylum
        or leave to remain on any other protection or human rights ground.
     2. The Judge noted at paragraph 5 of the decision under challenge:


             "The essential claim of the Appellant  is  that  if  she  were
             returned  to  Pakistan  she  would  face  ill  treatment   and
             persecution on the basis that her father wished her  to  marry
             against her wishes and that if returned she would fall  within
             a particular social group, women forced to marry.  She  claims
             that the UK  will  be  in  breach  if  its  obligations  under
             Articles 2, 3 and 8 European Convention on Human Rights if she
             were returned to Pakistan."


     3. Having considered the evidence with the required degree of  anxious
        scrutiny the Judge finds at paragraph 26:


             "The cumulative weight of the factors to which I have referred
             above, which go to the credibility of the Appellant,  is  such
             that in my judgment, adopting and  applying  the  standard  of
             proof to which I have referred earlier, I do  not  accept  the
             core account of the Appellant.  She has not  established  that
             there is a reasonable likelihood or a serious  possibility  of
             risk and she has not, then, established a  Convention  reason.
             The lack of credibility in relation to the core account  means
             that there is no question arising of internal location or risk
             on return and in consequence the claim under Articles 2 and  3
             of the Human Rights Convention must also fail."


     4. At paragraph 27 the Judge rejects the appellants claim to have been
        in a relationship akin to marriage at  any  material  time  and  at
        paragraph 30 that:


             "For the above reasons the Appellant cannot succeed under  the
             Immigration Rules in relation to "partner".  I do  not  accept
             that the parties had been living in  a  relationship  akin  to
             marriage for at least two years before the date of application
             and although there has now been a civil marriage, it does  not
             appear to me this is genuine but simply a tactical device  for
             the purposes of the appeal.  Moreover it  is  clear  that  the
             marriage took place after the  Appellant  had  overstayed  for
             more than 28 days."


     5. No exceptional circumstance  were  made  out  such  as  to  warrant
        consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules.
     6. Permission to appeal was granted on a renewed application  for  the
        following reasons:


             "Whilst the detailed grounds contain a number of points  which
             are little more than quibbles with the Judge's  assessment  of
             the evidence, it is arguable that the Judge failed to make any
             findings as to the credibility of the appellant's  sister  who
             gave oral evidence and also at para  21  unfairly  raised  the
             points against her evidence which had not been put to  her  or
             the appellant.  There had been  no  cross-examination  of  her
             sister by the HOPO.  I am  also  concerned  that  the  Judge's
             assessment of the 'genuineness' of the relationship  with  her
             partner in the UK (married by religious ceremony) is  arguably
             wrongly premised in the implausibility  of  that  relationship
             beginning shortly after she arrived and was  one  which  would
             have lead to marriage a year later"

The Grounds


     7. The challenge to paragraph 21 of the decision  under  challenge  is
        set out at paragraph 5 of the grounds. At paragraph  21  the  Judge
        finds:


             "At all material times the Appellant has been living with  her
             sister in the United Kingdom.  From answers to  questions  127
             and 128 of the asylum interview, it  appears  that  there  was
             still some contact between the sister and her family in the UK
             and the Appellants family in Pakistan.  It is, then, difficult
             to see how in her witness statement the sister would say  that
             she was no longer in contact with her father as  a  result  of
             his behaviour towards the Appellant. I acknowledge that in her
             witness statement the sister says that  "this  happened  after
             she came to the UK..."  But  it  seems  implausible  that  the
             sister would not have known about  her  fathers  attitude  and
             behaviour towards the Appellant when the Appellant arrived  in
             the United Kingdom.  After all, one of  the  reasons  why  the
             Appellant came, on her own account, was that  she  feared  for
             her life and safety at the hands of her  father.   Surely  the
             sister must have known about this when the Appellant  came  to
             the United Kingdom.  That being so it seems unlikely that  the
             sister would have continued in contact with her father."


     8. The appellant asserts this finding is based upon conjecture. It  is
        important to consider this finding in relation to the evidence as a
        whole. The appellants claim  that  her  father  was  a  strict  and
        controlling person was challenged in the reasons for refusal letter
        which also rejected the claim he was a physically  and  emotionally
        controlling person. At paragraph 21c of the refusal  letter  it  is
        written:


             "In addition to this, your sister Khalida is  also  living  in
             the UK.  You state that you live with her currently and she is
             the one who sent you the money to come to the UK.   You  claim
             that Khalida was able to travel to the UK and had an  arranged
             marriage to Saif Ali Shakir's  father,  your  brother  in  law
             Basharat Hussain.  You claim that your father is unhappy  with
             Khalida's marriage (AIR Q52). Yet you claim it was an arranged
             marriage and it is known your  sister  entered  the  UK  on  a
             spouse visa in February 2011 (AIR Q101).
             Further, your own evidence is that your  brother  in  law  and
             sister in law (Stoke) were very  much  in  contact  with  your
             father and family members in Pakistan as you were worried that
             they might tell your  family back home about your marriage  to
             Saif (AIR Q98, 127-128).  Your evidence that  Khalid  and  her
             husband  are  estranged  from   your   father   is   therefore
             inconsistent with this."


     9. It is suggested by Mr Bates that there was therefore a conflict  in
        the evidence between the appellants claim in the  asylum  interview
        that her sister was estranged from her father and family  yet  that
        there was ongoing contact between the family in  Pakistan  and  the
        appellants brother and sister in law. The explanation  provided  by
        the sister to the Judge was  not  accepted  in  paragraph  21.  The
        appellant was aware of the issue and cannot therefore claim to have
        been denied an opportunity to respond as the evidence recorded  was
        the response. The weight to be given to that evidence was a  matter
        for the Judge. It has not been  made  out  that  the  weight  given
        leading to the rejection of the explanation is arguably  irrational
        or outside the range of permissible findings.
    10. Mr Bates also drew the Tribunals  attention  to  other  information
        before the Judge which lends support to the  weight  given  to  the
        rejection of the sisters evidence by the Judge. This  includes  the
        fact that when the  immigration  authorities  visited  the  sisters
        house to look for the appellant the sister denied knowing where she
        was, even though it was discovered the appellant was  hiding  under
        the  stairs  in  the  house.  This  was   a   deliberate   act   of
        deception/denial  made  with  the  intention  of  obstructing   the
        immigration officers in the execution of their duty.
    11. The sister's witness statement does not appear in the appeal bundle
        but is in a handwritten form and dated 11 May 2016, the day of  the
        hearing, being suggestive of a document prepared very late  in  the
        day, at the last  minute.  The  sister  does  not  appear  to  have
        expanded upon the content of the statement in her oral evidence and
        its is arguable there was no need for  the  witness  to  be  cross-
        examined. The failure to do so is not an arguable  legal  error  as
        the presenting officer sought to rely upon the refusal  letter  and
        the weight to be given to  the  statement  was  a  matter  for  the
        Judge.
    12. The sister's claim to be unaware of events must also be  considered
        in light of the fact the appellant lives in the same house  as  her
        sister.
    13. The Judge has also give a number of other reasons for rejecting the
        plausibility/credibility of the appellants account,  including  the
        claim in her 2014 interview that the only reason she came to the UK
        was to study when compared to  her  current  claim  that  the  main
        reason was to escape the violence at the hands of  her  father  and
        brother [15]. It is also noted that the appellant claimed  to  have
        fled Pakistan to avoid such threats and to have arrived in  the  UK
        on 3 February 2012 on a student visa,  yet  did  not  claim  asylum
        until she was arrested on the 2 July 2014 when she  was  discovered
        hiding in her sisters  house  [13].  This  damages  the  appellants
        credibility  by  virtue  of  section  8  Asylum   and   Immigration
        (Treatment of claimants etc.) Act 2004. The appellants evidence she
        was able to study in Pakistan and teach at  a  private  school  was
        also considered to contradict her  claim  she  was  prevented  from
        having a life of her own by an oppressive father, as was the  claim
        she was able to arrange to come to the UK in secret [15].
    14. Having considered the evidence as a whole it is clear the Judge has
        given adequate reasons for the findings made. As such the weight to
        be attributed to the evidence was a matter for the  Judge.  It  has
        not been shown the adverse credibility  findings  are  outside  the
        range of findings reasonably open to the Judge on the  evidence  or
        that it they are arguably irrational or perverse.
    15. In relation to the relationship,  the  Judge  did  not  accept  the
        credibity of the claim to have lived  in  a  relationship  akin  to
        marriage for the required period to enable the appellant to succeed
        under the Rules. The finding that the parties claimed they  married
        "in order to protect the  appellant"  was  not  illustrative  of  a
        relationship akin to marriage was reasonably  open  to  the  Judge.
        Whilst it is accepted that providing protection is an integral part
        of a marital  relationship  there  is  ordinarily  more  which  the
        evidence does not show was present in this case.  The  Judge  noted
        the timescale but this was not the determinative element. The Judge
        did not find it credible that the appellant and  her  husband  kept
        the marriage secret from the appellants sister,  which  the  sister
        claimed only to have discovered when the appellant was detained  in
        July 2014, even though they all live in  the  same  household.  The
        reasons provided for this view at [19] were reasonably open to  the
        Judge on the evidence.
    16. No error of law material to the decision to dismiss the  appeal  on
        any of the pleaded grounds has been made out.  The  decision  shall
        stand.


Decision

    17. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   No anonymity direction is made.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 16 November 2016

