


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/12273/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19 October 2017                        |  On 19 October 2017             |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     F O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:      Mr Karnik, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mrs Peterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

       1. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to her protection claim.





Summary of asylum claim

       2. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Somalia who is at risk  of
          persecution by reason of her Ashraf minority clan status  together
          with the fact that she will be returned as a lone woman.

Background history

       3. The appellant arrived in the UK  and  claimed  asylum  in  January
          2010.   She  was  refused  asylum  and  her  appeal  against  that
          decision was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  in  a  decision
          dated 19 April 2010.  The  appellant  made  fresh  representations
          and in a decision dated 8 September 2015  the  respondent  refused
          her asylum claim.


       4. The appeal against this  decision  was  dismissed  in  a  decision
          dated 26 April 2017.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  accept
          much of the appellant's account and rejected her  claim  to  be  a
          Somali citizen from the  Ashraf  clan,  whose  first  husband  had
          died.

       5. In a decision  dated  13  July  2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Pitt
          granted  permission  to  appeal  observing  that  the   First-tier
          Tribunal failed to take into account, inter alia,  the  undisputed
          evidence from  the  appellant's  Somali  Ashraf  husband  and  the
          evidence that the appellant is not entitled  to  lawful  residence
          in Kenya.

       6. The respondent submitted a rule 24 notice dated 2 August  2017  in
          which it was submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings
          were open to it.

SSHD concession

       7.  At  the  beginning  of  the  hearing  I  indicated  a  number  of
          provisional concerns in  relation  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
          credibility findings.   Mrs  Peterson  agreed  that  the  decision
          findings contain  important  gaps  and  material  inconsistencies.
          She conceded that the errors of law are  such  that  the  decision
          should be set aside.  Mrs Peterson was entirely  correct  to  make
          this concession for the reasons I identify below.

Error of law discussion

       8. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  credibility  findings
          contain numerous material errors of law  such  that  the  decision
          must be set aside and remade by a  different  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge.


       9. First, the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  take  into  account  or
          provide adequate reasons  for  rejecting  important  evidence,  in
          particular:

              i) evidence from the appellant's second Somali Ashraf  husband
                 that he can  verify  that  his  wife  is  a  Somali  Ashraf
                 "because they know each  other  from  the  accent  and  the
                 dialect  and  their  culture"  -  see  [18].   Indeed,  Mrs
                 Peterson acknowledged that there are no clear  findings  of
                 fact regarding the evidence  provided  by  the  appellant's
                 second husband at all;


             ii) the appellant's own evidence that she was  told  her  first
                 husband  died  and  her  second   husband's   evidence   as
                 summarised at [19] that when they got married,  the  Sheikh
                 who conducted the service made sure the first  husband  was
                 deceased;

            iii) medical evidence that the appellant has  undergone  type  3
                 FGM, a practice more common in Somalia than in Kenya;

             iv)  the  position  of  the  appellant's  vaccination  scar  is
                 consistent with an  early  childhood  in  Somalia  and  not
                 Kenya;

              v) the conclusion of the Sprakab  report  that  the  appellant
                 speaks a variety of South Somali found in Kenya and certain
                 parts of southern Somalia, such as the Gedo area.  This  is
                 entirely consistent with the appellant's account  that  she
                 was born in the Gedo region and lived there until  she  was
                 taken to Kenya to reside in refugee camps when  she  was  4
                 i.e. in 1993, when Somalia was at civil war;

             vi) country background evidence on the  plight  of  Somalis  in
                 Kenya.

      10. Second, the First-tier Tribunal findings  contain  inconsistencies
          on two pivotal aspects of the appellant's claim.

              i) The First-tier Tribunal finds at [38] that the appellant is
                 of "Somali extraction but has lived in Kenya throughout her
                 life", yet at [39] appears to accept that the appellant and
                 her mother may have lived in Mogadishu (but went on to find
                 this does not make the appellant Somalia).


             ii) At [40] the First-tier Tribunal bases its  conclusion  that
                 the appellant will not be returned to  Somalia  as  a  lone
                 woman on the absence of evidence that her first husband  is
                 dead, yet appears to accept that the appellant has met  and
                 married and is having a baby with  her  second  husband  at
                 [44], who supports her in the UK.

      11. Third, the finding that the appellant is Kenyan and  can  lawfully
          reside there is unsupported by any evidence, save for the  Sprakab
          report, and in  any  event  inadequately  reasoned.   The  Sprakab
          report concludes that the appellant's use of language  renders  it
          equally likely that she is  from  Kenya  or  the  Gedo  region  of
          Somalia.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  finds  at  [41]   that   the
          appellant has produced no evidence that she would not be  admitted
          back into Kenya and is "therefore satisfied that she  is  Kenyan".
          The First-tier Tribunal has given no  reasons  for  rejecting  the
          appellant's evidence as supported by her second husband  that  she
          was living in Kenya on a temporary  basis  and  has  no  basis  to
          reside  there  lawfully.   No  reference  has  been  made  in  the
          findings of fact to the  country  background  evidence  supporting
          the appellant's claim.   Such  evidence  was  highlighted  to  the
          First-tier Tribunal (see by way of example [28])  but  credibility
          findings have been reached without addressing this evidence.

Conclusion

      12. When the errors identified above  are  considered  together  I  am
          satisfied   that   the   First-tier   Tribunal's   findings    are
          inadequately reasoned, and the First-tier Tribunal has  materially
          erred in law.


Disposal

      13. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant  Senior  President's
          Practice Statement and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
          findings required in remaking the decision, and  I  have  decided,
          with the agreement  of  both  representatives,  that  this  is  an
          appropriate case to remit to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   This  is
          because completely fresh findings of fact in relation to  detailed
          evidence are necessary.

Decision

      14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
          material error of law.  Its  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
          aside.

      15. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
19 October 2017

