
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/12481/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke             | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2nd June 2017                          | On 15th June 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     BH
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Crowther of Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Juss of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 10th January 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a male Afghan citizen  born  1st  January  1984  whose
    asylum and human rights claim was refused on 15th September 2015.

 3. The Appellant appealed to the FtT, and his  appeal  was  heard  on  7th
    December 2016 and dismissed on all grounds.

 4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon four grounds which are summarised below.

 5. Firstly the FtT erred by failing to take into account material evidence
    and make a finding on a material issue,  in  relation  to  the  medical
    report of Dr Sinha.  This report found  the  Appellant's  scars  to  be
    "highly  consistent  with  the  attributed  case".   The  FtT  made  no
    reference to Dr Sinha's findings as  to  scarring,  and  did  not  give
    reasons why Dr Sinha's report should not be taken into account.

 6. Secondly the FtT  erred  by  failing  to  take  into  account  material
    evidence or make a finding on a material issue, that being  the  expert
    report of Dr Guistozzi.  It was contended that the FtT  had  failed  to
    make any reference to this report, and gave no  reasoned  findings  why
    the report should be rejected.

 7. Thirdly the FtT erred by failing to take into account material evidence
    and to make a finding on a  material  issue,  that  being  the  medical
    report of Dr Winton.  This report concluded that the  Appellant's  PTSD
    was likely to lead to inconsistencies in his account.  It was contended
    that this report therefore provided a reasonable explanation for  those
    inconsistencies, but the FtT made no reference to Dr Winton's  specific
    finding that the Appellant's PTSD was likely to lead to inconsistencies
    in his account of events.

 8. Fourthly the  FtT  made  a  misdirection  in  law  when  assessing  the
    Appellant's Article  8  rights.   The  FtT  considered  whether  it  is
    reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  accompany  the   Appellant   to
    Afghanistan for him to make a  proper  application  to  re-enter.   The
    Appellant's case is that  this  is  not  the  question  which  requires
    consideration under section 117B(6), which  requires  consideration  of
    simply whether it is reasonable for a qualifying  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  No period or purpose is contained within the statutory
    test.  It is contended that the FtT did not apply the correct test, and
    failed to reach a conclusion as to whether it would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Kimnell of the FtT.

10. Following the grant of  permission  the  Respondent  did  not  lodge  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

11. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. Mr Bates conceded on behalf of the Respondent, that the FtT  had  erred
    in law as contended in the grounds seeking permission to appeal.

13. Both representatives submitted that the appropriate  course  of  action
    was to set aside the decision of the FtT with  no  findings  preserved,
    and remit the appeal back to the FtT to be considered afresh.

My Conclusions and Reasons

14. As I indicated at the hearing, I accept that the concession made by the
    Respondent is rightly made.  I find the FtT materially erred in law  as
    contended in the grounds seeking permission to appeal.

15. Having considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements I conclude that the appropriate  course  is  to  remit  this
    appeal back to the FtT to be considered afresh.  This is because of the
    nature and extent of judicial fact-finding that will be necessary,  and
    it is more appropriate that this is carried out by the FtT rather  than
    the Upper Tribunal.

16. The parties will be advised of the time and date of the hearing  before
    the FtT in due course.  The appeal is to be heard by an FtT Judge other
    than Judge Juss.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
anonymity direction is made because the Appellant has made an  international
protection claim, and is made pursuant to rule 14 of The Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Signed                              Date         6th June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The  issue  of  any  fee  award
will need to be considered by the FtT.

Signed                              Date         6th June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
