

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: AA/12205/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |   Decision & Reasons          |
|                                   |Promulgated                    |
|On 18 October 2016                 |   On 19 October 2016          |
|                                   |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL

                                   Between


                                    S M R
                         (ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr J Waithe, Counsel (instructed by Solomon
Shepherd)
For the Respondent:   Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with permission granted by Upper Tribunal
           Judge Finch on 15 September 2016 against the decision of  First-
           tier  Tribunal  Judge  Eban  made  in  a  decision  and  reasons
           promulgated on 17 June 2016 dismissing the  Appellant's  asylum,
           humanitarian protection and human rights appeals.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Rwanda, born on 20 February 1980.
            At the hearing through her  counsel  she  withdrew  her  asylum
           claim, and elected to proceed with her Articles  3  and  8  ECHR
           appeals only.  These were based respectively  on  her  ethnicity
           and imputed political opinion, and her family and private life.


      3.    The judge found that there was no Article 3 ECHR risk on return.
            The Appellant met no part of Appendix FM, whether as partner or
           parent, nor paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Her
           Article 8 ECHR claim failed  on  proportionality  grounds.   The
           judge gave extensive consideration to the best interests of  the
           Appellant's daughter in that process.


       4.   When granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Finch
           considered that it was arguable that Judge  Eban  had  erred  in
           allowing the asylum appeal to be withdrawn in that the Appellant
           claimed that her instructions had not been given.  The Appellant
           had also sought to challenge the Article 3 and 8  ECHR  findings
           which  had  been  raised  in  the  onwards  grounds  of  appeal.
           Permission to appeal was given in general terms.


      7.    The Respondent filed notice under rule 24 dated 6  October  2016
           indicating that the appeal was opposed as it had  no  substance.
           Standard directions were made by the tribunal and the appeal was
           listed for adjudication of whether or not there was  a  material
           error of law.




      Submissions


      8.    Mr Waithe for the Appellant relied on the grounds of appeal  and
           on the grant of permission to appeal by the Upper Tribunal.   He
           accepted, however,  that  he  was  in  difficulties  as  to  the
           withdrawal of the asylum claim  authorisation  issue,  as  there
           were no supporting witness statements.  As to the Article 8 ECHR
           claim, the judge had given  insufficient  consideration  to  the
           various problems which the Appellant would face if  returned  to
           Rwanda, given her unhappy experiences there  in  the  past.   It
           would not be in the Appellant's  daughter's  best  interests  to
           live in Rwanda.  The appeal should be reheard.


      9.    Mr Jarvis for the Respondent relied on the Respondent's rule  24
           notice.  He submitted that the decision and reasons disclosed no
           error of law and should stand.


      No material error of law


      10.   The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
           found no material  error  of  law  and  otherwise  reserved  its
           decision which now follows.  In the tribunal's view,  the  grant
           of permission to appeal in the Upper  Tribunal  was  excessively
           generous by a considerable margin.  The Appellant's  appeal  was
           heard before an experienced judge of the First-tier Tribunal and
           the Appellant was represented by  experienced  counsel  of  good
           standing.  No  doubt  the  possibility  of  misunderstanding  is
           always present in the heat of the courtroom, but the decision to
           withdraw the asylum element of the claim was hardly a surprising
           one, particularly as it left the Article 3  and  8  ECHR  claims
           intact.  More to the  point,  there  was  simply  no  supporting
           evidence  produced  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  either  with  the
           application or at the substantive  hearing,  to  show  that  the
           Appellant's  instructions  had  not  been  faithfully  followed.
           There  was,  in  short,  no  proper  basis  on  which  to  grant
           permission to appeal on that head.


      11.   The grant of permission to appeal under Article 3  ECHR  by  the
           Upper Tribunal was also over generous.  The decision and reasons
           demonstrates  the  most  careful  analysis  of  the  Appellant's
           evidence, much from  a  positive  credibility  perspective.   Mr
           Waite rightly did not seek to persuade the  tribunal  otherwise.
           No relevant risk factors which had not been  considered  by  the
           judge were identified.  There was no defect  in  the  Article  3
           ECHR decision.


      12.   As to the Article 8 ECHR challenge, as noted  above,  permission
           to appeal on that head was not specifically granted by the Upper
           Tribunal.  Article 8 ECHR  had,  however,  been  raised  in  the
           onwards grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  so  that
           argument was permissible.  But  the  arguments  raised  were  so
           exceedingly feeble that they  showed  that  the  Upper  Tribunal
           should also have refused permission to appeal on the  Article  8
           ECHR decision.


      13.   The judge considered every Article 8 ECHR aspect of  the  appeal
           in [30] onwards of her decision, first  in  effect  through  the
           lens of the Immigration Rules (Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE)
           and then at large on Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 principles.   It  may
           well be that, in the light of SS (Congo) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387,
           there was no need for the tribunal to go beyond the  Immigration
           Rules, in  that  no  compelling  circumstances  were  identified
           requiring such consideration.  Nevertheless, many judges  prefer
           to cover every possibility by way of cross check  and  that  can
           hardly be cause for complaint by the present Appellant.


      14.   Mr Waithe was unable to identify any relevant or  material  fact
           or matter which  the  judge  had  misunderstood  or  omitted  to
           consider when considering the Article 8 ECHR case put forward on
           the Appellant's behalf.  On the contrary, there was a meticulous
           examination of the  evidence,  clear  findings  and  a  balanced
           evaluation of proportionality.  In the tribunal's judgment,  the
           judge's decision was a comprehensive reflection on  the  various
           issues raised in the appeal.  There is no basis for  interfering
           with the judge's decision to  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal,
           which dismissal must stand.


      DECISION


      The tribunal finds that there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
original    decision, which stands unchanged


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell     19 October 2016

