
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/12452/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th August 2016                     |On 31st August 2016                  |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                              MR Koy Jonas Koy
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer, Counsel instructed by Roelens
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Ivory Coast whose  claim  to  require
    international protection was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mayall in a decision promulgated on 3rd May 2016.  The  judge  did  not
    find the Appellant to be a credible witness and therefore dismissed the
    appeal.

 2. The grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  made  irrational
    findings on the Appellant's political activity and focussed  mainly  on
    the lack of assessment of the medical evidence which it is said to be a
    "striking error"  by  the  judge.   Other  grounds  were  put  forward.
    Permission to appeal  was  initially  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Holmes but subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek in  a
    decision dated 27th June 2016.

 3. In particular Judge Kopieczek found the grounds arguable  in  terms  of
    the judge's consideration of the evidence said to  be  from  the  Front
    Populaire Ivoirien (FPI)  relied  on  in  support  of  the  Appellant's
    claimed political involvement, and also  in  relation  to  the  judge's
    consideration of the medical evidence.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 5. Mr Palmer focussed on the  grounds  allowed  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Kopieczek.  While it could be said the judge  had  given  a  number  of
    reasons for disbelieving the Appellant the fact of the matter was  that
    he had ignored other matters set  out  in  the  grounds  rendering  the
    decision unsafe; as such the decision should be set aside and  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. Mr Tarlow was without papers and had nothing to add to the decision  of
    the judge.

 7. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 8. This is a case where if the Appellant is a credible witness the  appeal
    must be allowed - see paragraph 57 of the judge's decision referring to
    the concession made by the Home Office.  In passing I should  say  that
    contrary to the grounds the judge did apply  the  correct  standard  of
    proof - see paragraphs 59 and 60 of the decision.

 9. It is also true, as said by Mr Palmer, that the judge gave a number  of
    reasons for disbelieving the Appellant.  The problem with the  decision
    is that the judge has effectively ignored the medical  evidence.   What
    the judge did note was that there was no evidence from  a  psychiatrist
    or psychologist with a diagnosis of PTSD while there was a letter  from
    his GP which suggested he was suffering from that condition.  This  was
    based largely upon his self-reported symptoms (paragraph 61).   However
    as the grounds point out the judge had before him a letter  from  South
    West London and St George's Wandsworth IAPT where it was said  that  he
    did present with features of PTSD.  In addition at the  appeal  hearing
    before the judge Counsel had  served  upon  the  court  and  Presenting
    Officer a report from Dr Lechi dated 26th January 2016  which  provided
    further details of PTSD, scarring and clinical depression.  The  report
    also confirmed the antidepressant medication he was taking and the fact
    that he had been referred to  Wolfson  Neurorehabilitation  Centre  for
    further assessment and management.  It was clear that both the  GP  and
    the psychologist believed that the Appellant needed treatment for  PTSD
    and  memory  difficulties  which  were  closely  associated  with  that
    condition.  Given those reports it was essential for the judge to apply
    anxious scrutiny to them to see whether they had played any part in the
    apparently inconsistent account given by the Appellant.  Not to  do  so
    was a material error in law.

10. I consider there is also mileage  in  the  argument  under  Grounds  of
    Appeal 2(i) namely that the judge failed to evaluate the  corroboration
    provided by Mr de Bogou. He had confirmed Mr Bayeto's signature in  his
    earlier letter where the FPI confirmed  the  Appellant's  long-standing
    membership with that organisation.  It is arguable that the  judge  did
    not give proper consideration to  this  aspect  as  this  was  also  an
    important evidential issue which required a finding.

11. However it is because of the  lack  of  findings  in  relation  to  the
    medical evidence which render this decision unsafe.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  It is not necessary at  this
stage to make an anonymity direction.


Signed                              Dated 30th August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
