
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/12057/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6 June 2017                            |On 20 June 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                    mr FS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. This case concerns both an appeal by the appellant and a  cross  appeal
    by the respondent as follows: the appellant in this case is  a  citizen
    of Afghanistan born on 15 March 1985.  In a decision  dated  27  August
    2015 the respondent refused the  appellant's  claim.   A  supplementary
    refusal letter was issued on 3 November 2016 following the provision of
    an expert report.  This  refusal  maintained  that  the  appellant  was
    excluded under Article 1F(c) grounds and under paragraph  339D(iii)  as
    there were serious grounds for believing that the  appellant  had  been
    guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles  of  the  United
    Nations.

 2. In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 20 January  2017  following  a
    hearing on 13 January 2017, Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  A  J  M
    Baldwin dismissed the appellant's appeal under the  Refugee  Convention
    and his appeal under humanitarian protection grounds as the judge found
    that the appellant  was  excluded.   However,  the  judge  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal on human rights grounds under Articles 2  and  3  on
    the  grounds  that  there  was  good  reason  for  believing  that  the
    authorities would be interested in interrogating  the  appellant  as  a
    commander within the Taliban  and  that  the  appellant  could  not  be
    expected to lie; even if he did  it  was  very  possible  that  further
    enquiries made at the time or later would suggest he should be detained
    and interrogated.  The judge went on to find at [30] that it  was  more
    than  possible  that  the  Afghan  authorities  would  need  a  lot  of
    persuading that the regular commander of that unit was not on duty that
    particular day having been persuaded to take that day off.   The  judge
    went on to find that even  if  the  appellant  was  not  of  sufficient
    adverse interest to the Taliban the appellant would be at real risk  of
    serious ill-treatment by the authorities.

 3. The appellant appealed  on  the  grounds  that  the  respondent  raised
    credibility for the first time at the hearing as a result of which  the
    appellant's representative commissioned  an  addendum  report  from  Dr
    Giustozzi which was submitted three days prior to promulgation.  It was
    stated that it was not clear if the judge received this report but that
    it should have been submitted in  line  with  SD  (Treatment  of  post-
    decision evidence) Russia [2008] UKAIT 0037.  It was argued that  there
    was procedural unfairness.

 4. The respondent cross-appealed, with permission, on the grounds that:

    (1)  it was arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  give
    legally adequate (if any) reason for its  conclusion  that  the  Afghan
    authorities would have knowledge of the appellant's involvement in  the
    Taliban and would thus be 'very interested' in interrogating him'.

 5. Following an adjourned error of law hearing on Wednesday 5  April  2017
    amended grounds were submitted by the appellant's solicitors addressing
    the handwritten note copied to the parties by the Upper Tribunal  on  5
    April 2017.  This was handwritten by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Baldwin on 20 January 2017 and addressed information received from  the
    appellant's solicitors dated 17  January  2017  including  post-hearing
    submissions, the addendum report of Dr Giustozzi and a  new  report  in
    relation to  Taliban  Making  Military  Gains  in  Afghanistan.   Judge
    Baldwin indicated as follows:

         "These docs were  received  after  I  had  determined  all  issues.
         Before issuing the determination I have read the post-hearing  docs
         and have concluded that it is not  necessary  to  have  the  appeal
         listed for further argument as the conclusions I reached would have
         been the same in relation to all of the significant  issues  had  I
         been given this information at the hearing.  It should be noted  in
         particular that plausibility is not the same  as  credibility,  the
         latter being a matter for the judge".

 6. It was argued on behalf of the appellant that it was  not  satisfactory
    for a  First-tier Tribunal Judge to supplement the reasons given  by  a
    handwritten note which was placed in the court file but not  circulated
    to the parties which did not satisfy the duty to give reasons, MK (Duty
    to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT  00641  (IAC).   It  was  further
    submitted that Judge Baldwin was obliged to consider whether  to  admit
    further evidence pursuant to the principles set out in SD (Treatment of
    post hearing evidence) and if he admitted it to consider its  relevance
    in the round and to recognise that an expert can offer factual  context
    in  which  it  may  be  necessary  for  a  fact-finder  to  survey  the
    allegations placed before him (Mibanga [2005] EWCA  Civ  367)  applied.
    Mr Neale submitted that the respondent was incorrect in her Rule 24  in
    relation to post hearing evidence and that it was significant that this
    evidence was received prior  to  promulgation.  Paragraph  27  of  E  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ  49  alluded
    to the fact that the Tribunal would be  at  liberty  to  admit  further
    evidence prior to promulgation and reminded that the  Tribunal  remains
    seized of the matter until the decision has formally been  communicated
    to the parties.  With respect to the post-decision evidence,  Mr  Neale
    submitted that the Ladd v Marshall principles were satisfied namely:

      1) whether the evidence  could  have  been  obtained  with  reasonable
         diligence for use at the hearing;

      2) whether it would probably have had an important  influence  on  the
         result;

      3) whether it is apparently credible as set out in  SD  (Treatment  of
         post-hearing evidence) Russia [2008] UKAIT 0037.

 7. Mr Neale also relied on MM (Unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT  00105
    (IAC) which he relied on as authority for the fact that even  if  there
    had been an error on his part, which he did not accept, in not bringing
    this information to the Tribunal's attention earlier this did not  mean
    that unfairness did not arise.

 8. Mr Neale accepted that it was un-contentious  that  credibility  was  a
    matter for the judge  but  that  the  judge  had  reached  plausibility
    findings based on his own view of  events  including  at  [27]  of  the
    Decision and Reasons in relation to whether it was  credible  that  the
    appellant would have been swiftly appointed  to  the  position  he  was
    which suggested he had showed himself to be a key member of the Taliban
    whereas Dr Giustozzi in his updated report stated that:

         "There are often issues among the Taliban over civilian casualties.
          It is not uncommon for commanders and fighters to resign and  quit
         the Taliban over this  issue.   In  fact  Taliban  regulations  ban
         indiscriminate killing, so Mr S's superior officer knew that  Mr  S
         could reject carrying out the attack without actually breaking  any
         Taliban rule.  So  it  is  plausible  that  the  senior  commanding
         officer might have wanted to get him temporarily out of  the  way".



 9. Mr Neale submitted that the judge had accepted that Dr Giustozzi was  a
    genuine expert but even if he did not  accept  what  he  said  then  he
    needed to say why and that there was no substitute for such reasoning.

10. At [28] of the Decision and Reasons the judge rejected the  appellant's
    assertion that he thought France had invaded Afghanistan and were alone
    and doing so whereas Dr Giustozzi's additional evidence was as follows:

         "It is absolutely clear that Taliban propaganda portrayed troops in
         Afghanistan as an occupying force.  The Taliban still describe  the
         2001 invasion as illegitimate.  The average member of the  Taliban,
         like the average villager, does not have a sophistication  to  even
         understand what a UN mandate  is.   It  is  not  uncommon  to  find
         villagers and even urban dwellers who have not realised Afghanistan
         is a republic now (the monarchy was abolished in 1973) the level of
         understanding of international politics is even lower".

    Mr Neale submitted that in this context the judge had not explained why
    a low level, largely uneducated unit commander in a rural area would be
    expected to have an understanding of the reasons for  the  presence  of
    the UN mandated troops.

11. In addition Judge Baldwin did not find it credible, at  [26]  that  the
    letter would have been delivered to the  appellant  in  the  manner  in
    which he claimed.  Mr Neale relied on the additional news article which
    indicated that although Tagab district is mainly Taliban controlled the
    relevant district centre was controlled by the government.

12. Dr Giustozzi stated that:

         "The villagers have their own arrangements for the mail to be taken
         from the district centre to them, whether in  areas  controlled  by
         the government or by the  insurgents.   Drivers  come  traders  and
         other travelling to the district centre will pick up mail and  take
         it to the villagers".

13. Mr Neale also submitted that at [26]  the  judge  was  making  Western-
    centric assumptions.  It was the appellant's contention  that  S  is  a
    tribal name and submitted that there was no adequate  reasoning  as  to
    why the judge found it odd that a leaflet  would  mention  his  Taliban
    name rather than his official name.

14. It was submitted that the judge had not taken into  account  background
    information submitted with the appellant's skeleton argument before the
    First-tier Tribunal to the effect that  many  Afghans  do  not  have  a
    surname at all.

Error of Law Discussion

Cross-Appeal

15. I am not satisfied that the Secretary  of  State  has  established  any
    material error.  The  judge set out adequate reasons  at  [30]  of  the
    Decision and Reasons which must be read  in  the  context  of  all  the
    evidence, and specifically paragraph  22  of  Dr  Giustozzi's  original
    report, which indicated that there was at real risk to someone  in  the
    appellant's circumstances.  Mr Neale submitted there was ample evidence
    before Judge Baldwin to conclude that the appellant would be identified
    on return as a former Taliban commander, notwithstanding the  issue  in
    relation to his alias.

16. I am satisfied that this must be the case; Dr Giustozzi stated  in  his
    report at paragraph 22:

         "On returning to Afghanistan, Mr S will  be  questioned  about  his
         personal background.  If Mr S lied to the police, he might be  able
         to get through unhindered.  However, Mr S's background might emerge
         later  as  explained  below.   There  is  a  real  risk  that  this
         information would be sought  and  provided,  even  arising  from  a
         routine police check.  On the basis of an interview with the police
         officer O, deployed at Kabul Airport, the following facts have been
         ascertained:

          a) a returnee who is not in possession of  his  passport,  having
             either deliberately destroyed it or having  left  the  country
             illegally, will be arrested and tried and can be sentenced  to
             up to six years of detention;

          b) an individual who is deported back to Afghanistan, but  is  in
             possession of regular passport and properly  stamped,  is  not
             guilty of any violation of Afghan laws;

          c) failed asylum seekers are identified by  their  possession  of
             documents, issued to them by the country which deported  them.
             These individuals are interrogated on  arrival,  in  order  to
             assess where they come from  and  why  they  tried  to  obtain
             asylum, what passport was used,  how  they  paid  for  travel,
             whether smugglers were used;

          d) the failed asylum seekers are also asked details  about  their
             deportation, whether they committed crimes  abroad,  how  long
             they were there, why the application for asylum was rejected;

          e) sometimes the documentation  accompanying  the  failed  asylum
             seeker includes information about crimes committed abroad;  in
             such cases checks are made about  whether  the  failed  asylum
             seeker was jailed for his crime and spent his whole  sentence;
             if yes he would be released and allow to go home,  if  not  he
             would be detained and sent to court;

          f) checks are made whether the failed asylum seeker is wanted  in
             Afghanistan for crimes committed there;

          g) most failed asylum seekers arrested on arrival  in  Kabul  are
             jailed because of having destroyed their own  passport  or  in
             any case having left the country illegally;

          h) if the failed asylum seeker found to  be  clean,  he  will  be
             issued a new Tazkira and allowed to go free;

          i) Checks are made to verify the identity of the returning failed
             asylum seeker.  Sometimes  cross  checks  are  made  with  the
             embassy of the deporting country;

          j) individuals trying to enter the country without  documentation
             are all imprisoned and sent to court."

17. Dr Giustozzi went on to set out at paragraph 23 of his original  report
    that arrests are often  carried  out  on  the  basis  of  the  slimmest
    evidence including where the suspect was  apprehended  because  of  the
    ringtone on his mobile.

18. The judge set out in some detail the  evidence  before  him,  including
    summarising Dr Giustozzi's report  at  [20].   It  must  be  the  case,
    reading the decision as a whole, that Judge Baldwin had that background
    information and Dr Giustozzi's report in mind  (including  that  checks
    are made to verify identity and that arrest  are  carried  out  on  the
    slimmest of evidence) when he made the specific  findings  he  did,  at
    [30], that there was good reason for believing the authorities would be
    interested in  interrogating  the  appellant  and  crucially  that  the
    appellant could not  be  expected  to  lie  which  is  a  non-contested
    principle.  I therefore find no material error of law disclosed in  the
    judge's findings on Articles 2 and 3.

The Appellant's Appeal

19. I am further not satisfied that any error of law is  disclosed  in  the
    judge's decision dismissing the appellant's protection claim, such that
    it should be set aside.

20. In relation to the additional  evidence  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant after the hearing and prior to promulgation of the decision I
    am far from satisfied that the new material passes the Ladd v  Marshall
    test.  Even if I were to accept  that  it  could  not  have  previously
    obtained with due diligence I am not satisfied, as  Judge  Baldwin  was
    not, that it would have had an important influence on the result.

21. Although it might have been preferable had Judge Baldwin, for  example,
    invited further submissions or set out his addendum note in the  actual
    decision, any error in not doing so cannot be material, I am  satisfied
    that there was not even a minimal possibility that  the  outcome  could
    have been different due to the totality of the judge's finding.

22. It  was  accepted  that  the  appellant  served  with  the  Taliban  in
    Afghanistan.  However, the judge properly directed  himself  that  even
    though this was accepted there were a number of issues that  needed  to
    be examined.

23. The judge went on at [25] to find that:

         "He has claimed the Taliban knew he  would  never  partake  in  any
         attack on civilians but I find  it  implausible  that  the  Taliban
         command would have appointed him to command a unit  so  quickly  if
         they had any doubts about his willingness to obey  their  commands.
         In his statement he claims that the only fighting in which  he  was
         ever involved was when they were attacked but this assertion I find
         at best to be  disingenuous  because  he  made  it  clear  that  he
         commanded attacks of troops  by  setting  up  ambushes  of  them  -
         (question 61).  The appellant also claims  that  he  believed  that
         Afghanistan had  been  invaded  by  France  and  it  was  therefore
         'exactly the same' as when they had been invaded by Russia.  I find
         that his assertion in this respect not credible, not least  because
         in his asylum interview he made it clear that  whilst  the  foreign
         forces were mainly French,  'there  would  be  other  nationalities
         too'.  His claim at the same time that he only ever  fired  in  the
         direction of those they were ambushing and he does not know whether
         his shots ever killed anyone, I  also  find  incredible.   Were  he
         claiming he had only ever been involved in a single short skirmish,
         that might well be credible, but the idea that he would  have  been
         engaged in combat duties for around five  years  and  had  no  idea
         whether he had ever killed anyone is simply not credible."

24. A reading of the judge's findings in their entirety  demonstrates  that
    his finding, that the exclusion  clause  under  1F  applied,  was  made
    specifically in relation  to  the  appellant's  actions  as  an  active
    fighter for around five years.  Much was made by Mr Neale  in  relation
    to Dr Giustozzi's plausibility indications, including that  there  were
    often issues among the Taliban over civilian  issues  and  it  was  not
    uncommon for commanders and fighters  to  quit,  and  that  it  was  Dr
    Giustozzi's opinion that it was plausible  that  the  senior  commander
    might have wanted to get him temporarily out of the way.  However  this
    was not material given the judge's findings at [28] that:

         "whether or not he commanded them on the day his unit  launched  an
         attack at the  market  in  2009,  the  fact  is  that  his  claimed
         disapproval was not such as to cause him to  make  arrangements  to
         leave the Taliban at or shortly after that attack.  Indeed, it  was
         from that year that he had assumed  and  maintained  control  of  a
         greater number of soldiers.  It was another  2.5  years  before  he
         claimed he left.  The appellant may not  have  been  a  high  level
         commander within the Taliban but he was  no  foot  soldier  and  he
         served for several years as a  commander  of  a  small  unit  which
         carried  out  ambushes  on  troops  acting  on  a  UN  remit.   The
         suggestion that he did not know of this remit is,  I  find,  wholly
         lacking in credibility, as is his assertion that he believed it was
         purely a French invasion of his country".

25. Therefore it is immaterial whether it was plausible or  otherwise  that
    the appellant could have effectively been  picking  and  choosing  what
    commands he would have undertaken and that the Taliban would  therefore
    have chosen not to  ask  him  to  do  things  which  might  offend  his
    sensibilities (which the judge found did not sit well  with  his  swift
    appointment to  the  command  some  of  the  men).   In  any  event  Dr
    Giustozzi's opinion does not address the judge's findings,  which  were
    open to him, that someone who was swiftly appointed to command did  not
    sit well with someone who would then pick and choose  what  they  might
    do.  Indeed I note that Dr Giustozzi's opinion  was  that  it  was  not
    uncommon for commanders and fighters to "resign and  quit  the  Taliban
    over this issue".  However, as noted above at [28] of the Decision  and
    Reasons the judge went on to specifically find that the  appellant  did
    not leave the Taliban and indeed assumed and maintained  control  of  a
    greater number of soldiers and remained for  another  two  and  a  half
    years.  In these circumstances there can be no material  error  in  the
    judge's findings.

26. In addition, the judge's findings in relation to the implausibility  of
    the Taliban appointing him to a command unit so quickly if they had any
    doubts about his willingness to obey their commands is also a  somewhat
    separate issue from that addressed  by  Dr  Giustozzi  in  relation  to
    Taliban fighters resigning and quitting the  Taliban  over  this  issue
    which the appellant clearly did not.

27. In relation to the  issue  of  the  appellant  believing  that  he  was
    fighting the French again, Dr Giustozzi stated that Taliban  propaganda
    portrayed foreign trips in Afghanistan as an occupying force  and  that
    the average member of the Taliban and the average villager did not have
    sophistication to understand what a UN mandate was.  However the  judge
    set out, and explored fully, the evidence and was fully  aware  of  the
    appellant's background and his circumstances.

28. The judge considered, at [25], the  appellant's  claim  that  the  only
    fighting in which he was ever involved was when they were attacked, but
    the judge found this to be disingenuous at best as  the  appellant  had
    made clear that he commanded attacks of troops by setting  up  ambushes
    and this finding was not substantively challenged.  The judge also gave
    adequate reasons for finding at [25] that the appellant's claim that he
    believed Afghanistan had  been  invaded  by  France  and  that  it  was
    therefore"exactly the same" as when they had been invaded by Russia was
    not credible not least because in his asylum interview he made it clear
    that whilst the foreign forces were mainly  French  "there  were  other
    nationalities too".

29. The judge therefore made  negative  credibility  findings  against  the
    appellant for the detailed and careful reasoning  he  gave.   The  fact
    that Dr Giustozzi indicates that the average member of the Taliban  did
    not have the sophistication to understand the UN mandate does not  come
    close  to  addressing  the  appellant's  inconsistency  and   lack   of
    credibility including in  relation  to  the  foreign  forces  including
    "other nationalities too",  which  the  judge  records  (at  [18])  the
    appellant subsequently denied in oral evidence stating that "no  troops
    from any other countries were involved in our area or elsewhere to  our
    knowledge".

30. In addition there was no substantive  challenge  made  to  the  judge's
    finding that it was not credible that the appellant stated he only ever
    fired in the direction of those they were ambushing and does  not  know
    whether shots killed anyone.

31. In not being satisfied that there is an error of law, I have also taken
    into account the issue raised in relation to  the  judge's  finding  at
    [26], that the way in which the letter which required him to report  is
    said to have been delivered was "very  odd  as  it  would  seem  highly
    unlikely the authorities would simply go up to someone  in  the  market
    and ask them to deliver a letter to someone  known  or  believed  to  a
    member of the Taliban."   Again  Dr  Giustozzi's  addendum  report  was
    relied upon, where he stated that there were difficulties with the post
    in Afghanistan and that most families do not  use  the  mail  and  that
    villagers have their own arrangements for the mail to be taken from the
    district centre to them, whether in areas controlled by the  government
    or by insurgents and that drivers, traders and others travelling to the
    district centre will pick up mail and take it to the villages; however,
    this does not address the  judge's  central  finding  that  there  were
    difficulties in accepting that someone would  be  asked  to  deliver  a
    letter, such as this requiring the appellant to report, to a member  of
    the Taliban.  Dr Giustozzi's comments in relation to post in general do
    not address this issue and could not make any material difference.

32. It was also submitted that the judge failed to take adequate account of
    the evidence attached to the skeleton  background  evidence  that  many
    Afghans do not have a surname at all and that the appellant had  stated
    in his witness statement that his tribal name was S and that was why he
    had taken this name in the UK whereas he is known in his village by the
    Taliban name of Mukhlis.  The judge found it very odd  that  a  leaflet
    dropped on the general public would  mention  the  appellant's  Taliban
    name rather than his official name.  At paragraph [26] of the  decision
    however what was not challenged by the appellant was that this was also
    inconsistent with the appellant's assertion at his screening  interview
    [1.3] that he had never used an alias and that given  that  he  claimed
    the Taliban generally provided a different family name to make it  more
    difficult for them to be identified by non-Taliban it was  odd  that  a
    leaflet would mention his Taliban name rather than his official name.

33. The judge correctly directed himself in relation to Al-Sirri  (FC)  and
    DD (Afghanistan) (FC) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 54  where  the  Supreme  Court
    held that Article 1F must be interpreted restrictively and applied with
    caution and there should be a high threshold and  serious  reasons  for
    considering that the person or individual responsibility  for  acts  of
    the character required.  An attack on ISAF is in principle  capable  of
    being an act contrary to the purposes and principles of the UN.

34. The judge made more than sufficient and adequate findings  in  relation
    to Article 1F and I am not satisfied there is  any  unfairness  in  him
    failing to explicitly  explain  in  his  decision  why  Dr  Giustozzi's
    addendum report would not have had an important influence on the result
    and that his conclusions would have been the same in  relation  to  all
    the significant issues.  It was not  necessary  to  reach  findings  on
    every item and the judge made no material  error  in  not  specifically
    addressing in writing what was a minimal issue and would not have  made
    any material difference.

35. In a well-reasoned decision Judge Baldwin took great care in making his
    findings and in reaching the decision he did and  it  is  not  arguable
    that the additional evidence could have had an important  influence  or
    made a material different to  those  comprehensive  findings  including
    significant negative credibility findings.

Summary

36. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  a  material
    error of law and shall stand.  The appeal  by  the  appellant  and  the
    cross-appeal by the respondent are both dismissed.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  16 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee application was sought or is made or indeed was paid or payable.






Signed                                  Date:  16 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


