
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/12320/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 August 2016                    |On 19 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                    T R J
                         (ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Vatish, Counsel (instructed by A2 Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS







    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with permission granted by Upper Tribunal
         Judge Kebede on 2 June 2016  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Frazer made in a decision and reasons promulgated on
         14 March  2016  dismissing  the  Appellant's  asylum,  humanitarian
         protection and human rights appeals.

    2.     The Appellant had claimed to be an undocumented Kuwaiti  Bidoon.
         The Respondent had asserted that the Appellant  was  Iraqi.   Judge
         Frazer set out the Appellant's case at  [2]  of  his  decision,  to
         which the tribunal refers, and which need  not  be  repeated  here.
         Judge Frazer found that the Appellant was not at all credible.   At
         [50] he found that he was not an undocumented Bidoon.  At  [51]  he
         found that the Appellant was not at risk of persecution if returned
         to Kuwait, and was not  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  for
         similar reasons.  At [52] the judge found that  the  Appellant  was
         not at risk of treatment contrary to Articles 2  and  3  ECHR,  nor
         would there be a disproportionate interference with his  Article  8
         ECHR  rights,  if  returned  to  Kuwait.    Thus  the  appeal   was
         dismissed.

    3.     Permission to appeal was initially  refused  in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.  When  granting  permission  to  appeal  on  the  renewed
         application, Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede considered that there  was
         no arguable  merit  in  the  attempted  challenge  to  the  judge's
         credibility findings,  nevertheless  it  was  arguable  that  Judge
         Frazer  had  failed  to  resolve  the  issue  of  the   Appellant's
         nationality.

    4.     The Respondent filed notice under rule 24  dated  23  June  2016
         indicating that the appeal was opposed.  The  Appellant  had  never
         claimed any fear of return to Iraq.  His case was based on fear  of
         return to Kuwait and the judge had given  sustainable  reasons  for
         finding against him.

    5.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal and the appeal was
         listed for adjudication of whether or  not  there  was  a  material
         error of law.

    Submissions

    6.     Mrs Vatish for the Appellant relied on the grounds of appeal and
         on the grant of permission to appeal by the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
         judge had misunderstood the Appellant's  case.   The  judge  should
         have dealt with the Iraqi passport/nationality issue  but  had  not
         done so.  That was a material error of law.  The judge had accepted
         that the Appellant had a fair knowledge of Kuwait and  had  reached
         contradictory or unclear findings.   The  decision  should  be  set
         aside.

    7.     Miss Ahmed for the Respondent relied on the Respondent's rule 24
         notice.  The decision and reasons disclosed no error of  law.   The
         determination showed that the judge found that  the  Appellant  was
         Kuwaiti and could be returned there.

    No material error of law

    8.     The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
         found no error of law and reserved its decision, which now follows.
          The current country background evidence concerning Kuwait was  not
         in dispute before Judge Frazer. The Appellant's  appeal  turned  on
         his  credibility  and  that  was  found   entirely   wanting,   for
         sustainable reasons which need not be repeated here.

    9.     No doubt it might have been an advantage for the judge  to  have
         stated his decision  on  nationality  in  clearer  terms,  but  the
         reality was that the Appellant had relied on a fear  of  return  to
         Kuwait and  nationality  was  effectively  subsidiary.   The  judge
         addressed that  fear  in  detail  and  disbelieved  the  Appellant,
         comprehensively.  The  Sprakab  report  showed  the  Appellant  was
         Kuwaiti: see [36] of the determination.   The necessary implication
         of finding that the Appellant could be returned to  Kuwait  without
         any form of real  risk  was  that  he  was  Kuwaiti  or  habitually
         resident in Kuwait and  so  returnable  there.   That  finding  was
         sufficient to resolve the Appellant's appeal and no further finding
         was needed.

    10.    The tribunal finds that there was no error of law.  There is  no
         basis for interfering with the  judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the
         Appellant's appeal, which dismissal must stand.

    DECISION

    The tribunal finds that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    original decision, which stands unchanged




    Signed                             Dated 18th August 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


