
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/12495/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 August 2016                    |On 23 August 2016                    |
|Prepared on 22 August 2016           |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. R.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  illegally  and  claimed
         asylum on 6 May 2009. That application was refused on 5 June  2009,
         and a decision to remove him was made in consequence.

      2. The Appellant's appeal to the Tribunal  against  those  immigration
         decisions was first heard and dismissed on 22 July 2009.

      3. The Appellant has since made a series of further submissions, which
         were rejected. On 22 September 2015 a further decision was made  to
         refuse leave to remain in the UK and to remove him. A  s120  notice
         was served with that decision, and the Appellant's  appeal  against
         that decision was then heard, and dismissed on asylum grounds,  but
         allowed on Article 8 grounds by decision  of  First  Tier  Tribunal
         Judge Handley promulgated on 2 May 2016.

      4. The  Respondent's  application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal was granted by Judge Pedro  on  26  May  2016.
         Thus the matter comes before me.

    Error of Law?

      5. The Appellant has offered no challenge to the Judge's decision that
         his return to Iraq was feasible, and could be  effected  without  a
         breach of his Convention rights, or his Article 3 rights.

      6. For her part the Respondent has offered no challenge to the Judge's
         decision upon whether it was reasonable to expect  the  Appellant's
         partner and child to  relocate  to  Iraq.  They  are  both  British
         citizens,  and  the  Judge  concluded  [42]  that   it   would   be
         unreasonable to expect them to do so. The Judge also accepted  that
         the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  his
         child [39].

      7. Whilst the Judge made no express reference to s117B(6) of the  2002
         Act,  the  decision  does  therefore  contain  the  two   necessary
         constituent elements for the statutory conclusion that  the  public
         interest does not  require  the  Appellant's  removal.  Mr  McVeety
         accepted that this was the case, and that the conclusions  set  out
         in the President's  decision  in  Treebhawon  and  others  (section
         117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 applied. He accepted that it followed that
         the grounds disclosed no material error of law.

      8. In the circumstances the Judge did not make any material  error  of
         law in his decision to  allow  the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds
         outside the Immigration  Rules,  and  the  Respondent's  appeal  is
         dismissed.

    DECISION

    The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 3  May
    2016 did not involve the making of an error of law in the  decision  to
    decision to allow the Appellant's appeal  on  Article  8  grounds  that
    requires that decision to be set aside and remade.

    The  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  asylum  and   humanitarian
    protection grounds, but to allow the appeal on  Article  8  grounds  is
    accordingly confirmed.


Signed




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 22 August 2016


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.


Signed




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 22 August 2016

