
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12736/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th May 2016                             |On 3rd June 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     VV
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Rothwell, Counsel instructed by Birnberg Peirce
& Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Robison promulgated on 25 February  2016  in  which  she
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.
 2. As this  is  an  asylum  case  I  have  made  an  anonymity  direction,
    continuing that made in the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as it was considered arguable that the
    judge may not have sufficiently factored in that the  psychiatrist  had
    other medical reports before him and was not just going on what he  had
    been told by the Appellant.


 4. I heard  submissions  from  both  representatives,  following  which  I
    reserved my decision which I set out below with reasons.


Submissions


 5. Ms Rothwell relied on the grounds of appeal.  She  submitted  that  the
    judge had not made a clear finding as to whether the  Appellant  was  a
    vulnerable witness and, if so, whether such vulnerability affected  the
    quality of his evidence.  I was referred to paragraph [26] of the  case
    of JL (China) [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC).  It was incumbent upon the judge
    to apply the guidance.  The Appellant was a vulnerable  person  and  to
    fail to acknowledge this was a material error of law.


 6. In relation to the treatment of the medical report of Dr. Dhumad, I was
    referred to paragraph 10.5 of Dr.  Dhumad's  report.   There  had  been
    evidence before Dr. Dhumad that the Appellant had being diagnosed  with
    PTSD by Dr. Wright in January 2015.  I was referred to the letter  from
    Dr. Wright dated 30 March 2015 which referred to a  diagnosis  of  PTSD
    (page 48 of the Appellant's bundle).


 7. The screening and asylum interviews had taken place in  December  2014,
    yet the Appellant had not been diagnosed with,  or  treated  for,  PTSD
    until January 2015.  The judge had not taken this into account.  I  was
    referred to paragraph 17.12 of Dr.  Dhumad's  report.   The  judge  had
    placed much weight on the fact that the Appellant had  given  only  the
    core of his case at interview and had expanded on it in his  statement.
    Dr. Dhumad had said that  there  would  be  a  difference  between  the
    information given at interview and that given in  his  statement.   The
    Appellant would not have given such a full account to the Respondent as
    to his own solicitors.  She submitted that it was not  clear  how  much
    time the Appellant had spent with his solicitors.   For  the  judge  to
    rely on the screening and asylum interviews was an error of law and she
    ought to have taken into account the diagnosis of PTSD.  I was referred
    to paragraph 17.6 of Dr.  Dhumad's  report  which  indicated  that  the
    Appellant was re-traumatised when he came to  the  United  Kingdom  and
    again when his father was detained, which had affected his PTSD.


 8. Ms Rothwell submitted that the judge had not  taken  into  account  the
    reports of Dr. Wright (page 48), Dr. Brady (page 50) or  the  therapist
    (page 51).  The fact that this evidence had been before Dr. Dhumad  had
    not been taken into account in her assessment of Dr.  Dhumad's  report.
    The judge had found that Dr. Dhumad had believed  everything  that  the
    Appellant had told him, but in paragraph 17.7 of Dr. Dhumad's report he
    dealt in detail with the  fact  that  the  Appellant  could  have  been
    fabricating his story.  In paragraph 17.8 he stated that  it  would  be
    inconceivable that  an  experienced  examiner  could  be  so  massively
    deceived by fabrications.


 9. The judge had found it difficult to reconcile the Appellant's  diaspora
    activities with his PTSD.  She  submitted  that  in  other  psychiatric
    reports, medical professionals had often told people in the Appellant's
    position to get involved with other activities.


10. She raised a further ground of appeal, to which  Mr.  Kandola  did  not
    object, and which I accepted, in  relation  to  the  treatment  of  the
    Appellant's father's witness statement.  This is addressed by the judge
    in paragraph [94].  She submitted that the judge decided that she could
    not place weight on this statement because, since the Appellant was not
    credible, neither was his father.  The father's witness  statement  was
    detailed, and the decision  did  not  deal  with  it  adequately.   She
    submitted that the judge had made up her mind about the credibility  of
    the Appellant and that of his  father  prior  to  taking  the  father's
    statement into account.  The judge should have looked at this statement
    alongside the other evidence, but  instead  she  had  focused  on  what
    evidence the Appellant could have obtained, for example from a  lawyer.




11. In reference to the first ground, Mr. Kandola referred me to paragraphs
    [13], [36], [75]-[78] and [87].  He submitted that the judge was  aware
    that the Appellant should be treated as a vulnerable witness,  and  was
    aware of the guidance.  However, at paragraph [79], the judge had found
    that the case turned on credibility owing to the glaring change in  the
    nature of the case between the interview  and  the  witness  statement.
    Paragraph [87] of the decision reflected this  radical  change  to  the
    Appellant's case.  He submitted that it was  clear  from  the  decision
    that the judge knew that she had been asked to take  the  vulnerability
    of the Appellant into account but found that this did not  account  for
    the radical change in the Appellant's case before the Tribunal.


12. In relation to the second ground I was referred to  paragraph  [35]  of
    the  decision.   The  judge  stated  that  Dr.  Dhumad's  opinion   was
    corroborated by other medical professionals.  It  was  clear  that  the
    judge knew that Dr. Dhumad's report was predicated on  the  reports  of
    the other medical practitioners.  He submitted that the judge  did  not
    need to put this under  the  heading  of  'Findings'  and  it  was  not
    incumbent on her to recite all of the evidence.   The  expert  evidence
    had been considered  properly.   I  was  referred  to  paragraph  [91].
    Adequate reasons had been given when dealing with the expert report.


13. In relation to  the  Appellant's  father's  statement,  the  judge  had
    acknowledged it in paragraph [94].  She had given two reasons  for  not
    accepting it in the context of other  concerns.   She  had  noted  that
    other evidence, for example from a lawyer, could be more objective.  In
    summary he submitted that the grounds were no more than a  disagreement
    with the findings of the judge.


14. In response Ms Rothwell submitted that the judge had not made a finding
    regarding whether or not the Appellant  was  a  vulnerable  witness  in
    accordance with JL.  I was referred to paragraph 4.1 of  the  screening
    interview where the Appellant had been told not to go into detail.  The
    asylum interview was fairly detailed.  Dr.  Dhumad  had  said  that  it
    would not be expected that the Appellant would give a full  account  in
    an interview situation.  The interview had lasted from 1:26pm to 5:10pm
    and the Appellant had had a headache during this time because of having
    to give this evidence.  She submitted that there was an error of law in
    dealing with the interview versus the statement.


Error of Law


Ground 1


15. While the judge acknowledges  that  it  has  been  submitted  that  the
    Appellant is a vulnerable witness, for example in paragraphs  [13]  and
    [36], there is no clear  finding  in  the  "Findings  and  conclusions"
    section (paragraph [72] onwards) that the  Appellant  is  a  vulnerable
    witness and that his evidence will be treated  differently  because  of
    this.  The judge mentions the guidance when recording  the  submissions
    [36], but there is no indication in the findings  that  she  has  taken
    this guidance  into  account  when  considering  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant.


16. JL states in paragraph [26] that "it is incumbent on a  Tribunal  judge
    to apply the guidance given in the Joint Presidential Guidance Note  No
    2 2010, Child, Vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant guidance."   It
    then quotes paragraphs 14 and 15 of the guidance.


         "14. Consider the evidence, allowing for possible different degrees
         of understanding by witnesses and appellant compared to  those  who
         are  not  vulnerable,  in  the  context  of  evidence  from  others
         associated with the appellant and the  background  evidence  before
         you. Where there were clear discrepancies  in  the  oral  evidence,
         consider the extent to which the age, vulnerability or  sensitivity
         of the witness was an  element  of  that  discrepancy  or  lack  of
         clarity.


         15. The decision should record whether the Tribunal  has  concluded
         the appellant (or a witness) is a child, vulnerable  or  sensitive,
         the effect the Tribunal considered the identified vulnerability had
         in assessing the evidence before it and thus whether  the  Tribunal
         was satisfied whether the appellant had established his or her case
         to the relevant standard of proof. In asylum appeals, weight should
         be given to objective indications of risk rather  than  necessarily
         to a state of mind."


17. JL continues in paragraph [26]: "Whilst in [14] above the focus  is  on
    oral evidence, it is clear from [15] and the guidance read as  a  whole
    that the same approach should inform assessment of discrepancies in the
    written record."  In paragraph [27] it refers to the need for the judge
    to acknowledge whether  any  differences  could  be  explained  by  the
    Appellant being a vulnerable person.


18.  It  is  not  clear  that  what  is  set   out   in   the   Appellant's
    representative's submissions has been accepted by the judge, and  is  a
    finding.  It is clear from the decision that the judge has set out  the
    submissions  in  some  detail  before  moving  to  her  "findings   and
    conclusions".  She does not  refer  back  to  the  submissions  in  the
    "findings and conclusions".


19. In paragraph [75] the judge states that the case turns on an assessment
    of credibility.


         "I was conscious too that Ms Walker has asked, again on  the  basis
         of the medical reports, for  the  appellant  to  be  treated  as  a
         vulnerable witness and that no adverse inference  should  be  drawn
         from his failure to give evidence, and  in  any  event  that  place
         [sic] too much weight  should  be  placed  on  any  inconsistencies
         revealed in the documents lodged."


20. This does not constitute a finding  that  the  judge  is  treating  the
    Appellant as  a  vulnerable  witness.   It  paragraph  [76]  the  judge
    addresses the inconsistencies in the evidence  and  in  paragraph  [77]
    sets out the explanation for these inconsistencies,  without  making  a
    finding that the explanation accounts for these  inconsistencies.   The
    same is the case in paragraph [78].


21. In paragraph [79] the judge states:


         "I considered that, even if I place little weight on  what  may  be
         described as more minor inconsistencies, at the core of  this  case
         is the appellant's claim to have  come  to  the  attention  of  the
         authorities in 2014 because of his renewed connection with LTTE and
         specifically with those seeking to lead a revival of the movement."


22. There is no  reference  in  this  paragraph  to  attaching  limited  or
    different weight to the  inconsistencies  because  of  the  Appellant's
    vulnerabilities.  Indeed, at the end of  this  paragraph,  contrary  to
    placing limited weight on these inconsistencies, the judge states:


         "I attach particular weight to these omissions because they  go  to
         the heart of the appellant's claim to have come to the authorities'
         attention in 2014 and in explaining the reasons why he fled".


23. I find that the judge attaches "particular  weight"  to  the  omissions
    without referring to the Appellant's vulnerability, or to the fact that
    Dr. Dhumad had set out in his report that the Appellant was  likely  to
    give more evidence to his own solicitors in a less stressful  situation
    than he would have given at  either  his  screening  interview  or  his
    asylum interview.  "On the basis of my examination of him and  what  he
    told me, I am convinced that he would not be able to face the stress of
    being  asked  to  give  evidence  and  answer  questions,  particularly
    questions about his traumatic experiences in Sri Lanka" (17.12).   This
    is exactly what the Appellant was being  asked  to  do  in  his  asylum
    interview yet no reference is made to Dr. Dhumad's report.  I find  the
    failure of the judge to make any conclusion as to whether  or  not  the
    Appellant should be treated as a vulnerable witness, and the failure to
    treat the evidence accordingly, is a material error of law.


Ground 2

24. In relation to the second ground and  the  treatment  of  Dr.  Dhumad's
    report,  when  setting  out  the   submissions   of   the   Appellant's
    representative,  the  judge  states  that  Dr.  Dhumad's   opinion   is
    corroborated by treating practitioners ([35]), but  as  above,  I  find
    that this is a record of the submissions, not a finding.  There  is  no
    reference in paragraph [91] to the fact that, prior  to  his  interview
    with  the  Appellant,  Dr.  Dhumad   had   sight   of   other   medical
    practitioners' reports which had already  diagnosed  PTSD.   The  judge
    states:


          "It appeared that Dr Dhumad  did  not  have  the  benefit  of  any
         medical reports relating to the appellant's  physical  health,  and
         that his conclusion was based,  with  the  benefit  of  his  expert
         experience, on what he had been told by the Appellant."


25. I find that as significant  as  the  benefit  of  any  medical  reports
    relating to the Appellant's physical health, are those reports relating
    to his mental health.  These are referred to in paragraph [35], but  it
    cannot be inferred that paragraph  [35]  has  been  subsumed  into  the
    findings in paragraph [91].  There is no reference to the fact  that  a
    diagnosis of PTSD had been made independently some  months  before  Dr.
    Dhumad's interview.


26. It is clear that the Appellant had given an account to Dr. Dhumad,  but
    this was in the context of Dr. Dhumad being aware  that  the  Appellant
    had already been diagnosed with PTSD.  In paragraphs 17.7 and 17.8  Dr.
    Dhumad  considered  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  could  have  been
    fabricating his claim.  I find that he did not believe everything  that
    he was told by the Appellant, but examined whether or not what  he  was
    being told was because of fabrication by the Appellant before him.


27. I find that the failure to give more weight to the report of Dr. Dhumad
    given that it had been written not only on the basis of  the  interview
    with the Appellant, but also with the benefit of  evidence  from  other
    medical practitioners, and given that  he  expressly  considered  other
    causes, is a material error of law as it affects the findings as to the
    Appellant's credibility.


Ground 3


28. I have considered the Appellant's father's witness statement which sets
    out what had happened since the Appellant left Sri Lanka.  I find  that
    paragraph [94] does not deal adequately with this  statement.   Instead
    of considering it in the round, the judge made her finding  as  to  the
    Appellant's credibility and, simply on the basis  that  she  found  the
    Appellant not to be credible, she found  that  his  father's  statement
    could not be relied on either.  I  find  that  the  judge  should  have
    considered all of the evidence in the round  and,  instead  of  finding
    that the Appellant could have obtained more evidence, she  should  have
    taken into account the evidence which was before her.   This  statement
    corroborates the Appellant's claim, but no weight is given to it at all
    on the basis of a credibility finding which is  in  itself  flawed  for
    failure to take into account the vulnerability of  the  Appellant,  and
    the failure to attach weight to the report of Dr. Dhumad.


29. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, and having regard to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision


30. I find that the decision involves the making of a material error of law
    and I set the decision aside.


31. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date 3 June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

