
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/12850/2011
                                                               AA/12843/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|on 15 May 2013                                |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SPENCER
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between


                           HAFIZ ABUBAKAR SIDDIQUE
                                AWAIS TALLHA


                                                                  Appellants


                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr I MacDonald, QC, instructed by V R & Shaw
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. We have both contributed to the writing of this determination.



 2. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan born on 19 October 1985 and  21
    October 1987 respectively. They  appeal  with  permission  against  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana, referred to  as  "the
    First-tier Tribunal judge" hereafter, promulgated on 30 November  2011,
    dismissing their appeals against the decisions of the respondent,  made
    on 18 November 2011, to refuse their claims  for  asylum  and  to  give
    directions for their removal from the United Kingdom under section  10A
    of the Immigration, Nationality and Asylum Act 1999.




 3. The appellants are first cousins.  It is their case that they are  gay;
    that they have been in a relationship for some years;  that  they  both
    came to the United Kingdom to study; that they lived here  together  in
    the house of Ms Saima Tariq (sister of the second named appellant)  and
    her husband; that they entered into a civil partnership  on  1  October
    2011; that their relationship and civil partnership  has  come  to  the
    knowledge of their families and the wider community in  Pakistan;  that
    this has put their lives in danger from their families  and  the  wider
    community; and, that in consequence they face persecution on return  on
    account of their sexuality.



 4. The respondent did  not  accept  that  the  appellants'  accounts  were
    credible,  due  primarily  to  inconsistencies  in   their   respective
    accounts.  Although she did accept that they had entered into  a  civil
    partnership, she did not accept that it was genuine or that  they  were
    gay. Therefore she considered that they would not be at risk on  return
    to Pakistan of ill-treatment of sufficient severity  to  engage  either
    the Refugee Convention, or articles 2 & 3 of the ECHR;  or,  that  they
    were  otherwise  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection.  She   further
    considered that removing the appellants to  Pakistan  would  not  be  a
    disproportionate interference with their protected rights under article
    8 of the ECHR.




 5. As noted above, this matter came before the First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    on 30 November 2011. Both cases were at  that  point  within  the  fast
    track procedure.  The First-tier Tribunal  judge   rejected  a  request
    that the appeals be adjourned to allow  Ms  Tariq  to  attend  to  give
    evidence in support of the appellants, it  being  explained  [27]  that
    their daughter had to go to hospital.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    found, in consequence, that:




     i. The appellants were not and never had been gay [62];

    ii. Their claim to have had homosexual experiences with each other  was
        not credible [62];

   iii. Their claim to be at  risk  from  relatives  in  Pakistan  was  not
        credible [62];

    iv. That they had not shown  they  were  at  risk  of  persecution,  or
        mistreatment, or had been threatened by reason of being,  or  being
        suspected of being gay [62];

     v. That the appellants were here for economic reasons, and that  their
        claims to be gay were invented [62];

    vi. That the  appellants'  civil  partnership  had  been  entered  into
        deliberately and opportunistically to found asylum claims [60];

   vii. That although this point had not been made by the appellants  [64],
        they had never been perceived to be gay and thus would  not  be  at
        risk in Pakistan, merely because they had a  certificate  of  civil
        partnership.




6.   Permission to appeal was granted on 12 December 2011, and the  appeals,
    still within the fast track procedure, then came before Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Kebede on 19 December 2011. In a determination promulgated on  20
    December 2011  she  concluded  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's
    determination did not involve the making of an error of law.



7.   The appellants then sought permission to appeal  against  the  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal to the  Court  of  Appeal.  The  application  was
    refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede in the  Upper  Tribunal  and  on
    renewal to the Court of Appeal by Sir Scott  Baker.   A  renewed,  oral
    application was granted on 2 April 2012 by Elias LJ but limited to what
    he described as "paragraph 7 of the Applicants' Skeleton Argument,  the
    2 grounds advanced by Counsel today".   In effect the two grounds  upon
    which permission was given were that the refusal to  adjourn  to  allow
    the first named appellant's sister to give evidence was unfair  as  the
    appellants were not given the opportunity to bring evidence before  the
    tribunal and that the First-tier Tribunal judge failed to give  any  or
    any adequate consideration to the fact that the appellants had  entered
    into a civil partnership and the consequences of it if  either  of  the
    appellants returned to Pakistan.  In giving his reasons Elias  LJ  said
    that he had to say that he thought it would was going to be a difficult
    case for Mr MacDonald to sustain.



8.   The respondent conceded that there had been an  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the Upper Tribunal, however,  and  on  14  June  2012,
    having considered a statement of  reasons,  by  consent  the  Court  of
    Appeal allowed the appeals without considering their merits and ordered
    that the matter be remitted to the Upper Tribunal. Paragraph 5  of  the
    statement of reasons provided as follows: -




      "The Respondent agrees that it is arguable that the Immigration  Judge
      (sic) arguably erred in failing to grant an adjournment  to  hear  the
      Appellants' witness evidence and failed to make findings  in  relation
      to the risk on return based on a perception of the Appellant's claimed
      sexuality because  of  their  civil  partnership.  It  is  accordingly
      expedient and the parties agree, that the appeal be  remitted  to  the
      Upper Tribunal to reconsider (sic)  the  appellant's  appeal  on  this
      basis."



9.   At the outset of the hearing Mr MacDonald indicated  that  he  did  not
    intend to call the appellants to give evidence.  He said he  understood
    that the hearing was a hearing to re-make the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge, particularly given the length of time  the  appeal
    had been listed for.  We observed that the length of the listing was in
    order to accommodate further evidence in the event that an error of law
    were to be found in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal judge.
     After reference was made to paragraph 5 of the statement  of  reasons,
    set out above, the parties' representatives agreed that the first  task
    of the Upper Tribunal was to determine whether the two arguable grounds
    had been made out, in other words whether the First-tier Tribunal judge
    had made an error of law in her determination of the appeal.



10.  In the course of argument it was agreed by  both  representatives  that
    the legal framework against which  our  decision  had  to  be  made  in
    relation to the first ground was as set out  in  the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in SH(Afghanistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.  The test in relation to  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge should have  adjourned  the  hearing  is  not
    whether the decision not to adjourn was properly open  to  her  or  was
    Wednesbury   unreasonable or perverse but whether fairness demanded  an
    adjournment.  Moreover we would  need  to  set  aside  a  determination
    reached by the adoption of an unfair procedure unless we were satisfied
    that it would be pointless because the result would inevitably  be  the
    same.   In  determining  each  question  we  could  look  at   evidence
    postdating the date of the determination.



11.  In relation to the first ground Mr MacDonald accepted that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge had correctly directed herself as  to  the  law  in
    deciding whether to  grant  an  adjournment  in  paragraph  29  of  her
    determination, but asserted that  it  was  unjust  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge to determine the appeals without giving  the  appellants
    the opportunity to have Ms Tariq, a person in whose house they had been
    living, give evidence in their  support.   Her  evidence  was  relevant
    since the case of the appellants was that she had telephone her  mother
    about the appellants' relationship both  before  and  after  the  civil
    partnership ceremony.  He conceded that the husband  of  Ms  Tariq,  Mr
    Arif Hussein, had  given  evidence  but  submitted  that  he  had  only
    attended the hearing to produce the  appellants'  rings  and  had  been
    questioned on  that  subject  only.    He  suggested  that  it  was  an
    injustice for the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  to  have  prevented  an
    important witness from giving evidence in appeals  which  were  in  the
    fast track system.  In relation to  the  statement  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge that the appellants had not produced any  evidence  that
    their witnesses had to attend hospital, he submitted that it would have
    been worthwhile for the First-tier Tribunal judge to wait for a medical
    certificate.

12.  In connection with  Mr  Macdonald's  suggestion  that  there  was  some
    overlap between the two grounds of appeal, any connection lies  in  the
    fact that Ms Tariq's evidence would have been relevant to the issue  of
    whether  the  fact  of  the  appellants'  civil  partnership  had  been
    communicated to their families  in  Pakistan.   We  can  see  from  the
    statements which have now been served by her  and  her  husband,  dated
    respectively 9 April 2013 and 13 May 2013, that neither  Ms  Tariq  nor
    her husband provided  any  evidence  which  could  be  said  amount  to
    independent support of  the  existence  of  a  homosexual  relationship
    between the appellants, apart  from  their  evidence  about  the  civil
    partnership, at which ceremony they were present.


13.  Mr Deller acknowledged that there was some overlap  between  the  first
    and second grounds, although  he  suggested  that  it  was  slight.  He
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  had  correctly  directed
    herself in law by reference to the fast track rules; she had considered
    the merits of the application and had given adequate  reasons  for  her
    decision.  It was a decision which was properly  open  to  her  in  the
    sense that it satisfied the requirements  of  legal  fairness  and  was
    properly made in the interests of justice.



14.  In considering whether the first ground of appeal is  made  out,  there
    are a number of matters which have come to light as  a  result  of  the
    further evidence served on behalf of the appellants.   The  application
    for an adjournment  was  made  for  three  reasons,  of  which  we  are
    concerned with the second only.  The first was that  an  expert  report
    was needed and the third was the appellants had not had sufficient time
    in which to instruct counsel.  The second reason advanced was  that  Ms
    Tariq and her husband could not attend as they had a daughter  and  had
    to go to hospital.  This supposed an intention to  call  them  both  as
    witnesses.  In paragraph 11 of his witness statement,  dated  13th  May
    2013, however, Mr Hossain stated that on the date when the appeals were
    listed for hearing "... the solicitor acting for them [the  appellants]
    had told me that I was not required to attend the hearing as there  was
    no need for me to do so."  Mr  MacDonald  was  not  able  to  given  an
    explanation for this as those instructing him on the appellants' behalf
    were different from those acting at the date of the hearing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.



15.  On the contrary, the explanation offered by  the  appellants'  previous
    representatives in their letter, dated 15th May 2012, to  the  Treasury
    Solicitors' Department differed from the reason given by Mr Hossain and
    that given at the hearing for their non-attendance.  It was  said  that
    the child of Ms Tariq and Mr Hussain had a high  temperature  and  they
    were advised by a relative to give the  child  some  calpol  syrup  and
    monitor her condition before taking her to the family GP.  Nothing  was
    said about whether the child was taken to the GP.



16.  Although, as indicated above, Mr MacDonald suggested  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge should have waited for a medical certificate,  none
    has ever been forthcoming, even by the date of the hearing before us.



17.  It is also the case that Mr Hussein did attend  the  hearing  and  give
    evidence, as is obvious from the determination.  In paragraph 11 of his
    witness statement, referred to above, he said that  between  12.00  and
    1.00  o'clock  that  day  he  received  a  call  from  the  appellants'
    solicitors asking him to take to  the  Tribunal  the  rings  which  the
    appellants had exchanged at the civil partnership ceremony and  he  did
    so.  Given that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal judge  did
    not contain a summary of Mr Hossain's evidence, we thought it right  to
    extract from the file her note of his evidence and make it available to
    the  parties'  representatives  and  give  them  the   opportunity   of
    considering it, taking instructions upon it and making  representations
    about it.  It is apparent from the note of Mr Hussain's  evidence  that
    it went beyond the question of the rings, because he was asked in cross-
    examination about a number of matters.



18.  The evidence which it is now said was important, was evidence  that  Mr
    Hussain told Ms Tariq to telephone her mother and tell  her  about  the
    appellants' relationship, which she did in his presence.  This was  the
    channel by which, so far as Ms Tariq's family  was  concerned,  it  was
    said, the appellants' sexual orientation became known in Pakistan.   It
    is odd, to say the least, that if the expectation was that Ms Tariq and
    Mr Hussain were to have attended the hearing but  were  prevented  from
    doing so by the unexpected illness of their child, when he  did  attend
    Mr Hossain was not asked about this telephone conversation in  evidence
    in chief.  Moreover if Mr Hossain was able to attend the hearing  after
    all, there seems to have been no good reason why  Ms  Tariq  could  not
    have attended, even if it meant Mr Hossain returning to look after  the
    child, to give whatever evidence was required.



19.  In the absence of confirmatory evidence that Ms Tariq  and  Mr  Hossain
    were unable to attend we do not think that it was unfair of the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge to have refused to adjourn the hearing.  We are not
    persuaded that the appellants  were  deprived  of  the  opportunity  of
    relying upon the evidence of Ms Tariq by the failure of the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge to adjourn the hearing because the indications are  that
    prior to the request for an adjournment no attempt  had  been  made  to
    ensure her attendance at the hearing.



20.  If we were wrong in this regard  it  would  be  necessary  to  consider
    whether the result would inevitably have been the same if Ms Tariq  had
    given or were to give evidence.



21.  The essence of Ms Tariq's evidence, as  it  appears  from  her  witness
    statement, dated 9th April 2013, is that when the appellants arrived in
    the United kingdom in July 2010 they were offered a bedroom in her home
    in which they shared a bed. In April 2011 her  brother,  the  appellant
    Tallha, told her that he was in a gay relationship with her cousin, the
    appellant Siddique.  She asked Saddique if it was true and he confirmed
    that it was. That evening she told her husband who was very shocked and
    angry.  The next evening  he  told  her  to  telephone  her  mother  in
    Pakistan and tell her about the appellants' relationship, which she did
    in his presence.  Her mother became hysterical and blamed her for  what
    had happened and when her uncle's wife took the  phone  she  also  told
    her.   Her husband decided to throw them out of the house but had  them
    back because they were living in bad conditions.  They  had  no  choice
    but  to  go  along  with  their  wishes  regarding  entering  a   civil
    partnership and they attended the ceremony and a meal in  a  restaurant
    with the appellants afterwards.



22.  The credibility of Ms Tariq's evidence would have to be judged  in  the
    light of the remainder of the evidence. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    concluded that neither appellant was credible on the grounds, that:




     i. the appellants could not recall when their relationship had  begun,
        whether it was the second named appellant's 19th or  20th  birthday
        [39];


    ii. the first named appellant could not recall when asked in  interview
        when he first kissed the second named appellant yet was able to  do
        so in his evidence at the appeal hearing [40];


   iii. there were inconsistencies between the appellants' accounts  as  to
        when the second named appellant had first kissed  the  first  named
        appellant [41]; the second named appellant said that he had not had
        any sexual feelings towards nor kissed a man before  he  watched  a
        pornographic film with the first named appellant  on  his  birthday
        but the first named appellant's account was that he and the  second
        named appellant used to  kiss  romantically  and  do  other  things
        before that birthday,


    iv. there were inconsistencies as to the circumstances and the house in
        which the appellants claimed they first had  sex  together[42]  and
        inconsistencies as  to  who  sourced  the  pornographic  film  they
        watched [44];


     v. there were inconsistencies as to how the appellants conducted their
        relationship at college, the  [48]; why the appellants had  stopped
        studying at college [49]; inconsistencies as to their hobbies  [51-
        52] despite having been together for six years; inconsistencies  as
        to when Ms Tariq  found  out  about  their  relationship  [53]  and
        inconsistencies as to how the appellants' parents found  out  about
        the relationship [56]; initially the first named appellant said  he
        telephoned his parents and told them, then he  said  Ms  Tariq  had
        done so and then he said a friend, Asif, told them.


    vi. there were inconsistencies as to who had been living  in  Ms  Tariq
        and Mr Hussain's house and why the appellants had to share  a  room
        [57];

   vii. there was an absence of any credible explanation for why  Ms  Tariq
        would tell her (and the second named appellant's) parents about the
        relationship when she knew they would disapprove [54]; or, why,  if
        threats had been made as a  result,  she  would  then  contact  the
        appellants' parents to tell them about the civil partnership [55];

  viii. when describing  the  rings  they  had  exchanged  at  their  civil
        partnership ceremony, the first named appellant said his  ring  was
        silver with blue and red stones and the  second  named  appellant's
        was black with a red stone, but the second named appellant said his
        ring was a gold band and the first named  appellant's  ring  was  a
        silver band [46];

    ix. when the rings had been produced in court, they did not  match  the
        descriptions given yet the appellants identified them as the  rings
        they had exchanged and worn; further the second  named  appellant's
        ring was clearly too small to fit his finger[47].



23.  The point made by the First-tier Tribunal  judge,  that  there  was  an
    absence of any credible explanation for why Ms  Tariq  would  tell  her
    (and the second appellant's) parents about the  relationship  when  she
    knew they would disapprove applies  equally  to  Ms  Tariq's  evidence.
    Moreover it is significant that she made  no  mention  in  her  witness
    statement of having telephoned her mother and  informed  her  that  the
    appellants had entered into a  civil  ceremony,  which  the  appellants
    claimed she had done and which the First-tier Tribunal judge found  not
    to be credible [55].



24.  In relation to the note of Mr Hussain's evidence  made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge, Mr MacDonald  made  the  point  that  it  had  not
    featured in any previous hearing and he was not certain anything was to
    be gained from it in determining whether there was an error of  law  in
    the determination of the appeal.  We do not think that  the  fact  that
    the note was not previously mentioned is a reason for us not to take it
    into  account.   Although  it  was  produced   by   to   the   parties'
    representatives on the morning of  the  hearing,  we  granted  a  short
    adjournment so that the parties' representatives could consider it  and
    neither asked for more time. Mr Macdonald had the opportunity of taking
    instructions upon it and although he described it as scant he  did  not
    suggest that it was not accurate.



25.  A significant aspect of the evidence of Mr Hossain  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, was that when he was asked in cross examination  whether  the
    family in Pakistan knew about the  appellants'  relationship,  he  said
    they were very upset and had disowned them.  He said he  did  not  know
    how they found out.



26.  Furthermore in evidence in chief, when Mr Hossain was  asked  what  his
    reaction was to learning about the appellants'  relationship,  he  said
    that he had been brought up in this country.  He was broadminded.   His
    thinking was different and they were  entitled  to  live  their  lives.
    This is in stark contrast to Ms Tariq's claim that when  she  told  her
    husband he was shocked and angry.



27.  In these circumstances  we  take  the  view  that  had  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge considered the evidence of Ms Tariq, the conclusion that
    the appellants' claim to be homosexual (and  necessarily  to  be  in  a
    homosexual relationship with each other) was an invention and a ploy to
    remain in the United  Kingdom  [62]  and  her  finding  that  they  had
    deliberately and opportunistically entered into  a  civil  ceremony  in
    order to lay the basis for their asylum  claim  [60]  would  inevitably
    have been, the same.



28.  In reaching this view we have taken account of any  evidence  which  Ms
    Tariq would have been able to give had there been an adjournment in the
    fast track system.  This evidence  would  not  have  included  evidence
    about allegedly transpired during the trip she made with Mr Hossein  to
    Pakistan in February 2012.  Even if it had been, however, we  take  the
    view that the inevitable conclusion would have been that  the  she  and
    her husband were parties to the fabrication of the claim, so that  none
    of their evidence could be relied upon.



29.  So far as the second ground of appeal is  concerned,  in  his  skeleton
    argument Mr MacDonald set out paragraph 82 of  the  judgement  of  Lord
    Rogers in HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010]
    UKSC 31, the first sentence  of  which  said  that  when  an  applicant
    applied for asylum on the ground of a well-founded fear of  persecution
    because he was gay, the tribunal must first ask itself whether  it  was
    satisfied on the evidence that he was gay, or that he would be  treated
    as gay by potential persecutors in his country of nationality.  In  his
    submissions to us Mr MacDonald asserted that  the  First-tier  tribunal
    judge gave no consideration to what would be perceived in Pakistan as a
    result of the appellants having entered into a  civil  partnership.   A
    civil partnership was a public avowal by two persons of  the  same  sex
    saying that they wished to live together in an  intimate  relationship.
    There was evidence that the news of  the  civil  partnership  had  been
    relayed to the family in Pakistan.  Mr  Macdonald  submitted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge had missed out 50% of the question which  was
    required to be asked in the formula set out by Lord Rogers.  There  was
    no-where in her determination a direction relating to the risk  of  the
    appellants being perceived as homosexuals  in  Pakistan.  He  submitted
    that  there  could  be  such  a  perception  arising  from  the   civil
    partnership even if the appellants were not homosexuals.

30.  Mr Deller submitted that this aspect of the appellants' claim stood  or
    fell depending upon what ramifications the fact that they  had  entered
    into a civil partnership would  have  in  the  light  of  the  question
    whether the  civil  partnership  has  come  to  anyone's  knowledge  in
    Pakistan.  The finding of the First-tier tribunal judge was that it was
    not credible that the fact that the  appellants  had  entered  a  civil
    partnership had  been  communicated  to  the  appellants'  families  in
    Pakistan.

31.  It seems to us that the situation could be said to be an  analogous  to
    a sur place claim, where an applicant has fabricated a claim for asylum
    by, for example taking part in  demonstrations  outside  his  country's
    embassy without any commitment to  the  oppositionist  cause,  but  who
    nonetheless on that account was said to be at a real  risk  of  serious
    harm on return.  The deciding factor in such a case  would  be  whether
    his activities would be likely to have come to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities in the country of return.

32.  The determination of the First-tier Tribunal judge did  not  contain  a
    direction in the terms set out by Lord Rogers.  She did deal,  however,
    as a matter of fact, with the issue whether  the  appellants  would  be
    perceived as being homosexuals in Pakistan and thus be treated  as  gay
    by  potential  persecutors  in  their  country  of  nationality.     In
    paragraph 62 of her determination she said  that  she  did  not  accept
    their claims to be at risk from their relatives  in  Pakistan  or  that
    they feared persecution or  mistreatment  or  had  been  threatened  by
    anyone by reason of being homosexual or of  being  suspected  of  being
    gay.  It is the case that the direction  in  relation  to  whether  the
    appellants would be treated as gay by potential persecutors  by  reason
    of the civil partnership should it become known  and  the  risk  of  it
    becoming known could have been better expressed. In paragraph 64 of her
    determination, the First-tier Tribunal judge said that for the sake  of
    completeness she considered whether the fact that  the  appellants  had
    entered into a civil partnership, albeit not a genuine one, would  have
    an adverse impact upon their return to  Pakistan.   She  said  she  had
    found that they were not homosexuals and had never been perceived to be
    such and therefore they would not be at risk in  Pakistan  from  anyone
    merely because they had a certificate of civil partnership.

33.  The reality of the situation, however, is that the First-tier  Tribunal
    judge clearly did not believe that the appellants' families in Pakistan
    had been informed that they had entered into a civil partnership.   She
    did not believe that Ms Tariq would have told her mother that they  had
    done so. There is no reason to suppose that on  return  the  appellants
    would wish to reveal that they had entered into  a  civil  partnership,
    which on  the  finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge,  was  not
    reflective of a genuine homosexual relationship. If they  did  so  they
    could not be expected to lie and when asked why they had done so  would
    be obliged to say that they were not homosexuals and it had  been  done
    in order to found a false claim for asylum.

34.  In these  circumstances  we  are  satisfied  that  had  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge posed the question exactly as set out by Lord Rogers, on
    the facts as she found them, the inevitable answer would have  been  in
    the negative and if she had asked whether they was any realistic chance
    of it becoming known in Pakistan that the appellants had entered into a
    civil partnership the inevitable answer on the facts as she found  them
    would also have been in the negative.

35.  In these circumstances, for the reasons which we have given, the First-
    tier tribunal judge did not make an error of  law  which  warrants  her
    determination being set aside and accordingly we dismiss the appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date

P A Spencer

