
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/12503/2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|                                           |Notice Promulgated         |
|                                           |On 16 January 2014         |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR MOHAMMED MAHDID
                                                                  Respondent

    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr G Saunders a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
                            For the Respondent: the respondent's
           representatives did not attend

                            NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department  ("the
      Secretary of State"). The respondent is a citizen of Algeria  who  was
      born on 21 July 1987 ("the claimant).


   2. The claimant arrived in the UK  on  or  about  9  September  2007  and
      claimed asylum. By a decision dated 2 October 2009  the  Secretary  of
      State refused the claim.


   3. On 2 October 2009 the Secretary  of  State  gave  directions  for  the
      claimant's removal from the UK as an  illegal  entrant.  The  claimant
      appealed and his appeal was heard by Immigration Judge  Brewer  on  16
      December 2009. He dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds  but  allowed
      it on Article 3 and 8 human rights grounds.


   4. The respondent applied for and was granted permission to appeal to the
      Upper Tribunal. In April  2010  Designated  Immigration  Judge  Davies
      found that the Immigration Judge had erred in law and  set  aside  his
      decision. As a result the decision fell to  be  remade  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal. There were lengthy delays connected  with  consideration  of
      whether the claimant's mental health was such that he was fit to  give
      evidence.


   5. I now have a letter from Mr Saunders dated 22  November  2013  with  a
      copy of a letter  to  the  claimant's  solicitors  of  the  same  date
      informing them that the  Secretary  of  State  has  decided  that  the
      claimant should succeed on Article 3 human rights grounds and that  he
      will be granted leave to remain. The case has been reconsidered and as
      a consequence of her decision the Secretary of State needs to withdraw
      her appeal to the Upper Tribunal. The consent of the Upper Tribunal to
      such a withdrawal is required under the provisions of Paragraph 17  of
      The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  I  give  that
      consent.


   6. I record that the Secretary of State has withdrawn her appeal  to  the
      Upper  Tribunal.  The  claimant's   representatives   have   had   the
      opportunity to attend the hearing or to inform the Upper  Tribunal  in
      writing if the claimant objects to the appeal being allowed solely  on
      Article 3 human rights grounds. They have  not  done  so  and  in  the
      circumstances I record that the appeal has been allowed on  Article  3
      human rights grounds. This notice should be given to the parties.










       .............................................
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden                               Date
      5 December 2013




