
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
aa/12151/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4th April 2017                         |On 9th May 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                     L R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Christina Alfred (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Bates (Senior HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Collier, promulgated on 9th November 2016, following a hearing at
    Nottingham  Justice  Centre   on   20th   September   2016.    In   the
    determination,  the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,
    whereupon the Appellant subsequently  applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Algeria, was born on  6th  October  1972,
    and is a male.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 8th September 2015 to  refuse  his  application  for  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that this was  a  case  where  in  a  previous
    determination by the Tribunal, namely, by IJ Astle on 4th November 2008
    (see appeal number HX/25308/02) the judge had allowed  the  Appellant's
    appeal against refusal of  asylum,  on  the  basis  that  human  rights
    violations by the authorities take place and that  the  GIA  are  still
    active (see paragraph 42).  However,  before  the  Secretary  of  State
    could grant the Appellant  asylum,  it  transpired  that  he  had  been
    convicted of rape in the United Kingdom, such that it fell against  the
    public interest to grant him the right to remain here given the gravity
    of his crimes in this country.  Instead, the Appellant had been granted
    discretionary leave to remain.  IJ  Collier  observed  how,  "this  was
    temporary leave and this was granted on the  Appellant's  release  from
    prison in 2003" and there was no way that  the  Respondent  would  have
    granted the Appellant refugee status on release from prison.  The issue
    now was whether the Appellant could demonstrate a current fear of  lack
    of protection in Algeria.  The reality was that matters  had  moved  on
    considerably since the Appellant  left  Algeria.   There  had  been  an
    amnesty declared.  There was also the shift in respect of the leader of
    the organisation that the Appellant was said to fear  in  Algeria.   He
    was simply a person of lower interest and would be of no  fear  to  the
    Algerian state.  Insofar as there were  any  medical  problems  medical
    facilities were available in Algeria (paragraph 10).  The  argument  on
    behalf of the Appellant, however, was that, by failing to implement the
    decision of Judge Astle in 2002, the Secretary of State was engaged  in
    an abuse of power and acting unlawfully.  The judge eventually rejected
    this  argument  after  a  lengthy  determination  of  126   paragraphs,
    observing that, in refusing to grant the Appellant full refugee  status
    the UK was not in breach of any of its obligations (see paragraph 126).



Grounds of Application

 4. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to  engage  with
    arguments put forward on behalf of the Appellant to the effect that the
    earlier recognition of refugee status by the Immigration  Tribunal  was
    relevant to whether the Appellant should have  been  granted  a  longer
    period of leave to remain in the UK on Article 3 grounds.

 5. On 21st January 2017, permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on this basis, although it was expressly stated  that  it  did
    not appear to be arguable that the Respondent should have  granted  ILR
    in such circumstances to the Appellant because it  has  long  been  the
    practice of the state to grant a period of limited leave to remain only
    in such circumstances.

Submissions

 6. At the hearing before me on 4th April 2017,  Ms  Alfred,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, relied upon the Grounds of Appeal and made the
    following submissions.  First, the starting point in  this  appeal  was
    the decision of IJ Astle in  2002  whereby  the  Appellant's  claim  to
    refugee status was recognised.  Once the decision was  promulgated  the
    Secretary of  State  should  have  implemented  that  decision  in  the
    Appellant's favour and granted him full asylum  refugee  status,  which
    would by now have led to the  grant  of  indefinite  leave  to  remain.
    Second, the refugee status of the Appellant had not been  revoked  even
    following the very serious offence of rape.  In fact,  the  authorities
    have decided not to take any further action against the Appellant.   He
    has served his prison sentence.  He should now be granted ILR.  He came
    in 2000 and has been in this country for seventeen years.   He  is  not
    married.  He has no one in Algeria.  He has nothing to return to there.
     His entire life is in this country.

 7. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that, whilst it was accepted  that  in
    October 2002 the Appellant's appeal was allowed by IJ  Astle  (who  was
    unaware of the fact that the Appellant  had  been  convicted  had  been
    guilty of rape), this was not the starting point for  the  purposes  of
    the subsequent proceedings.  It was significant that  on  1st  November
    2002 the Appellant was convicted of rape and sentenced to  five  years.
    In these circumstances, the Secretary of State decided not to  issue  a
    recognition of refugee status document.  It was unfortunate that  there
    was a very close proximity in time between the allowing of  the  appeal
    on Refugee Convention grounds  by  Judge  Astle  in  October,  and  the
    commission of the Appellant for rape in  November.   Nevertheless,  the
    best that  the  Appellant  could  have  hoped  for  was  the  grant  of
    discretionary leave to remain, and this he was granted once he came out
    of prison.  He would  have  been  entitled  to  six  months'  grant  of
    discretionary leave which were renewable until such time  that  he  was
    returnable back to Algeria.  Except, however what the Appellant did was
    to make an application for private life rights under Article 8 on  13th
    January 2015.  Judge Collier made his decision in the context  of  this
    background information.  The fact was that the situation in Algeria had
    changed significantly since  the  time  of  Judge  Astle  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal.  This was clear at paragraph 10 of Judge  Collier's
    determination.  It is this which is the starting point for this appeal.
     The GIA terrorist group no longer exists in  Algeria.   Permission  to
    appeal in this case  should  not  have  been  granted.   All  that  the
    Appellant could ever have hoped for  was  discretionary  leave  and  Mr
    Bates relied upon the case of MS [2015] UKUT 00539 in this regard.

 8. In reply, Ms Alfred submitted that the Home Office had refused to grant
    the Appellant refugee status as they should  have  way  back  in  2002.
    There was a covering letter dated 22nd November 2004 which was  to  the
    effect that the Home Office "takes a serious view of your conduct"  and
    considers "the question of your liability to deportation", but  decides
    "not to take any action against you on this  occasion".   This  was  in
    2004.  On the other hand, the Home Office had 28  days  to  appeal  the
    decision of Judge Astle.  It chose not to do so.  Ms  Alfred,  however,
    accepted that there had been no  judicial  review  application  at  any
    stage to enforce the decision of  Judge  Astle  so  as  to  compel  the
    Secretary of State to grant the Appellant full refugee status.

No Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) for the following reasons.  First, the Appellant could  only
    ever have been entitled to a grant of discretionary leave to remain for
    six months, reviewable periodically.  This is the  case  following  the
    Appellant's conviction for rape a month after Judge Astle  allowed  his
    appeal, which she did in October 2002, with the conviction following in
    November 2002.  During that brief period of time, the Respondent  would
    have been considering the implications of the decision reached by Judge
    Astle, but during the process of such consideration, the Appellant  was
    then convicted of rape, leaving the Secretary  of  State  to  now  take
    account of fresh facts that had a direct impact on what leave, if  any,
    should be granted to the Appellant.  There is no abuse of power in this
    respect by the Secretary of State.

10. Second, the Appellant made no judicial review  application  to  enforce
    the Secretary of State to implement the decision of Judge  Astle.   One
    can see the reason why this was not done because, as I have said, there
    was no abuse of power by the Secretary of State in these circumstances.



11. Third, the decision of Judge Collier is not open to a successful appeal
    because, although the grant of permission states that the issue of  the
    appeal being allowed in 2002 was relevant to whether leave  should  now
    be granted under Article 3 grounds, what Judge Collier was  looking  at
    was the position as of now, when GIA as a  terrorist  group  no  longer
    exists.

12. Finally, the case of MS [2015] UKUT 00539  confirms  that  the  current
    discretionary leave policy (applicable since 24th June 2014) as well as
    his  predecessor  states  that  the  RLR  policy  will   apply   unless
    exceptional circumstances justify divergence from the policy.  Needless
    to say, there are no exceptional circumstances in this  case  requiring
    divergence from such a policy.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th May 2017
