
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/12917/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21 July 2016                           | On 27 July 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                     K N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M. Blundell, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z. Ahmed, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals on procedural fairness grounds from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Row sitting at Birmingham on  24  May
    2016) dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse  to  recognise  him  as  a  refugee,  or  as  otherwise
    requiring international or human rights protection.







The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro considered that there was no  merit  in
    grounds (2) to (5) but granted the appellant permission  to  appeal  on
    ground (1). It was arguable that it was  procedurally  unfair  for  the
    judge to have regard to  background  information  published  after  the
    hearing  without  giving  an  opportunity  to  the  parties   to   make
    submissions thereon.

Discussion

 3. There is no dispute about the facts. The appeal hearing took  place  in
    the morning. At 1.04pm  on  24  May  2016  the  Home  Office's  Country
    Information and Guidance on trafficking from Vietnam  was  uploaded  to
    the relevant UK government website and thus became publicly accessible.



 4. In his decision promulgated on 27 May 2016 Judge Row referred  to  this
    guidance at paragraph [23] in the course of giving reasons  as  to  why
    the appellant, who he accepted had been trafficked to France, would not
    be at risk of persecution or serious harm on return to Vietnam.

 5. He  cited  paragraphs  3.1.12  and  3.1.8  as  indicating  that  whilst
    protection is not perfect, the Vietnamese government has  made  efforts
    in recent years to fight human trafficking. It has comprehensive  anti-
    trafficking legislation and prosecutes those involved  in  trafficking.
    It has agreements with police  forces  in  other  countries  to  combat
    trafficking.  Support  and  protection  from  governmental   and   non-
    governmental sources is generally available to victims of  trafficking.



 6. Neither representative relied on the guidance in submissions. So  prima
    facie the judge erred in conducting post-hearing internet research: see
    EG (post-hearing internet research) Nigeria [2008] UKAIT 15.

 7. It is strongly arguable that the judge's error was  not  material.  For
    example, his citation from the earlier 2013 COI Report at the beginning
    of paragraph [23] suggests that the latest guidance  does  not  mark  a
    significant change in the landscape, and  that  the  judge  could  have
    founded his rejection of the appellant's case on risk on return  solely
    on the country guidance material that was in play at the hearing.

 8. However, Mr Blundell submits that there has  been  material  unfairness
    because the judge has  only  selected  passages  in  the  report  which
    supported the Secretary  of  State's  case  and  has  overlooked  other
    passages in the report  which  assisted  the  appellant's  case.  As  a
    result, he submits, the conclusions  which  the  judge  drew  from  the
    report were inaccurate, and the judge did not acknowledge that  aspects
    of the report supported those parts of the appellant's case  which  the
    judge elsewhere rejected as "fanciful".

 9. In IA (Somalia) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 323, giving the leading judgment
    of the Court, Keene LJ at [15] rejected the proposition that it was for
    the party complaining of unfairness to prove that, if the error had not
    occurred, the judge would have come to a different conclusion:

         I cannot accept that: in public law cases, an error of law will  be
         regarded as material unless the decision-maker  must  have  reached
         the same conclusion without the error.

10. As I ruled at the hearing,  I am not satisfied  that  the  Judge  would
    have been bound to reach the same  conclusion  if  either  he  had  not
    considered the new evidence at all or if  he  had  considered  the  new
    evidence after the parties had been given the  opportunity  to  comment
    upon it.

11. Accordingly, I find that the error of law challenge on  ground  (1)  is
    made out, and it is not necessary  for  me  to  address  Mr  Blundell's
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal out of  time
    in respect of grounds (2) to (5).

12. As the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  vitiated  by  procedural
    unfairness, the appropriate forum for the remaking of the  decision  is
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the decision is set aside.

Directions

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Birmingham  for  a  de
novo hearing before any judge apart from Judge Row.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 27 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
