
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12026/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 May 2016                     |On 1 June 2016                       |
|                                   |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR



                                   Between

                                     i l
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr I Maka, Counsel, instructed by Traymans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on [ ] 1986.  He  states  he
    arrived in this country on 14 December 2001  and  applied  for  asylum.
    This application was refused on 21 January  2002  but  he  was  granted
    exceptional leave to remain until 6 December 2004 as  an  unaccompanied
    minor. The appellant made an in-time application for further  leave  to
    remain on 16 November 2004 and this application  was  refused  after  a
    lengthy delay on 26 August 2015.  The appellant appealed this  decision
    and his appeal came before a First-tier Judge  on 8  March  2016.   The
    judge heard oral evidence from the appellant who claimed to be a member
    of a particular social group and feared persecution because of  imputed
    political opinion.  He claimed to have become a  police  informant  who
    had reported on an Albanian criminal gang.

2.   The judge rejected the appellant's claim to be a police  informant  and
    found his account neither to be truthful or  credible.   She  found  no
    real  risk  of  the  appellant  being  killed  or  suffering  degrading
    treatment if returned to Albania.

3.   Having so found she concluded her determination by considering  Article
    8 in the following terms:

         "47. I must first consider  whether  the  appellant  can  meet  the
             Article 8 requirements   within  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
             burden is upon him to prove  the  same  upon  the  balance  of
             probabilities.


         48.   The  appellant  acknowledges  that   he   cannot   meet   the
             requirements of Appendix FM .


         49.  As to his private life  the  appellant  relies  only  on  para
             276ADE (1)(vi).


         50.  He would have to show that 'there would  be  very  significant
             obstacles' to his reintegration into Albania.

         51.  He says that he entered the United Kingdom in 2001 when he was
             15 years of age.  He has thus  spent  some  of  his  important
             teenage years living in the United Kingdom  and  he  has  been
             here for some time.

         52.  The appellant relies on a number of letters  which  appear  at
             C3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 in the bundle.  In his oral evidence he said
             that he could not call witnesses to attend  at  court  because
             they did not know his role as a police informant.

         53.  His solicitors of course had  requested  previously  that  the
             matter be heard in a  closed  court  and  I  acceded  to  this
             request.  The witnesses could simply have given their evidence
             and then left the court without knowing about the  appellant's
             claim to be an informer.  If this was  considered  to  be  too
             risky the solicitors could have  ensured  that  the  witnesses
             provided evidence in statement form.

         54.  I have placed limited weight on the letters because

               a) The witnesses did not attend for oral evidence.

               b) The evidence is not in the form of statement.

               c) Some of the letters are very difficult to read, the letter
                  at C3 is illegible to me in parts.

         55.  At best the letters appear to confirm that  the  appellant  is
             kind, friendly and trustworthy and a loyal customer.

         56.  The letters do not lead me to conclude that the appellant  has
             established strong links with the community or  anything  more
             than would be expected for  somebody  who  had  lived  in  the
             United Kingdom for fifteen years.

         57.  It is reasonable for me to infer  that  the  appellant  speaks
             Albanian as he spent his formative years, and the time when he
             would have most of his education in Albania.

         58.  He said in his oral evidence that his father had  been  killed
             and that he had no close family left in Albania other than his
             mother.  He described her as very old and very ill and that he
             was not in contact.  He did not explain however  how  he  knew
             his mother was very ill if he was not in contact with  her  or
             anybody else in Albania.

         59.  The appellant is a recovering alcoholic but does not  complain
             of any present health problems.

         60.  He refers in his evidence  to  having  worked  in  the  United
             Kingdom (cleaning cars) and there is no  evidence  to  suggest
             that he would be unable to undertake manual work  were  he  to
             return to Albania.

         61.  Of course the appellant has lived in the  United  Kingdom  for
             some considerable time but  would  this  amount  to  the  very
             significant obstacles required to grant leave to remain within
             the Immigration Rules?

         62.  I accept  there  would  be  challenges  to  the  appellant  in
             returning.  However he is  a  relatively  young  man  of  good
             health who has the capability to find  work  and  reintegrate.
             He has not shown me that there are very significant  obstacles
             to his reintegration.

         63.  Although he says he fears criminal gangs I have not found  his
             evidence credible with regard to  his  past  involvement  with
             either gangs or police informants.  Accordingly  he  does  not
             meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(6).

         Article 8 Outside of the Rules

         64.  It is the appellant's case  that  if  he  does  not  meet  the
             requirements of the Immigration Rules I should go on and  make
             an Article 8 assessment outside of the Rules.

         65.  My starting point is to consider whether an assessment  should
             in fact be made outside of the Rules and  in  considering  the
             same I have had regard to SS Congo and Others [2015] EWCA  Civ
             387  and  whether  there  are  "compelling  circumstances"  to
             support a claim for grant of leave outside of the Rules.

         Compelling Circumstances

         66.  Appellant's Counsel  submits  that  in  this  case  there  are
             compelling circumstances because of the delay in this case  in
             the  Home  Office  making   a   decision.    The   appellant's
             representative states that  there  has  been  an  unacceptable
             period of delay between the application being made in 2004 and
             the decision being given in August 2015.

         67.  This is a lengthy and unusual period  of  delay.   It  is  the
             Respondent's case that the delay in part has been due  to  the
             appellant who did not respond to letters in August 2005, March
             2011 and October 2012 (A1).  The  appellant's  representatives
             indicate that a response was made to the letter of 30th August
             2005.

         68.  I find that the appellant at times did not cooperate with  the
             Respondent's enquiries but nevertheless think  the  Respondent
             has not given an adequate explanation for the lengthy  periods
             of delay.

         69.  However I have considered whether the delay is material and in
             considering the same I have had due  regard  to  EB  (Kosovo).
             Lord Bingham of Cornhill said  "what  (if  any)  bearing  does
             delay by the  decision  making  authorities  have  on  a  non-
             national's rights under Article 8?"

         70.  The judge concluded it may be relevant in one  of  three  ways
             namely

               1) The appellant may develop closer personal and social ties.

               2) If in a relationship the sense of impermanence will fade.

               3) It may reduce the weight otherwise to be accorded  to  the
                  requirements of firm and fair immigration control  if  the
                  delay is shown to be the result of a dysfunctional  system
                  "which  yields  unpredictable,  inconsistent  and   unfair
                  outcomes."

         71.  In this case it is for the appellant to cross the first hurdle
             in satisfying me that there are compelling circumstances.

         72.  I am not told that the delay in this matter has  affected  any
             relationships that the  appellant  has  formed.   He  has  not
             produced evidence to lead me to conclude that  he  has  closer
             personal and social ties  than  he  would  have  had  had  the
             decision been made some considerable time ago.  The  delay  by
             the Respondent has not produced an unfair outcome.

         73.  Accordingly I do not find that the appellant has satisfied  me
             that there are compelling circumstances  such  that  I  should
             make an Article 8 assessment outside of the Rules.

         74.  Even if  the  appellant  had  satisfied  me  that  there  were
             compelling circumstances then I would have looked  at  whether
             the  Respondent  had  satisfied  me  that  the  decision   was
             proportionate in all the circumstances.   I  would  have  been
             obliged to consider the Section 117B considerations such that

             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
                  the public interest.

             (2)  I would have had due regard to the appellant  being  able
                  to speak English.

             (3)  I would  have  considered  that  the  appellant  was  not
                  financially  independent.   I  would   not   have   placed
                  significant weight on this given the appellant's status as
                  an asylum seeker.

             (4)   As to the appellant's private life this was  established
                  at a time when his immigration status was precarious given
                  that he had limited leave.

         75.   Taking  matters  in  the  round  the  respondent  would  have
             satisfied me  that  the  decision  was  proportionate  in  the
             circumstances given the weight to be attached  to  the  public
             interest.

         76.   However  I  have  found  that   there   are   no   compelling
             circumstances that require an Article 8 assessment to be  made
             outside the Rules."

4.   Accordingly the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all  grounds.   The
    appellant applied for permission to  appeal  and  the  application  was
    considered by First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson in a decision dated  13
    April 2016.  The judge did not  grant  permission  in  respect  of  the
    asylum issues and stated as follows in relation to Article 8:

         "As to Article 8 issues, the judge was aware that the appellant has
         lived in the United Kingdom for fifteen years  i.e.  for  half  his
         life. Moreover, whilst there has been  inordinate  delay  from  the
         date of application in 2005 and the decision  in  August  2015  the
         judge did consider EB (Kosovo) and concluded that the appellant had
         not demonstrated that the delay had interfered with his social  and
         personal ties or given rise to compelling  circumstances.  However,
         it is arguable that the judge erred in her approach  to  assessment
         of proportionality as the decision is silent in that regard."

5.    The  respondent  in  her  response  dated  4  May  2016  opposed   the
    appellant's grounds. It was submitted that the judge had had regard  to
    the  delay  and  the  other  matters  advanced   by   the   appellant's
    representative and the judge had properly assessed matters in the light
    of EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41 and had considered the proportionality of
    the decision and the public interest at paragraphs 74  and  75  of  the
    decision.  The grounds were a mere disagreement with the  findings  and
    outcome.

6.   At the hearing Mr Maka lodged a skeleton argument requesting a  witness
    summons and seeking to raise issues with the judge's findings about the
    appellant not being an informer as he had  claimed.   Issue  was  taken
    with the judge's approach to the evidence and there had been no  proper
    assessment of the objective evidence.

7.   I pointed out that permission  had  not  been  granted  except  on  the
    proportionality point.  No notice had been given of  the  intention  to
    raise grounds on which permission had not been given.   No  application
    had been made to amend the grounds and the application  for  permission
    had not been renewed on the points on  which permission  had  not  been
    granted.  In the exercise of my discretion and  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective I could see no reason for widening  the  scope  of
    the arguments in this case.

8.   Mr Maka pointed out that the judge had  given  limited  weight  to  the
    letters which the appellant had relied upon.  He had not  followed  the
    approach identified in Razgar and although he initially submitted  that
    there was no reference to  proportionality  he  acknowledged  that  the
    judge  had  made  reference  to   the   respondent's   decision   being
    proportionate in her alternative findings.  The judge had  referred  in
    paragraph 67 to the lengthy and unusual delay but it was  not  apparent
    that the letters referred to in that paragraph had been  shown  to  the
    First-tier Judge.  No consideration had been  given to  the  fact  that
    there had been no explanation for the delay.  There had been a systemic
    failure in the  decision  making  process.   Mr  Maka  referred  to  EB
    (Kosovo).   The judge had erred in simply focusing on the first hurdle.
     That was just one aspect of the delay.  The  delay  had  been  grossly
    disproportionate.  He had been a minor,  a  vulnerable  individual  and
    only aged 17  when  he  made  his  re-  application.   There  had  been
    inadequate consideration in paragraph 72.

9.   Mr Tarlow opposed the application  to  obtain  a  witness  summons.  He
    pointed out that he had not drafted the respondent's response  and  did
    not seek to develop it.

10.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.

11.  Permission to appeal was granted on a limited issue as I  have  pointed
    out.  The only point on which permission was granted was  that  it  was
    arguable that the judge had erred in her approach to the assessment  of
    proportionality "as the decision is silent in that regard".  As Mr Maka
    acknowledged, that was  not  entirely  correct.  The  determination  in
    relation to Article 8 needs to be read as a whole. The judge's approach
    was informed by the decision of the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) - see
    paragraph 65 of her decision.  She first considered whether there  were
    compelling circumstances to support a claim for grant of leave  outside
    the Rules.  The judge then turned to consider whether there  were  such
    circumstances and fully acknowledged that there had been  a lengthy and
    unusual period of delay.

12.  Mr Maka argued that it was not established that the letter referred  to
    in paragraph 67 of the determination had been shown to the judge.   The
    appellant was represented at the hearing  and  the  representative  had
    stated as appears from paragraph 67, that a response had been  made  to
    one of the letters.   The judge in my view  was  entitled  to  conclude
    that the appellant did not cooperate at  times  with  the  respondent's
    enquiries but nevertheless I am not satisfied that she underplayed  the
    extent of delay  in  this  case.   She  directed  herself  properly  by
    reference to EB (Kosovo). In paragraph 71 in  referring  to  the  first
    hurdle the judge was clearly referring back to the issue of  compelling
    circumstances rather than the development of closer personal and social
    ties. She turned to the question of delay  affecting  relationships  in
    paragraph 72 of her decision.

13.  It is to be noted that at an earlier stage of her  decision  the  judge
    had considered the letters that had been  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant which did not lead her to conclude "that  the  appellant  has
    established strong links with the community or anything more than would
    be expected for somebody who  had  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    fifteen years." In this context I am not satisfied  that  paragraph  72
    and indeed the judge's approach as a whole was insufficiently  informed
    or  reasoned.  She  gave  all  the  evidence  before  her   appropriate
    consideration.

14.  It is important to bear well in mind that the judge  having  considered
    that there were no compelling circumstances  was  not  required  to  go
    further.  She makes this quite clear in paragraph 74 of the decision.

15.  What follows from paragraph 74 is that her findings were  made  on  the
    alternative basis that she had been  satisfied  there  were  compelling
    circumstances.

16.  In those circumstances it is unsurprising that the  judge's  evaluation
    of proportionality was more succinct than it might otherwise have been.
     However it is not correct to argue, as Mr  Maka  fairly  acknowledged,
    that there was no reference to proportionality.

17.  In conclusion, the judge directed herself by reference  to  SS  (Congo)
    and found there were no compelling circumstances to support a claim for
    grant of leave to remain  outside  the  Rules.  Her  approach  in  this
    respect  is   not  the  subject  of  criticism  in  the  grounds.   Her
    consideration of Article 8 issues was accordingly  in  the  alternative
    and not expressed at such length as it might otherwise have been.

18.  For the reasons I have given, I am not  satisfied  that  the  point  on
    which permission was granted gives rise to a material error of  law  in
    this case.   The decision  of  the  First-tier  Judge  stands.   Appeal
    dismissed.  I make no fee award.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Fee Award

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.



Signed                                  Date 31 May 2016


G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

