
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12915/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16th November 2016                     |On 28th November 2016             |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     E P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna of Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Gribble
    made following a hearing at Birmingham on 23rd June 2016.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 17th October  1983.   She
    arrived in the UK on 7th July 2013 and claimed asylum on the basis that
    she was a victim of human trafficking and would be at risk on return to
    Albania.

 3. The Immigration Judge did not accept that she had told the truth  about
    the reasons for her arrival in the UK.

 4. The appellant's case is that she was previously married  and  separated
    from her husband in August 2010.  She went  to  live  with  friends  in
    Tirana where she met a Mr G and they  began  a  relationship  together.
    About a month later he took her to his  gym,  which  he  owned,  behind
    which were rooms where she was forced to work as a  prostitute  against
    her will.  About two and a half years later, in June 2013, she  managed
    to escape from the hospital where she had been taken.  She returned  to
    her home but was rejected by her father.   Her  friend  helped  her  to
    leave Albania.  When she arrived in the UK she heard  a  woman  talking
    Albanian, who helped her, giving her accommodation.  She  assisted  her
    claim in her claim for asylum.

 5. The judge found her account to be implausible.  She said  that  it  was
    unusual that the appellant had lived with her friends for a  period  of
    four months and yet did not mention the relationship with  G  to  them,
    nor did they make any enquiries about her when she disappeared  without
    trace.  She did not accept that G assaulted her because it was  in  his
    interest, if her account was to be  believed,  to  preserve  her  as  a
    commodity.  Neither did she accept  that  G  would  have  the  time  to
    collect and deliver the appellant personally twice a day every  day  to
    the same gym for two and a half years when she was only  a  prostitute.
    She rejected the appellant's account of having been helped first  by  a
    policeman, and then by a nurse in the hospital, which she  regarded  as
    wholly implausible.

 6. There were inconsistencies in her account of the aftermath.  There  was
    an inconsistency in relation to the purchase of  antibiotics  following
    her illness in hospital.   In her AIR she said  that  she  took  public
    transport to her home town and in her oral evidence she said  that  she
    flagged down a van.

 7. Finally, the judge regarded her account of hearing a woman speak in her
    language on her arrival to an unknown city in the  UK,  and  then  that
    woman being willing to accommodate her, to be overly coincidental.

 8. The judge then considered the  country  guidance  case  of  TD  and  AD
    (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 and concluded that even if  the
    appellant's circumstances were as  claimed  she  had  viable  means  of
    support available to her on a return to Tirana or another large city.

 9. On that basis she dismissed the appeal.



The Grounds of Application

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in her approach to the appellant's credibility, predominantly
    basing her findings on her view  of  what  was  implausible,  based  on
    preconceptions rooted  in  the  UK.   The  grounds  cite  a  number  of
    examples, such as the fact that the judge  found  it  unlikely  that  a
    policeman in uniform would visit  a  brothel,  and  unlikely  that  the
    hospital nurse who assisted her had not  worn  an  ID  badge.   It  was
    argued that it was not open to the judge to find  it  implausible  that
    the appellant would be rejected by her father.  Furthermore, the  judge
    had drifted into speculation in rejecting the appellant's account  that
    her trafficker had taken her to work on a daily basis, and  whether  it
    was likely that a nurse would have helped the appellant and the sort of
    medical  treatment  which  would  have  been  sought  for  her  by  her
    traffickers.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Foudy on 11th August 2016 for
    the reasons stated in the grounds.

12. On 8th September  2016  the  respondent  filed  a  reply  opposing  the
    appellant's  appeal,  arguing  that  the  grounds  amount  to  a   mere
    disagreement with the findings.

Submissions

13. Ms Patyna submitted that the judge had erred in failing to  assess  the
    appellant's oral evidence in the  context  of  the  objective  evidence
    before her.  In particular, she relied on the Tribunal in TD  and  AD's
    conclusions on corruption in  Albania  which  was  a  serious  problem.
    There was abundant evidence in the objective material  in  relation  to
    how the police and hospital might have behaved which was  not  referred
    to in the determination.  She relied on the decision in Y v SSHD [2006]
    EWCA Civ 1223 which stressed the importance of considering  credibility
    in the context of the society of  the  appellant.   In  particular,  at
    paragraph 27, Keene LJ said:

         "A decision maker is entitled to regard an account as incredible by
         such standards, but he must take care not to do so  merely  because
         it would not seem reasonable if it had happened  in  this  country.
         In essence, he must look through the  spectacles  provided  by  the
         information he has about conditions in the country in question"

14. Mr Avery submitted that the grounds amounted to  nothing  more  than  a
    disagreement with the decision.  The  judge  was  fully  aware  of  the
    country conditions in Albania.  The appellant had only challenged a few
    findings, none of which were critical to the decision as a whole.   She
    was perfectly entitled to find that many  aspects  of  the  appellant's
    account were unlikely to have happened as she claimed.

Findings and Conclusions

15. I am satisfied that there is no error of law in this decision  for  the
    following reasons.

16. First, the grounds are right  to  highlight  certain  passages  in  the
    determination which do appear  to  fall  foul  of  the  principle  that
    credibility must be considered in the context of the  appellant's  home
    country of Albania.  The observation, for example,  that  ID  would  be
    worn in a hospital there by a nurse would appear to be based  upon  the
    judge's observations of what would happen in the UK.  Similarly, it may
    not have been open to her to found adverse credibility findings upon an
    assumption that policemen in uniform  in  Albania  would  not  visit  a
    brothel.  However, these are peripheral matters.

17. The judge's conclusion that it was  not  credible  that  the  appellant
    would not mention her new relationship to friends  with  whom  she  had
    been living for four months was  entirely  open  to  her.   The  people
    concerned were friends of the appellant's best friend.  The  judge  was
    entitled to find it striking that they  took  no  steps  to  tell  that
    friend that the appellant had disappeared  or  to  make  any  enquiries
    about her.

18. Equally, it was open to the judge to find  it  not  credible  that  the
    appellant would have been unconscious for many  hours  without  medical
    attention being sought if she was regarded as a valuable commodity to a
    person who was sufficiently involved with her to take and  collect  her
    personally twice a day every day for  two  and  a  half  years  to  the
    premises where she worked as a prostitute.  There was an  inconsistency
    in her claim, highlighted by the judge, that he was well connected  and
    wealthy and yet no-one else was involved with her until two people were
    sent to look after her in June 2013.

19. The judge was entitled to conclude that it was  more  likely  that  the
    appellant, if she was being held captive and ill, would have been  seen
    by a doctor called to the premises rather than being taken to hospital.
     The conclusion that the account of the escape was implausible was  not
    based upon culturally specific assumptions.  The judge highlighted  the
    professional difficulties to the nurse in helping the appellant  escape
    when she had a high fever and was attached to a drip as well as  taking
    a personal risk in helping an appellant who was being  guarded  by  two
    men.

20. At paragraph 40 the judge  analysed  the  appellant's  account  of  her
    escape, noted the inconsistencies in relation to  the  guard,  and  the
    practical  difficulties  in  relation  to  collecting  the  appellant's
    clothing from another part of the hospital.

21. Similarly, there were inconsistencies in her evidence after her  escape
    from the hospital.  The judge does not dispute the appellant's  account
    of  her  father  rejecting  her,  but  she  did  find  the   subsequent
    coincidences not to be credible, in particular her account  of  hearing
    someone  speaking  Albanian  in  Leicester  and  that  woman   offering
    assistance.

22. Overall this is a thorough and well reasoned determination.  Nothing in
    the grounds  establishes  that  the  judge  erred  in  respect  of  her
    assessment of credibility.  It was plainly open to her  to  reject  the
    account.

23. In any event, even if such  an  error  was  established,  there  is  no
    challenge to the judge's conclusions that the appellant does  not  fall
    within those persons identified in TD and AD of  trafficked  women  who
    would be at risk on return.

24. The appellant has no known health problems.  She has been able to  find
    assistance within her own community in the UK, and she has  friends  in
    her home area and friends in Tirana.  She was educated at  primary  and
    secondary level and has a reasonable employment history.   The  judge's
    conclusion that she would not be  a  person  vulnerable  to  being  re-
    trafficked  is  unassailable.   Even  if  the   judge's   approach   to
    credibility had been flawed, it would not have affected her  assessment
    of the risk factors since there is no challenge in the grounds  to  any
    of the facts as set out at paragraph 52 of the determination.



Notice of Decision

25. The original judge did not err in law.  Her decision will stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed[pic]                             Date 26 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

