
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12904/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 May 2013                                |On 14 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                              Sayadamir yaghobi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Wilford C ins Afro-Asian Advisory Service
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  who  was  born  on  10
    December 1993.  On 4 November 2011,  when  the  appellant  was  aged  17
    years, the Secretary of State refused to vary his leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom but did  not  actually  make  an  "immigration  decision"
    within the meaning of section 82(2) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 until November 2012, by which  time  the  appellant  was
    aged 18.

 2. The appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Aujla,  and  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal, but he made very positive findings  of
    fact.  Paragraphs 44 and 45 are particularly helpful to  the  appellant,
    and this is what the judge said:

         "44. No credibility issues arose regarding the appellant's  account
         about what happened to him before he came to the United Kingdom.  I
         therefore have no doubts about his credibility and accept and  find
         that the appellant was at risk of being forcibly recruited  by  the
         Taliban before he left the country.  There is  nothing  to  suggest
         that the security situation in Wardac province had  improved.   The
         Taliban are still active in  the  area.   In  the  circumstances  I
         accept and find that the appellant would be at risk of  persecution
         and ill-treatment in his locality on return  to  Afghanistan.   The
         remaining issue in this case, as accepted by both  representations,
         is whether or not the option of internal relocation  to  Kabul  was
         open to the appellant, and whether or not it would be reasonable to
         expect him to relocate there.

         45.   Insofar  as  the  appellant's  family  were  concerned,   the
         appellant stated in his witness statement as well as interview that
         he was not in contact with his family.  He made the same  claim  at
         the previous hearing.  He repeated it in evidence  before  me.   He
         was not in contact with his  family  and  he  was  not  even  aware
         whether or not they were still alive.  In answer to a question from
         Mr  Zukunft,  the  appellant  clearly  stated  that  there  was  no
         arrangement in place for him to contact his family to  inform  them
         that he had arrived safely in the United Kingdom.  The  agent  told
         him that he would inform the family of his  safe  arrival.   Having
         found that I had no concerns about the appellant's  credibility,  I
         find and accept that the appellant was  not  in  contact  with  his
         family and never had been.  He was not aware of  their  whereabouts
         in Afghanistan.  I therefore find that the appellant would not have
         familial support on return to Afghanistan."

 3. In short, the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the appellant was  at
    risk of persecution if he returned to his home area, but the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge also went on to find that the appellant is  not  at  risk
    now.  He has achieved his majority and, broadly speaking,  a  young  man
    from Afghanistan who is at risk in  his  home  area  can  reasonably  be
    expected to return to Kabul and live there safely.   Nothing  before  me
    suggests that this is not such a case.  Again, broadly speaking  minors,
    even minors who are approaching their  majorities,  cannot  be  returned
    safely to Kabul.

 4. Mr Wilford for the appellant says  that  the  effect  of  Judge  Aujla's
    findings is that the appellant was a refugee  when  the  appellant  says
    that he was not.  Unless that is, he could not have been returned.  Here
    Mr Wilford relies on the so-called Rashid principle which was  explained
    particularly in the Court of Appeal in the case of KA and Others v  SSHD
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1014.  The appellant would not have been a refugee if he
    could have had family support away from Kabul.  The Secretary  of  State
    did nothing to investigate that possibility, although the appellant  had
    been quite straightforward and presumably in the light of other findings
    entirely frank about contact addresses for his family in Afghanistan.

 5. Mr Wilford says, and I think he is right, that this is a case where  the
    appellant has been deprived of a chance of showing that he could not  be
    returned by the Secretary of State not testing the claim that he had  no
    contact and that the contact addresses he had did not work.

 6. Broadly speaking the appellant should be put in the  position  he  would
    have been in if he had been recognised as a refugee when he should  have
    been.  The decision in KA has been considered by the Court of Appeal  in
    EU [2013] EWCA Civ 32 which was clearly wary of the Rashid principle and
    expressed concern about the undesirability of treating a person as if he
    were a refugee when plainly he was not.   That  undesirable  quality  of
    course has to be balanced against the undesirability of not  recognising
    a person as a refugee when that person should have been recognised as  a
    refugee.  It may be that the difficulty, if that is what it is, is  that
    had the appellant have been recognised as a refugee when he should  have
    been he would have been given five years' leave to remain,  even  though
    in fact it was reasonably likely that he  would  not  have  needed  that
    period if recognising him as a  refugee  throughout  his  majority  only
    would have been sufficient.

 7. I am persuaded that this is a case where the First-tier Tribunal  failed
    to follow the approach taken in KA and that I have to allow  the  appeal
    on the grounds that it is not in accordance with the law.

 8. I make it plain it is not immediately clear to me what I must  do  next,
    but I think the answer is, having made that finding, to give a direction
    based on the direction  given  in  the  case  of  AA  and  explained  at
    paragraph 11 of KA where it was noted that the court granted  relief  in
    the form of a direction under Section 87 of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act  2002  requiring  the  Secretary  of  State  to  consider
    whether, in the light of the judgments of the courts and of any  further
    representations made by the appellant within 21 days, a period of  leave
    should be granted and if so, for how long.

 9. I do not think that this is a case  where  the  appellant's  clam  under
    Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  makes  any
    difference to what I have considered already.  It is not  a  case  where
    the appellant has established any right to  be  in  the  United  Kingdom
    independent of his right to be recognised as a refugee.   It  is  not  a
    case of strong family ties for example, as I understand it, and I see no
    additional error created by the Immigration Judge's decision to  dismiss
    the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

10. It follows therefore that I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I  substitute  a  decision  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law, and I give the following directions:

                                 Directions

    The Respondent must consider whether, in the light of this judgement and
    any further representations made by the  appellant  within  21  days,  a
    period of leave should be granted and if so, for how long.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 May 2013                    |




