
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/12539/2015
                                                             & AA/12523/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke on Trent          |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 5 June 2017                                  |On 13 June 2017            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     NAM
                                     PNM
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Claimants

Representation:

For the claimants:     Ms E Rutherford, instructed by Braitch RB Solicitors
For the appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Phull promulgated 7.6.16, allowing  the  claimants'
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State,  dated  16.9.15,
    to refuse the claim for international protection.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 13.5.16.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly refused permission to appeal on 4.7.16.
    However, when the application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kopieczek granted permission to appeal on 29.3.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 5.6.17 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. I found such error of law in the making of the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal as to require the decision of Judge Phull to be set aside
    and remade. I reserved my reasons, which I now summarise.

 6. In refusing permission to  appeal,  Judge  Kelly  agreed  that  it  was
    arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  assertion  that  the
    Immigration Rules do not fully address  the  private  and  family  life
    issues in the  appeal  was  insufficient  to  identify  any  compelling
    circumstances to warrant  consideration  outside  the  Rules.  However,
    Judge Kelly considered the error  immaterial  to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal, given that the test of reasonableness under the Rules and under
    s117B(6) has been held to be the same (AM (s117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT
    0260 (IAC)), and that on its wording s117B(6)provided a discrete regime
    which states that upon fulfilment of its three conditions, the Tribunal
    is bound to hold that the public interest does not require the  removal
    of the parent  or  the  child  from  the  UK.  Therefore,  Judge  Kelly
    considered it not arguable that that the engagement of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with the reasonableness test was incomplete.

 7. However, the law has moved on. In the Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek
    found it arguable in the light of the recent case authorities  that  in
    allowing the appeals under article  8  ECHR,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's  decision  failed  to  reflect  the   wider   public   interest
    considerations inherent in the 'reasonableness' question.

 8. As the Court of Appeal held in MA (Pakistan) &  Ors  v  Upper  Tribunal
    (IAC) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705, the court is required to have  regard
    to  the  conduct  of  the  appellant  and  the  wider  public  interest
    considerations when considering the reasonableness test under  117B(6),
    including those set out in the preceeding provisions of  s117B.  It  is
    not a discrete, free-standing,  self-contained,  determination  of  the
    public interest, as Judge Kelly believed it to be,  and  involves  more
    than simply the interests of the child.

 9. Ms Rutherford accepted that in  light  of  MA  (Pakistan)  she  was  in
    difficulties in resisting the appeal.

10. In the circumstances, I find, as asserted  in  the  grounds,  that  the
    First-tier   Tribunal   conducted   a   child-centric   assessment   of
    reasonableness and in doing so failed to take into account the family's
    circumstances as a whole, together with the immigration history and the
    other public interest considerations of s117B. I agree and so find that
    the reasonableness assessment of the First-tier Tribunal was incomplete
    and did not properly engage with the full facts of the case.

11. The error arises by reason of the decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal,
    promulgated 7.7.16, after the promulgation of the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal, and not a decision the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  could
    have been aware of. It follows that the finding of an error of  law  is
    no reflection on Judge Phull. The case law on the  reasonableness  test
    has overtaken the understanding of that test  prior  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal's judgement.

Remittal

12. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal.

13. In all the circumstances, at the invitation both parties to relist this
    appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I do so  on  the
    basis that this is a  case  which  falls  squarely  within  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement at paragraph  7.2.  The  effect  of  the
    error has been to deprive the parties of a fair hearing  and  that  the
    nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which  is  necessary  for
    the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that, having regard to
    the overriding objective in rule  2  to  deal  with  cases  fairly  and
    justly, including with the avoidance  of  delay,  I  find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        28 July 2017



Consequential Directions

 1.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
    Birmingham;

 2. The appeal is to be relisted at the first available date;

 3. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

 4. The ELH is 3 hours;

 5. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Phull;

 6. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing;

 7. The First-tier Tribunal may give such further directions as are  deemed
    appropriate.

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did make an order pursuant and given that a child  is  involved,  I
continue the anonymity direction.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        28 July 2017


