
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12789/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2 June 2016 & 4 August 2016             |On 16 September 2016             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     I N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer (2 June
2016)
     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer (4 August 2016)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Roots)  dismissing  his  appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision of  17  September  2015  refusing  to  grant  him
    asylum.



Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 9 November 1977.  It  is
    common ground that in February 1999 he joined the  Pakistan  Air  Force
    and remained in  service  until  he  deserted  in  February  2011.   In
    September 2010 he had applied for early retirement but, on his account,
    the officer in charge did not look at it.  He decided to leave military
    service and applied for a student visa in the UK which was granted from
    11 January 2011 until 21 March 2014.  He left Pakistan  on  6  February
    2011 by plane arriving in the UK on the same day.

3.   His student visa was curtailed in May 2012 because his college  licence
    was revoked.  He applied to a new college  but  its  licence  was  also
    revoked.  He made further applications in July 2013 and September  2014
    for leave to remain.  On 17  December  2014  he  was  notified  by  the
    respondent that in the light of the fact that his college's licence had
    been  revoked  the  respondent  would  suspend  consideration  of   the
    application for a period of 60 calendar days to enable him to  withdraw
    his application and submit a fresh application in a different  category
    or to leave the UK.   He then claimed asylum on 23 January 2015.

4.   His application was refused for the reasons set  out  in  the  decision
    letter  of  17  September  2015.   The  respondent  accepted  that  the
    appellant had been in military service and had deserted.  It  was  also
    accepted that the appellant was on the ECL list, a stop  list  used  at
    airports to prevent individuals leaving Pakistan or to  indicate  their
    interest to the authorities if they  return.   The  respondent  further
    accepted that the appellant had been in active service when he deserted
    his post.  However, it was the respondent's view that he would  not  be
    at risk of persecution on return but of prosecution as a deserter.   It
    had not been claimed that any punishment  received  for  draft  evasion
    would occur for a  Convention  reason  or  that  the  appellant  had  a
    conscientious  objection  to  serving  in  the  military.    In   these
    circumstances, his claim did not engage the Refugee Convention.

5.   The respondent went on to consider whether the appellant  was  entitled
    to humanitarian  protection  but  found  that  there  was  insufficient
    information to show that prison conditions would breach article 3.  The
    respondent considered the country guidance case  in  KA  and  Others  v
    Secretary of State (domestic violence - risk  on  return)  Pakistan  CG
    [2010] UKUT 216 but was not satisfied that there were any specific risk
    categories affecting the appellant which would  lead  to  a  breach  of
    article 3.  The respondent also considered the provisions of article  8
    but found that the appellant was not able to bring himself  within  the
    Immigration Rules nor that there  were  any  exceptional  circumstances
    justifying a grant of leave outside the Rules.  She accepted  that  the
    appellant suffered from a fistula but, although medical care  was  poor
    in Pakistan by comparison to the UK, there was access to such care  and
    there were foundations and  hospitals  dedicated  specifically  to  the
    treatment of fistula.


The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

6.   At the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  judge  said  that
    there were essentially two issues concerning  the  risk  the  appellant
    would face on return; firstly, the risk of torture or interrogation  in
    a way amounting to a breach of para 339C or article 3 and secondly, the
    question of whether his prison conditions would be in breach of article
    3 [18].  The judge commented that it was for the appellant to prove his
    case to the lower standard of proof  but  he  had  produced  no  expert
    evidence on the risk of torture, what would happen to him on return  or
    as to what had happened to other deserters from the  Pakistan  Army  or
    Air Force.  He said that he was aware that this had been  submitted  in
    other Tribunal appeals.  Whilst the appellant's credibility in  general
    terms of what had happened to him was not in doubt, that did  not  mean
    that he had to accept his assertions about what would happen to him  on
    return to Pakistan as those matters may be outside his  knowledge,  the
    appellant having been out of Pakistan for over five years.

7.   It was the appellant's claim that the risk of torture was very high  as
    the authorities might not accept that he was simply a  deserter  as  he
    had deserted whilst on active service and gone abroad.  He would, as he
    put it, be "ripe picking" for investigation and he relied on  an  email
    of 6 October 2015  to  the  respondent  as  evidence  that  while  such
    investigations were carried out, he might be  mistreated.   He  claimed
    that he would be seen as a traitor and that being on  the  ECL  made  a
    huge difference.  However, the judge in the  light  of  other  evidence
    before him did not accept that it was very unusual for a deserter to be
    placed on the ECL [20].

8.   When the appellant was asked about where his evidence  about  the  risk
    of mistreatment came from, he had said that everyone knew  but  he  had
    also spoken about two months previously to a friend who had joined  the
    air force with him and who was now an intelligence  officer  at  Lahore
    Airport.  He had told the appellant not to return to Pakistan and  that
    he would be treated harshly on return.  The judge  commented  that  the
    appellant had  produced  no  evidence  to  support  these  claims.   He
    accepted that a deserter who left Pakistan was  likely  to  be  treated
    differently and probably more seriously than one who  remained  but  he
    did not accept the appellant's unsupported assertions  that  particular
    consequences would follow  noting  that  on  his  own  account  he  had
    performed only logistical and supporting roles whilst  working  in  the
    intelligence unit.

9.   On this aspect of the appeal  the  judge  summarised  his  findings  as
    follows:

         "25. I accept that the appellant gave detailed evidence as to  what
             he thought would happen to him on return  to  Pakistan  and  I
             have taken this into account.  I accept that  he  may  believe
             this is what would happen to him.  However,  he  has  produced
             very little, if any, evidence in support.


         26.  In conclusion, looking at all the evidence in the round, I  do
             not consider that the appellant has discharged the  burden  on
             the lower standard of proof to show that he will  be  regarded
             as  anything  other  than  a  simple  deserter  who  would  be
             prosecuted for deserting.  I do not find he has established  a
             real risk that he will be persecuted."

10.  The judge went on to  consider  the  argument  that  prison  conditions
    would breach para 339C or article 3.  He commented that  there  was  no
    expert evidence on this issue  and  he  found  that  the  evidence  and
    submissions were confusing.  In opening Mr  Karim  had  said  that  the
    appellant may face the death penalty but at interview the appellant had
    said that he would be imprisoned whether for a short  or  long  period.
    There was no  expert  evidence  or  evidence  of  sentences  for  other
    deserters and the appellant had produced the  Pakistan  Air  Force  Act
    1953 and the  Pakistan  Army  Act  1952  but  it  was  not  clear  what
    legislation he was relying on.  The email of 6 October 2015  which  the
    respondent produced at the hearing did not provide  any  clear  support
    for the appellant's submission that his sentence would be very lengthy.
     However, he accepted in the light of the decision letter at paras  38-
    42 that it was likely that the appellant would suffer a period of  long
    imprisonment.

11.  The judge was not satisfied that the  appellant  had  established  that
    there was a real risk that his likely imprisonment for deserting  would
    amount to a breach of para 339C or article 3.  He took into account the
    evidence about the type of facility where he was likely to be sent  and
    about the appellant's health problems but was not satisfied that  these
    factors established a risk under article 3.  So far as the  appellant's
    claim that he would be seen as a traitor was concerned, the judge said:

         "36. His evidence was that deserters were not usually  put  on  the
             ECL  and  therefore  he  had  been  marked  out  for   special
             attention.  However, I have considered this above and  do  not
             find that his contentions are reliable."

     Accordingly the appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The Grounds and Submissions

12.  The grounds of appeal are lengthy but  can  be  crystallised  into  the
    following assertions.  It is argued  that  the  judge  failed  to  take
    proper account of the appellant's own evidence that  he  was  not  just
    relating what he was told about what  happened  to  deserters  but  was
    giving evidence of what he had seen.  The judge had failed to make  any
    adequate  credibility  findings  on  this  evidence  but  appeared   to
    criticise the appellant for a lack of supporting evidence when  it  was
    unclear precisely what type of evidence he would expect to see.  It  is
    further argued that the judge had failed to give adequate  reasons  for
    his decision.  He had questioned which legislation would apply but  the
    provisions of the Pakistan Army Act 1952 were  clear.   The  judge  had
    referred to expert evidence which he was aware had  been  submitted  to
    other Tribunals but it was incumbent upon him to determine an appeal on
    its own facts and merits.  If he had had sight of expert  evidence,  it
    should have been disclosed to the parties in the interests of fairness.



13.  It is further argued that the judge misunderstood the  submissions  and
    evidence advanced on behalf of the appellant by commenting on the  fact
    that his counsel had failed to repeat the submission  made  in  opening
    about the risk of the death penalty being  imposed  and  had  commented
    that it was not clear which legislation was being referred to,  on  the
    fact that his counsel accepted he did  not  know  where  the  appellant
    would be sent and that the evidence on that  issue  was  in  any  event
    unclear.  The judge had failed to give proper weight to the email of  6
    October 2015 or to the  background  evidence  when  considering  prison
    conditions in the light of the appellant's medical condition.

14.  Permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted by the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Gill) for the following reasons:

         "The respondent accepted that:


         (1)  The appellant was in the Pakistan Air Force for  about  twelve
             years.
         (2)  He was a corporal technician and part of the intelligence unit
             with the air force.  He did not  gather  intelligence  himself
             but worked in logistical support.
         (3)  He deserted from the air force whilst on active service at the
             time of desertion.
         (4)  He is on the ECL list, i.e. a stop list used  at  airports  to
             prevent individuals leaving or arriving in Pakistan.
         (5)  He would be arrested on arrival in Pakistan.


         It is  arguable  that  the  judge  may  have  materially  erred  in
         concluding that the  appellant  was  not  at  real  risk  of  being
         perceived as a traitor.  It is  arguable  that,  in  requiring  the
         appellant to produce evidence that he would be seen  as  a  traitor
         because he had deserted his post and gone  abroad,  the  judge  may
         have applied too high a standard of proof.  All the grounds may  be
         argued."

15.  Mr Karim adopted his grounds  arguing  that  the  reference  to  expert
    evidence made by the judge  indicated  an  error  of  approach  in  his
    assessment of the evidence.  The judge  could  not  take  into  account
    expert evidence from other cases.  The likelihood  was  that  for  this
    reason he had drawn an adverse inference against  the  appellant.   The
    judge had failed to give proper weight to the email of 6  October  2015
    from which it could properly be inferred that there  would  be  a  real
    risk to the appellant in his circumstances.  The fact remained that the
    appellant would be investigated on return as he was on the ECL and  had
    deserted to a foreign country.

16.  He further submitted that the judge's analysis of prison conditions  in
    Pakistan failed to take  all  relevant  matters  into  account  and  in
    particular the circumstances relating to  the  appellant,  his  medical
    condition and the likelihood that he would be treated as a traitor.  In
    summary, he had failed to give him the benefit of the doubt  on  issues
    where the evidence was not clear  or  to  give  proper  weight  to  the
    appellant's own evidence and  had  placed  excessive  emphasis  on  the
    failure to produce expert evidence.

17.  Mr Tarlow submitted that the grounds were no more than  a  disagreement
    with the findings of the judge.  It was for him to assess the  evidence
    and to make findings in accordance with the lower  standard  of  proof.
    He had been entitled to conclude that it was not unusual for a deserter
    to be placed on the ECL.  It had been accepted that  prison  conditions
    in Pakistan were poor but the judge had  been  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion that there would not be a breach of article 3  having  taken
    into account the country guidance decision in KA.

Consideration of Whether There is an Error of Law

18.  The issue I must consider is whether the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in
    law such that its decision should be set aside.  The grounds argue that
    the judge's reference to expert evidence submitted  in  other  Tribunal
    appeals indicates an erroneous approach to the evidence and that it can
    be inferred that there was a failure to disclose knowledge of  evidence
    in other cases so that the appellant had  the  opportunity  of  dealing
    with it.  However, I do not accept that this is a reasonable  inference
    to draw from the judge's comment.  He was entitled to  comment  on  the
    fact that there was no  expert  evidence  on  the  issue  of  what  had
    happened to other deserters from  Pakistan  but  there  is  nothing  to
    indicate that the judge was aware of the contents of that evidence  and
    still less that he took into account evidence that was not drawn to the
    attention of the parties.

19.  The issue between the parties crystallised into whether  the  appellant
    would be regarded as a simple deserter  as  argued  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent [24] or whether a more serious view would be  taken  by  the
    authorities  in  Pakistan  with  an  increased  risk  of  serious  ill-
    treatment.  The judge commented at [25] that  the  appellant  may  well
    believe that this would happen to him but he had produced very  little,
    if any evidence in support.

20.  The judge was entitled to look at the extent  to  which  the  appellant
    had substantiated his claim and to this extent it was open  to  him  to
    comment on a failure to provide supporting evidence.  However, I am not
    satisfied that the judge gave adequate consideration to the appellant's
    evidence in so far as it was unsubstantiated.  He  failed  to  consider
    when assessing the appellant's unsubstantiated evidence the  provisions
    of para 339L of HC 395 and in particular the fact that the  appellant's
    statements are arguably at least coherent and plausible  and  that  his
    general credibility had been established.  Further, there was  evidence
    in the email of 6 October 2015 which was at least capable of supporting
    the appellant's own evidence that he would be at real risk  of  serious
    ill-treatment on return.

21.  This is an email relying on information from an anonymous  source.   In
    answer to the question

         "In your previous email you said 'it has also been  confirmed  that
         they are not tortured and not subject to inhuman treatment at all',
         however looking at COIS on prison conditions in Pakistan, it  seems
         that they can breach Article 3 and there is  evidence  of  torture,
         etc.  Are you able to tell me whether army deserters are sent to  a
         regular prison - or different type?  Are you able to say which type
         of prison they are sent to?"

    The response is:


         "As stated in my previous email to you, they are not  tortured  and
         not subject to inhumane treatment if they are simply deserters  and
         there are no other charges to be investigated or  to  be  confessed
         and have not been involved in any heinous crimes against the state.
          If they are arrested  by  Pakistan  police  they  are  taken  into
         custody for a limited period and are then eventually handed over to
         the military police who then keep them in quarter guards  cell/army
         prison till the military court decides about their fate."


    In response  to  a  question  whether  the  source  was  able  to  give
    information of the conditions in this type of prison/gaol that they are
    sent to, the reply is "Don't know".


22.  The answer to the first question above  certainly  appears  to  draw  a
    distinction between simple deserters where there are no  other  charges
    to be investigated and no involvement in  heinous  crimes  against  the
    state with other cases.  As identified in the grant  of  permission  to
    appeal the appellant was in the Air Force for about  twelve  years,  he
    was  part  of  an  intelligence  unit  although  he  did   not   gather
    intelligence himself but worked  in  logistical  support,  he  deserted
    whilst on active service at the time of desertion and was  on  the  ECL
    list.  In the light of these  facts  and  the  guarded  answer  to  the
    enquiry about the risk of inhumane treatment, I am not  satisfied  that
    the judge gave sufficiently anxious consideration  to  the  appellant's
    evidence about how he was likely to be treated on  return  or  that  he
    properly took into account the information set out in the  email  of  6
    October 2015 in his assessment  of  the  extent  of  the  risk  to  the
    appellant.  For these reasons, I am satisfied that the judge  erred  in
    law and that the decision should be set aside.

23.  At the hearing Mr Karim indicated that if the decision  was  set  aside
    it was his wish to call  further  evidence  and  that  this  should  be
    considered at a re-hearing.  Mr Tarlow did not object to  that  course.
    In the light of the issues raised I  was  satisfied  that  this  appeal
    should remain in the Upper Tribunal and that the parties should have an
    opportunity of submitting further evidence.

24.  Following the directions made at  the  initial  hearing  the  appellant
    submitted a further bundle of documents (2A) indexed and paginated 1-55
    to  supplement  the  original  bundle  (1A0  paginated.  1-16  and  the
    respondent produced the Home Office Country Information  and  Guidance,
    Pakistan: Prison Conditions Version 2.0 June 2016 (CIG).

Further Oral Evidence of the Appellant

25.  The appellant adopted his witness statement dated 4 August 2016 (2A, 1-
    2) confirming that he entered the UK with a student visa on 6  February
    2011.  He had enrolled in the Pakistan Air Force as  an  airman  on  19
    February 1999 but deserted his unit when he came to the UK.  He  was  a
    supply assistant in the logistics section, an important and secret unit
    working in Gwadar, the most important location these  days.   He  would
    definitely be interrogated due to the leakage of information if he were
    to be removed from the UK.  The unit he had deserted was  a  monitoring
    unit  which  worked  under  the  supervision  of  the  Directorate   of
    Intelligence although his role was in  logistic  support  but  he  also
    dealt with the radio signal equipment.  He confirmed that his name  was
    on the ECL which meant that  he  could  not  even  obtain  a  Pakistani
    passport.  He said that he was sure  that  he  would  be  tortured  and
    treated inhumanely if he were to be returned because  he  had  deserted
    and he would be interrogated about the  leakage  of  information  since
    then.

26.  In further evidence-in-chief he referred  to  his  statement  dated  18
    July 2016 at 2A, 4 and the document  at  2A,  37.   According  to  this
    statement his passport expired in November 2013 and that  if  his  name
    was on the ECL he would not be issued with  a  passport.   He  asserted
    that if any official of the UK or Pakistani High Commission  in  London
    could re-issue a passport to him he would withdraw his asylum case.  He
    also referred to the transcript messages at 2A, 33 between him and  one
    of his colleagues and to a text conversation on 16 December 2014  which
    referred to another colleague who had also deserted and was continually
    travelling although he did not work  in  the  intelligence  unit.   The
    appellant said that it might also be the case that he was not in active
    service.  His last conversation had been the one in December 2004.  The
    appellant confirmed that he had been in active service  and  worked  in
    the intelligence unit.  In the eyes of  the  authorities  it  would  be
    regarded as demoralising other personnel who were  working  in  extreme
    conditions.   He  had  dealt  with  sensitive  radio  conversations  on
    confidential frequencies.

27.  In cross-examination he repeated that his job was very sensitive.   His
    role was in logistics and he dealt with radio systems and repairs.   He
    was asked about the conversation in 2A, 33 and said that his friend was
    a deserter but was not on the ECL  list  and  he  (the  appellant)  had
    worked in Gwadar.  He was asked why he had said in his statement of  18
    July 2016 that he would withdraw his asylum case if he were issued with
    a passport.  The appellant responded that  in  fact  he  would  not  be
    issued with a passport as he was on the ECL.

28.  In re-examination he re-asserted that he would never be issued  with  a
    passport and that he could not go back there.  He  had  claimed  asylum
    when he learnt that his name was on the ECL list.  Even if he could get
    a passport, he would not return.

Submissions

29.  Mr Tufan said that, although it  had  been  conceded  in  the  decision
    letter that the appellant was a deserter, his role had been quite minor
    and his behaviour arose from the fact that he had  not  been  promoted.
    He  submitted  that  in  his  evidence  the  appellant  had  sought  to
    exaggerate his role and the reality of the position was that his status
    was nowhere near serious enough for there to be a real  risk  of  harsh
    treatment  on  return.   It  appeared  the  appellant  had  a  fear  of
    prosecution, not of persecution.  So  far  as  prison  conditions  were
    concerned, he referred to 3.11 of the CIG saying  that,  whilst  prison
    conditions were extremely poor in Pakistan, in general they were not so
    systematically inhuman and life threatening as to meet the threshold of
    article 3.

30.  Mr Karim adopted his skeleton argument of 1 August 2016.  He  submitted
    that  there  were  three  issues,  whether  the  prosecution  would  be
    oppressive and would put the appellant at risk of a death  sentence  or
    unduly lengthy imprisonment, whether he would be subject  to  treatment
    contrary to Article 3  whilst  in  detention  and  whether  the  prison
    conditions would be such that there would be a real risk of a breach of
    article 3.  He submitted that the appellant was at risk as someone  who
    had deserted from the Air Force whilst on active service and was on the
    ECL list.  It was not argued that he had  been  involved  in  gathering
    intelligence but he had been  involved  in  using  sensitive  equipment
    where, if something went wrong, others could listen in.  It was a  real
    possibility, so he argued, that as a deserter on the ECL any subsequent
    investigation might lead to torture and  ill-treatment.   Further,  the
    prison conditions in Pakistan, particularly in the light  of  5.3.4  of
    the CIG taken with the fact the appellant suffered from a fistula would
    lead to a breach of article 3 or at least to a breach of article 8.  He
    further argued that there was a real prospect that the appellant  would
    be at risk of being subject to the death penalty as someone  who  would
    be regarded as guilty of mutiny and subordination  (see  6.1.1  of  the
    CIG).

Assessment of the Issues

31.  Much of the appellant's evidence  is  not  in  dispute.   It  has  been
    accepted that he was in the Pakistan Air Force for about twelve  years,
    working as a technician as part of an intelligence unit  with  the  Air
    Force.  He worked in logistical support.  He deserted whilst on  active
    service and his name is on the ECL list.

32.  It is common ground that as a deserter,  were  he  to  be  returned  to
    Pakistan, there was a substantial degree of likelihood that he would be
    detained and referred to the military authorities for them to  consider
    what action to take.  The fact that the appellant would be referred  to
    a military tribunal and not to a civil tribunal with no right of appeal
    to a civil tribunal is confirmed by the documentary evidence which  has
    been produced (2A, 29-30).

33.  When interviewed at Q68 the appellant said that his life  would  be  in
    real danger if he had to  go  back.   He  would  be  detained  and  the
    intelligence would first put him through lots of interrogation  and  he
    was sure he would be tortured to get any information about  whether  he
    had shared any state secrets with any person or countries.  If he  were
    put through this punishment and interrogation, he would  be  rigorously
    punished.  He said that they would put a charge of  mutiny  because  in
    their eyes he had committed treason and had demoralised his colleagues.
     He gave further details of his fears at Q102 and at Q103 and said that
    he had not shared any  secret  or  any  information  with  anybody  but
    questioned whether the intelligence officers could  be  trusted  saying
    that if anything was put on his file as evidence that he  had  done  so
    then he would be subject to  the  death  penalty  and  that  every  day
    someone was executed in Pakistan.

34.  The extract from the International Commission of  Jurists  Report  June
    2016  (2A,  26-7)  records  that  Pakistani  military  courts  are  not
    independent and that the proceeding  before  them  fall  far  short  of
    national or international fair trial  standards.   Judges  or  military
    officers are part of the executive branch of the state and do not enjoy
    independence from the military hierarchy.  Further, the Pakistani  army
    does not guarantee either public trials  in  court  martial  or  public
    hearings in court martial appeals and civilian courts have no appellate
    jurisdiction over decisions of the court martial.

35.  So far as prison  conditions  are  concerned,  the  CIG  confirms  that
    prison conditions are extremely poor (3.1.1) and that an unofficial six
    year moratorium on judicial executions was ended in December 2014 since
    when hundreds of executions have been carried out (2.4.1).   At  5.2.2.
    the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan's Annual Report for 2014  noted
    that in some prison barracks a few convicts  had  to  stand  while  the
    other slept and prisoners could not access the washroom  in  the  night
    because sleeping prisoners covered  the  entire  barrack  floor.   Such
    conditions amounted to ill-treatment and were beyond the punishment  of
    penal confinement prisoners had to bear.  According to the same  report
    (5.3.4) the condition of prisons in Pakistan remained dismal and  there
    were chronic issues such as overcrowding,  lack  of  proper  healthcare
    system, inferior quality food, corruption and rampant  torture  in  the
    year under review.

36.  Although torture in custody is contrary to  the  Pakistan  Penal  Code,
    nonetheless the HRCP 2015 Annual Report (5.4.2) stated that  "custodial
    torture remain one of the gravest and most pressing human rights issues
    in Pakistan".

37.  It is against this  background  that  the  information  sought  by  the
    respondent and set out in the chain of emails between June and  October
    2015 must be set.  In response to an enquiry in an email dated 22  July
    2015 it is confirmed that people whose names are on the ECL,  if  lucky
    enough not to be noticed during their exit from Pakistan, are  arrested
    and handed over to the relevant military authorities on their  arrival.
    It is then said that it has been confirmed that they are  not  tortured
    or subject to inhumane treatment at all.  Further enquiries  were  made
    leading to the response in the email of 6 October 2015 already set  out
    at [21] above.

38.  The email also refers to the following question:

         "Also, in a previous email you talked about them going  to  country
         jail and then sent back to military service  -  which  sounds  less
         harsh  than  what  the  law  implies  -   'lengthy   sentence/death
         penalty'".  Do you know how long they are likely to  be  imprisoned
         for?"

    The answer is:


         "They are sent to country  prisons  after  the  decision  made  by
         military court if they are to be  jailed/sentenced  for  number  of
         months/years.  'Lengthy sentence/death penalty' is only awarded  in
         case of heinous crimes or crimes  against  state.   The  length  of
         imprisonment depends on the charges."

39.  Drawing the threads of the evidence together I  am  satisfied  that  it
    establishes that there is at least a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood
    that the appellant as a deserter whilst on active service whose name is
    on  the  ECL  would  be  at  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  during  his
    interrogation and detention, in breach of article 3, before  being  put
    on trial before a military tribunal.  The reference in the CIG at 5.4.1
    to "custodial torture being rampant in jails and police stations" taken
    with the guarded response to the first  question  in  the  email  of  6
    October 2015 which only says that those who are  simply  deserters  are
    not tortured and not subject to inhuman  treatment  satisfies  me  that
    there are substantial grounds for believing that there would be such  a
    risk for this appellant in his particular circumstances.  For the  sake
    of completeness I should add that the evidence relating to whether  the
    appellant would be at real risk of a death penalty is tenuous and  does
    not reach the standard required to  justify  a  grant  of  leave  under
    article 3 on that  basis  alone.   Again,  so  far  as  general  prison
    conditions are concerned, I find that a real risk arises so far as  the
    appellant is concerned because of the risk of detention as  a  deserter
    in prison barracks.

40.  In his evidence the appellant said that he would  withdraw  his  asylum
    claim if he were to be issued with a passport.  Prima facie this  could
    be treated as evidence that he is not afraid of returning.  However,  I
    am satisfied that the appellant was seeking to emphasise his conviction
    that he would not be in fact issued with a passport and was not in  any
    way indicating that he was not afraid of returning, a position which in
    any event would be at odds with the way his application  has  been  put
    from the beginning.

41.  For these reasons I am satisfied that the appellant would  be  at  real
    risk of treatment contrary to article 3 were he to be returned to  face
    the consequences of his desertion from the  Pakistani  Air  Force.   It
    follows that he is entitled to humanitarian protection.   The  fear  of
    harm does not arise for a Convention reason and so does not engage  the
    Refugee Convention.

Decision

42.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside.  I  re-make
    the decision by allowing the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.
     No application has been made to vary or discharge the anonymity  order
    made by the First-tier Tribunal which remains in  force  until  further
    order.




Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 15 September 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
