
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12467/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 April 2019                              |On 14 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     T W
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G Mellon of Counsel instructed by David Benson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed against a decision of the  respondent  dated  14
    September 2015 to refuse to grant him asylum.   After  the  appeal  had
    been remitted twice to the First-tier Tribunal the appeal  was  allowed
    by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Carroll  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 25 October 2018.  After a hearing on 23 January  2019  I
    set aside that decision and directed that the appeal  be  heard  afresh
    before me.  In these circumstances the appeal  came  before  me  on  17
    April 2019.

2.    In my decision setting  aside  the  determination,  which  is  annexed
    hereto, I set out the appellant's immigration history and  referred  to
    the medical evidence placed before the First-tier Judge.  In paragraphs
    25 through 28 of my determination I gave my reasons for  setting  aside
    the decision and referred to the  reasons  for  refusal  given  by  the
    Secretary of State.

3.    In drafting this determination I note the terms  of  the  judgment  of
    the Supreme Court in KV (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019]  UKSC  10  which  was
    handed down on 6 March 2019, that is two weeks after  my  decision  was
    promulgated.  That judgment dealt  with  the  issue  of  self-inflicted
    injury by proxy and, in effect, emphasised that wounding  by  SIBP  was
    "generally so unlikely" and that an explanation would have to be  found
    for the number of wounds incurred. It  was  the  view  of  the  Supreme
    Court, endorsing the judgment of Elias LJ that:

         "... very considerable weight should be  given  to  the  fact  that
         injuries which are SIBP  are  likely  to  be  extremely  rare.   An
         individual is highly unlikely to want to suffer the continuing pain
         and discomfort resulting from self-inflicted harm, even  if  he  is
         anaesthetised  when  the  harm   is   inflicted.    Moreover,   the
         possibility that the injuries may have been sustained in  this  way
         is even likely in circumstances  where  the  applicant  would  have
         needed to be anaesthetised.  This would  in  all  probability  have
         required the clandestine co-operation of  a  qualified  doctor  who
         would have had  to  be  willing  to  act  in  breach  of  the  most
         fundamental and ethical  standards,  and  who  had  access  to  the
         relevant medical equipment."

4.   The issue of the scars on the  appellant's  back  therefore  becomes  a
    central issue in this appeal.  While the  respondent  has  put  forward
    clear reasons why the appellant's claim is not  credible.   I  have  to
    consider the credibility of the appellant's claim in the context of the
    clear direction from the Supreme  Court  that  it  would  be  extremely
    unlikely that the injuries which the appellant suffered were  inflicted
    by proxy.  I would add, of course, that the standard of proof  in  this
    asylum claim is that of serious possibility or reasonable likelihood.

5.   Both Miss Mellon and Mr Kotas referred to numerous documents  including
    the various medical reports, the letter of refusal, relevant  case  law
    including GJ and Others (post-civil war returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]
    and ME  (Sri  Lanka)  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1486  as  well  as  background
    documentation.  The appellant gave evidence  regarding  his  claims  of
    what had happened to him in Sri Lanka before he came to  Britain  as  a
    student and when he was deported from Martinique.  I consider  that  it
    is of use if I set out the submissions made to me at the hearing before
    referring to the  documentary  evidence.   In  brief  however,  in  his
    evidence before me, the appellant relied on  two  statements  and  said
    that he had developed sympathy for Tamils after seeing videos of Tamils
    being ill-treated. He had helped LTTE members escape from  Vavuniya  to
    Chilaw, receiving 50,000 rupees on each occasion.  He was helped by his
    father who was a lorry driver.  In all he made five journeys.   He  had
    travelled on the last occasion to Vavuniya with a Tamil friend, Ganesh,
    in his three-wheeler (his tuk-tuk) and while there his mother told  him
    not to return to Chilaw as his father had been picked up at their  home
    and detained and shortly, thereafter, was found  dead  on  the  railway
    line.  He believed that his father had been murdered.

6.   In March 2009 he was picked up at a checkpoint when with a friend.   He
    stated he had been released in November 2009 after a bribe was paid  by
    his brother but was placed on reporting conditions.  He gave details of
    his leaving through the airport with the help  of  an  agent.   He  was
    asked to identify people from photographs.

7.   He stated that when deported from Martinique he had been picked  up  at
    the airport and handed by immigration to the CID and that it  was  then
    found that he was a wanted person so he was taken to  a  judge's  house
    because he was wanted and  thereafter  he  was  sent  to  the  Welikada
    Prison.  He stated that when  he  had  appeared  before  the  judge  he
    learned that his detention was based on a record on a database that  he
    had helped members of the LTTE and that he had escaped from prison  and
    gone to Britain, that he could be supporting the LTTE from Britain  and
    therefore it was necessary to interview him further.  He  said  he  had
    been shown pictures when in prison and said he did not know the  people
    in the pictures, although he had recognised one person.  He  said  that
    he was ill-treated while he was being questioned.  He  stated  that  he
    had been released after the intervention of a Member of Parliament  but
    the release had not been legal.  There was  a  record  which  indicated
    that he was still imprisoned.  He had left  on  a  false  passport  but
    which contained a photograph but not his name.

8.   In cross-examination the appellant was asked  why  he  had  helped  the
    members of the LTTE and he said that he had  wanted  to  help  a  Tamil
    friend after seeing videos of ill-treatment.   His  evidence  regarding
    the contents of the videos was that it showed an atrocity after a  bomb
    had gone off and he mentioned that the LTTE had forced people  to  join
    them.  One of the videos had shown people being tortured.  He then gave
    details of the money which he had received for transporting Tamils  and
    said that he had helped Tamils because they were "normal people".

9.   Although he was primarily a musician he had also driven a  tuk-tuk  and
    he said that his father had helped transport Tamils  in  his  lorry  on
    four occasions, but on the fifth occasion he had been with a  Tamil  in
    his tuk-tuk.  He was then referred to the report of Dr Leggatt in which
    Dr Leggatt had said that the appellant had told her that his father was
    initially keen for the  family's  tuk-tuk  to  be  used  but  that  the
    appellant had made various round trips to  Vavuniya  to  collect  Tamil
    passengers who were escaping the civil war.  The  appellant  emphasised
    that he had said that his father had helped him.  He confirmed that he,
    but not his father, had been paid and that he had persuaded his  father
    to help.

10.  He was referred to a comment that he had made to a doctor that  he  had
    been involved in the militia.  He stated that that was wrong:  what  he
    had said was that he had been detained by the militia in an army  camp.
    He was then referred to a letter from his  doctor  dated  6  June  2016
    which described visits to the doctor in May and June 2016 when  he  had
    complained of back pain.  Mr Kotas then asked him how it was that if he
    was suffering from posttraumatic  stress  disorder  such  that  he  was
    unable to attend the course for which he had received the student  visa
    in August 2010, he had been able to work in Tesco.  He said that he had
    not worked.  It was then pointed out to him that he  had  attended  his
    doctor in December 2014 when it was  said  that  he  had  been  trapped
    between two doors in a hospital while delivering pizza.  He  was  asked
    if he was working then.  He was also asked about the fact that  at  one
    appointment it was stated that he had been accompanied by  his  sister.
    He said he was accompanied by the woman with whose family he was living
    at that time.  He stated that he had  been  trying  to  get  to  Canada
    because he had been told that  he  could  not  succeed  in  the  asylum
    application here.

11.  Having given Mr Kotas further details of his detention at  the  airport
    on return in 2015 he was  again  asked  about  his  attendance  at  the
    doctor's surgery and asked if he had mentioned the scars on  his  back.
    He said that he may have talked about it.  He was asked why the  doctor
    had not said that he had scars on his back and it was put to  him  that
    at that time he had not had scars on his back.

12.  He was asked if he had been involved in  activity  in  Britain  and  he
    said that he had not and he confirmed  to  Mr  Kotas  that  he  had  no
    evidence that there was an arrest warrant outstanding for him.  He said
    that he was no longer in contact with his mother.  He said that he  had
    not instructed a lawyer  in  Sri  Lanka  and  that  one  had  not  been
    contacted apart from the obtaining of the affidavit from his mother.

13.  I asked him:

         "Is it true when you first saw the doctor here  you  did  not  have
         scars on your back?".

     The appellant replied:

         "I don't remember I met a doctor in 2015 and I do not remember.   I
         showed the doctor my wounds".

14.  In his submissions Mr Kotas relied on the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    and asked  me  to  find  that  the  appellant's  claim  was  inherently
    implausible and inconsistent with the country guidance in GJ  and  that
    in effect the core of the appellant's claim had not happened.  He would
    therefore not be on risk on return and in that regard  he  referred  to
    the judgment of the Court of Appeal in ME (Sri Lanka).  He asked me  to
    find the appellant's story of having watched a  number  of  videos  and
    then decided to assist Tamils to move  around  was,  for  a  Sinhalese,
    extremely unlikely unless there was financial motivation.  He  had  not
    stated at interview why he would assist the Tamils, but only said  that
    he was sympathetic  with  them  and  would  therefore  help  them  out.
    Moreover, he had indicated that the money paid related  to  his  father
    rather than to himself and if there had been a  financial  remuneration
    factor surely  that  would  have  been  mentioned  at  interview.   The
    appellant had been vague in what he had seen in the  videos  and  there
    was discrepancies in his claim of  how  he  had  moved  people  around,
    whether by lorry or in the tuk-tuk.  Moreover, he was vague as  to  how
    his brother had secured his release - the assertion of how he had  been
    released was really based on convenient happenstance.  If it  were  the
    case that the appellant had feared returning then surely he would  have
    claimed asylum here before attempting to go to Canada.  Mr  Kotas  also
    referred to the fact that a doctor had mentioned that he  had  attended
    with his sister.

15.  He added that the appellant had told the doctor that  he  was  involved
    with the military and the reality was  that  he  had  merely  tried  to
    explain that away.  His story had  changed  depending  on  who  he  had
    talked to.

16.  The appellant claimed that he had been detained at the airport in  2015
    but the independent evidence,  set out in GJ was  that  there  were  no
    detention facilities at the airport.  Moreover, there was  no  evidence
    of a warrant or court order and therefore there was no  reason  why  he
    should have been on a stop list.  He would surely have been allowed  to
    go home.

17.  With regard to the appellant's scarring his assertion was that  he  had
    been subjected to repeated burns but when he got out of  detention  his
    grounds were only treated with cream.  Moreover, when first seen by his
    doctor he had not had scars although the doctor had examined  his  back
    before sending him for an x-ray.  This was powerful evidence that there
    were no scars when he was examined.  Surely if he had  just  had  fresh
    scars he would have asked the doctor to check  them  over  and  if  the
    doctor, having examined  him  had  seen  them,  that  would  have  been
    mentioned.  The only logical conclusion was that he did not have  scars
    when he arrived in Britain and was first seen by a doctor.

18.  Moreover, the appellant had not claimed that he had  left  the  country
    since returning to Britain and therefore the scars could only have been
    caused by what had happened to him here.  He referred  to  Dr  Leggat's
    report but asked me to consider that they did not indicate that he  had
    received the injuries in Sri Lanka.  The  evidence  was,  he  asserted,
    that the appellant was an economic migrant.

19.  Alternatively, he asked me to conclude that taking  the  claim  at  its
    highest and given that there was no evidence of an  arrest  warrant  or
    that the appellant was on a stop list the only possible reason he could
    face persecution was because he had helped someone in 2008,  which  was
    eleven years ago.  He pointed out the appellant had not  been  involved
    in politics and there was no evidence of diaspora  activities  and  the
    reality was the appellant, if returned, was merely just a failed asylum
    seeker.  It may be that he was ill-treated when he had returned because
    he had used a false passport but that would not be the case  on  return
    now as he would  be  returning  on  a  travel  document.   There  would
    therefore be no risk on return.

20.   In reply Miss Mellon asked me to find that the appellant's  claim  was
    credible.  She  emphasised  that  the  appellant  had  been  consistent
    throughout the asylum process and under cross-examination and indeed in
    what he had said to the medical professionals.  The  points  raised  by
    the  respondent  were  minor.   His  evidence   had   been   consistent
    throughout.  He had been involved in the Tamil movement and  had  given
    reasons why that was the case.  Indeed,  there  was  some  evidence  of
    Sinhala support for the Tamil cause  and  indeed  evidence  that  those
    Sinhalese who supported the Tamils were more severely punished.     The
    only inconsistency is relating to the appellant's detention in 2015  as
    to whether or not the appellant was held at the airport.  He had  given
    a reason for this by stating that he was on a stop list.

21.  She asked me to place no weight on the fact that the  doctor  had  said
    that the appellant's sister had attended  with  him.   With  regard  to
    scarring she asked me to note that at no time had the respondent raised
    the issue of self-inflicted injury  by  proxy  either  in  the  refusal
    letter or at any other time.   She stated that the  reality  was  there
    was some  inaccuracies  in  the  general  practitioner's  records,  for
    example that she had referred to the appellant as being British but she
    had said that he had been assaulted in Sri Lanka.

22.  She referred me to Dr Leggat's report regarding  lower  back  pain  and
    asked me to make a distinction between lower back pain and  upper  back
    pain and stated in  any  event  that  pictures  were  provided  at  the
    substantive interview.  She referred me to the report of  Dr  Cohen  of
    the Medical Foundation which affirmed  that  the  "burn  lesions"  were
    diagnostic of the cause of torture attributed and had stated  that  "by
    the definition of paragraph 187 of the Istanbul Protocol, that no other
    cause is possible".  This was a relatively rare finding  and  had  been
    arrived at by an extremely experienced independent  specialist  medical
    expert from the Medical Foundation Medico-Legal  Report  Service.   She
    also referred to the psychological report and  the  decision  that  the
    appellant required further counselling.  She argued that the  appellant
    was at risk of suicide and therefore would qualify under Article  3  of
    the ECHR.


Discussion

23.  While the reality is that it is likely to  be  rare  that  a  Sinhalese
    would support the LTTE the  appellant  gave  two  reasons  for  why  he
    carried out in transporting Tamils between  Chilaw  and  Vavuniya.   He
    stated that he had Tamil friends who had shown him videos of atrocities
    which had taken place.  While Mr  Kotas  asked  me  to  find  that  the
    appellant was inconsistent about what he had seen on the  short  videos
    the reality was that he saw more  than  one  and  therefore  I  do  not
    consider that there is inconsistency between having seen  instances  of
    torture on video and the results of a bomb blast.  Moreover, there  was
    clearly a financial  motive  for  this  appellant  whose  income  as  a
    musician is unlikely to have been large and which was  supplemented  by
    his work as a tuk-tuk driver.  I do not consider that there is anything
    of import in the apparent  discrepancy  between  his  saying  that  his
    father transported people by lorry on four occasions and also  that  he
    used his own tuk-tuk.  It is clear that his father was involved in what
    might be considered to be a family money making scheme  and  I  do  not
    therefore place weight on any apparent discrepancy as to whether or not
    the lorry or the tuk-tuk was used on  all  occasions  or,  as  is  more
    likely, on most occasions but  not  on  the  last.   Applying  the  low
    standard of proof, I accept the appellant's evidence that  for  reasons
    both of sympathy - and he clearly had in mind the fact  that  the  LTTE
    were themselves oppressing Tamils - that  he  should  have  transported
    Tamils not only out of sympathy but for financial  reasons.   I  accept
    that having been detained that would have  led  to  his  detention  and
    clearly if he were released after detention it would be likely that  he
    would be asked to "sign on".

24.  Having arrived in Britain the appellant had leave  to  remain  for  two
    years and immediately, in 2010, obtained work.  That in itself does not
    detract from his story of what  had  happened  to  him  in  Sri  Lanka,
    notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8.  I do not place weight  on
    the apparent discrepancy that he said that he  was  not  working  after
    2012 despite the fact that he was apparently delivering pizza  when  he
    was trapped between two doors, a situation which could well  have  been
    traumatising for him particularly if he had been detained in the  past.



25.  The appellant says that his father was detained because of what he  was
    doing and I consider that that is possible although I do not  make  any
    finding on whether or not  the  appellant's  father  was  killed  while
    detained.

26.  In all, having considered the evidence in detail I  can  only  conclude
    on the low standard of proof the appellant's story of events up to  his
    coming to Britain are reasonably likely to have taken place.

27.  I would add that I am not  blind  to  discrepancies  between  what  the
    appellant may have said at interview  and  what  was  recorded  in  the
    doctor's notes but the reality is a doctor's duty  is  not  to  take  a
    witness  statement  but  to  consider  medical  matters  and  prescribe
    relevant remedies.

28.  The appellant states that when he was returned to Sri Lanka in 2015  he
    was picked up by immigration and handed over to the  CID  when  he  was
    taken before a judge before being taken to prison.  I do  not  consider
    that what he stated was inconsistent with the guidance in GJ given that
    he says that he was handed over by immigration  to  the  CID  and  then
    taken to a judge before going to prison.  In prison,  he  said  he  was
    tortured and asked to name people whose photographs he was shown before
    his release was secured by a Member of  Parliament.   He  then  escaped
    through the airport using a false passport with his own photograph.   I
    consider that that is possible but it does lead to  the  issue  of  the
    scarring which he has on his back and which was shown to Dr Leggat.  Dr
    Leggat was clearly of the view that the appellant was tortured  in  the
    way he claimed and that the  scarring  was  diagnostic  of  that.   She
    stated that the lesions she saw were  in  keeping  with  burn  injuries
    sustained ten months previously - that is  at  the  beginning  of  2015
    before the appellant  returned.   Her  report  is  compliant  with  the
    Istanbul Protocol.  She is clearly experienced and her credentials  are
    endorsed by Dr Cohen.

 29.   Mr Kotas referred me to the general  practitioner's  notes,  pointing
    out that when the appellant saw his general practitioner on his  return
    in April and May 2015 no mentioned was made of scarring.   However,  it
    is the case that when the appellant was  seen  in  May  2015  with  the
    problem of "back pain" the doctor  did  state  "assault  in  Sri  Lanka
    February?" and stated that there was tenderness to  the  bone.   On  15
    June 2016 the notes referred to, on examination  "scars  on  back  from
    where being burned.".  It is of note that that  entry  does  not  state
    "new scars" and although the notes refer  to  the  appellant  having  a
    "usual GP", Dr Sun, I consider that had "new" scars been found on  that
    occasion that would have been indicated.   I  therefore  do  not  place
    weight on the fact that scars were not mentioned when the appellant was
    first examined by his GP and indeed I cannot be certain that the doctor
    looked at his upper back as it was lower back pain for which he went to
    see the doctor.  I would add that the reality is when interviewed on 30
    July 2015 the appellant did state that he had been tortured but  it  is
    of note that there were no follow up questions asked.   It  would  have
    surely been appropriate for the interviewer to have asked  how  he  was
    tortured or asked to see the scars. While the  writer  of  the  refusal
    letter did have photographs of the scars before  him,  they  were  only
    considered in the light of the guidance in Tanveer  Ahmed  which  quite
    clearly from the judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  KV  was  not
    appropriate.   Again,  following  that  judgment  and  there  being  no
    alternative explanation put forward by the respondent I can  only  find
    that the appellant's scars were obtained in the way he states - that is
    that he was tortured in Sri Lanka in 2015.

30.  Mr Kotas asked me to conclude that, even taking the  appellant's  claim
    at its highest he would not be in danger of persecution on  return  now
    following the guidance in GJ.

31.  I follow the judgment in ME (Sri Lanka) and note  that  of  course  the
    guidance in GJ is not determinative.  There is also in  the  background
    documentation considerable evidence that there is  still  ongoing  ill-
    treatment of those who are thought to be inimical  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    state.  Moreover, I am conscious of the provisions of paragraph 339  of
    the Rules and that past persecution  can  be  determinative  of  future
    persecution.  While I accept Mr Kotas' argument that there is no arrest
    warrant outstanding for the appellant on return and no warrant for  his
    arrest I consider that given what has happened in the past  there  must
    be a serious possibility that he would be on a stop list and  therefore
    detained, and coming from Britain with his history and indeed  what  he
    asserts was said to the judge and what was  given as a reason  for  his
    continued detention - that he was coming from Britain  and  might  have
    been involved in diaspora activities and be a supporter of the  LTTE  -
    and further given that  there  is  some  evidence  that  Sinhalese  who
    supported the LTTE are treated particularly harshly,  I  consider  that
    on the low standard of proof there is a real risk  that  the  appellant
    would face persecution on return.  I therefore, having  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Judge, allow this appeal on asylum and human
    rights grounds.



Notice of Decision

     This appeal is allowed on asylum grounds and further  on  human  rights
    grounds (Article 3).


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: [pic]                           Date: 5 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy




Annex.

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Carroll,  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 25 October 2018 allowed  the  appeal  of  TW  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to grant asylum.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me I  will  for
    ease of reference refer  to  him  as  the  respondent  as  he  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier.  Similarly I will refer  to  TW  as  the
    appellant as he was the appellant in the First-tier.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born  on  23  June  1983.   He
    initially came to Britain as a student in June 2010 but  his  leave  to
    remain in that capacity was curtailed in May 2012.  He then applied for
    a further leave to remain as a student.  That application  was  refused
    in January 2015.

4.   The following month the appellant left Britain intending to  travel  to
    Canada via Martinique.  In Martinique he was  detained  by  the  French
    Authorities and found to be in possession of a forged  passport.  After
    being detained for three days he was then deported to Sri Lanka.

5.   He alleges that on 21 February 2015, on his return  to  Sri  Lanka,  he
    was detained and imprisoned until 4 March 2015 and while in prison that
    he was beaten and tortured. He was shown photographs and  asked  if  he
    knew who the people photographed were.  His mother spoke to a Member of
    Parliament and secured his release. The appellant then left Sri  Lanka.



6.   The appellant's claim was that, although he was Sinhalese  he  and  his
    father had helped transport  LTTE  members  from  Vavuniya  to  Colombo
    between 2007 and 2010. He said that in March 2009 he had  been  stopped
    in a random check when it was found that he was wanted by the  TID.  He
    was detained by the police before being taken  to  the  Boosa  Camp  in
    Galle where he was kept until November that year being tortured but not
    questioned.  His brother paid a bribe for him to be released and  after
    release he had been told to report in Colombo.  He had left Colombo  in
    August 2010 to come to Britain.

7.   The judge in paragraphs 2 to 8 set out the appellant's immigration  and
    procedural history but made no mention of his  being  detained  in  Sri
    Lanka in 2015.  He did however state that he adopted paragraphs 3 to 13
    of the reasons for  refusal  which  referred  to  the  appellant  being
    detained  in March 2010 and in 2015.

8.   The judge noted medical  evidence  which  included  a  report  from  Dr
    Virginia Leggatt.  He quoted from  that  report  and  in  particular  a
    section heading "interpretation of physical evidence" which referred to
    lesions which were caused by burns to the  appellant's  back  sustained
    while he was imprisoned in March 2015.  She said that she had  examined
    him in January 2016 - months later -  and  that  the  lesions  were  in
    keeping with burn injuries sustained ten months before.

9.   The judge also referred to a  letter  from  Dr  Cohen  of  the  Medical
    Foundation who referred to Dr Leggatt's report saying that her  finding
    that the burn lesions were diagnostic of torture was a relatively  rare
    finding but had been arrived at by an extremely experienced independent
    specialist medical expert and he went on to  further  comment  that  Dr
    Leggatt had said that the appellant had not exaggerated or  embellished
    his psychological  evidence  which   might  be  expected  in  a  person
    fabricating an account.  The judge also considered a psychiatric report
    prepared by Dr S Dhumad who concluded that the appellant's presentation
    was consistent with a diagnosis of moderate depressive episode and that
    his symptoms met the criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder.

10.  The judge referred to the determination  of  the  Tribunal  in  GJ  and
    Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  and  to  the
    various relevant factors set out therein.

11.  In paragraphs 23 onwards the  judge  set  out  his  assessment  of  the
    appellant's case.  He noted that the appellant's involvement  with  the
    LTTE was limited to the years 2007 to 2009 and that he did not claim to
    be subject to any arrest warrant nor did he claim to have taken part in
    any Tamil activist activities whilst in the  UK.   He  noted  that  the
    appellant claimed to have been required  to  report  after  his  second
    detention and that his claim that he would be of interest  to  the  Sri
    Lankan Authorities "arises out of his claim  that  he  has  been  twice
    detained and tortured".

12.  The judge went on to say that aspects of the appellant's  account  "are
    insufficiently supported by the evidence" referring to the  appellant's
    claim that his father was arrested, detained  and  killed.   The  judge
    stated that the only document before him relating  to  the  appellant's
    father's death indicated that the death, as  recorded,  was  due  to  a
    train accident.

13.  The judge then went on to say:-

         "25.     Looked at overall, however,  the  appellant  has  given  a
             credible and consistent account throughout the asylum  process
             and throughout his engagement with the medical  professionals.
             Dr Leggatt's report is exceptionally careful and detailed  and
             as I have noted above was not before  the  respondent  at  the
             time of the decision under appeal.


         26.  I am satisfied to the required standard that the appellant  is
             credible as to the core of his account to have  been  detained
             and tortured twice by the Sri Lankan Authorities.  He has  not
             sought to embellish his account by claiming to  have  had  any
             role in post-conflict Tamil separatism during his time in  the
             United Kingdom but  the  evidence  shows  that  he  is  highly
             likely, if returned, to be the subject of adverse interest  to
             the Sri Lankan Authorities.  It was accepted in GJ and  Others
             that internal relocation is not possible  for  those  who  are
             considered to be of adverse interest to the Authorities."

14.  The judge therefore allowed the appeal.

15.  The Secretary of State appealed the decision of the judge in the First-
    tier stating that the judge having found that  the  appellant  did  not
    claim to be subject to any arrest warrant and did  not  claim  to  have
    taken part in any Tamil activist activities in Britain  had  failed  to
    correctly apply the risk  attack  categories  in  GJ  and  Others  when
    finding that the appellant was at risk on  return,  particularly  given
    the factual findings that the appellant had ceased  activity  with  the
    LTTE in 2009, there was no outstanding arrest warrant against  him  and
    he  was  not  involved  in  any  diaspora  activities.   Moreover   the
    determination in GJ had stated  that  in  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka  an
    individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent that  was
    perceived by the Sri Lankan Authorities as indicating a present risk to
    the unitary Sri Lankan state or Sri Lankan Government.

16.  It was stated that the judge had failed to adhere to the  findings/risk
    categories in the extant country guidance case by allowing  the  appeal
    on the basis of the appellant's past history in Sri Lanka, rather  than
    the risk factors outlined in GJ and Others.

17.  Permission to appeal was granted on that basis.

18.    At the hearing of the appeal before  me  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  stated
    that the judge had accepted that the appellant had  been  detained  and
    tortured only twice and therefore the remainder of  what  he  had  said
    should be taken as not being accepted by the judge.  It was  not  clear
    on what basis the judge had found that the appellant would be  at  risk
    on return.  The judge had himself  pointed  out  there  was  no  extant
    arrest warrant nor was it suggested there was any ongoing investigation
    with regards to the appellant.  The findings did not say  that  he  was
    required to report but only that he had  been  detained  and  tortured.
    Therefore the appellant did not fall into  any  of  the  relevant  risk
    categories.

19.  Ms Jegarajah, in reply, stated that the  grounds  of  the  appeal  were
    misconceived.  The judge had found it credible that the  appellant  had
    been detained on two  occasions.   She  referred  to  evidence  of  the
    appellant's mental health difficulties and  the  fact  that  there  was
    evidence that he had been tortured.  The  judge  had  incorporated  the
    Secretary of State's factual summary and  she  stated  that  there  was
    evidence from the appellant's mother that CID officers had visited  her
    house after the appellant had been released who had said  that  he  had
    escaped and asked that he be produced.  She stated the  judge  was  not
    required to give much by way of  reasoning.   The  interview  was  very
    detailed and it was clear that the judge accepted  what  the  appellant
    had said.  The appellant had indicated at interview  that  he  believed
    that the Authorities thought that he  had  been  helping  the  LTTE  in
    Britain.

20.  She referred to the judgement in ME (Sri Lanka) [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1486
    asserting  that  it  was  evident  that  any  detention  was  based  on
    sophisticated intelligence and that the appellant  would  still  be  of
    interest in return.

21.  In reply Ms Willocks-Briscoe said that the reality was that  the  judge
    had not made findings  nor  any  attempt  to  analyse  the  appellant's
    account.  It was not clear how he came to his conclusions.

 Discussion.

22.  I consider that there are material errors of law in the  determination.
     The reality is that it was incumbent upon the judge  to  have  engaged
    with the case before him.

23.  It is of note that the judge did not  engage  with  the  terms  of  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter which found that the  appellant's  claim  to
    have helped the LTTE was not credible and had noted  that  by  his  own
    admission  the  appellant  had  not  attended  any   LTTE   events   or
    demonstrations or been politically active  in  Sri  Lanka  and  it  was
    therefore considered that he did not have a significant role or profile
    in relation to post-Tamil separatism and therefore his profile did  not
    meet the relevant category set out in GJ.  Moreover the  appellant  was
    not a journalist or human rights activist, had not  given  evidence  to
    the Lessons Learned and Reconciliation Committee and there was  nothing
    to indicate that his name was on a computerised stop list accessible at
    the airport, comprising a list of  those  against  whom  there  was  an
    extant court order or arrest warrant.

24.  The letter pointed out that he had left Sri Lanka on his  own  passport
    in August 2010 and had only stated "I  think  so"  when  asked  if  the
    Authorities were still looking for him and had  not  accepted  that  he
    was of current interest to the Sri Lankan Authorities.

25.  The Reasons for Refusal Letter contained a  section  dealing  with  the
    appellant's claimed arrest and detention in February 2015 on the  basis
    that it was not accepted that the appellant had helped the LTTE  before
    leaving in March 2010. Reference was made to the treatment of deportees
    from Britain on return to Sri Lanka.  It was accepted that  whilst  the
    appellant might have been questioned because he had been deported  from
    Martinique, that would have been in order to determine if  he  had  any
    outstanding warrants or criminal offences.  Clearly the  appellant  had
    had none.  It was also evident that returnees were  held  for  no  more
    than seven hours and no one had  ever  been  arrested  or  detained  on
    arrival in Sri Lanka and the letter  asserted  therefore  that  it  was
    inconsistent that the appellant would have been arrested on return.  It
    was stated that the photographs did not support his  claimed  treatment
    in detention.  It was also pointed out that the appellant had attempted
    to enter Britain under a false identity in May 2015 which was a  factor
    that damaged his credibility.


26.  The judge  simply  did  not  engage  with  the  reasons  given  by  the
    Secretary of State for  refusing  the  application  nor  does  he  give
    reasons for accepting what the appellant said  and  why  he  considered
    that the respondent was wrong to conclude that the  appellant  was  not
    credible.  He merely states that he accepts the appellant's evidence.

27.  It was incumbent upon him to make findings of fact in  the  context  of
    the background evidence including that  set  out  in  relevant  country
    guidance, give reasons for his findings and then to consider the  claim
    in the context of the categories set out in country guidance.

28.  Clearly the judge did not do this and I consider that that is an  error
    of law and accordingly I set aside  his  determination.   Ms  Jegarajah
    asserted that the grounds of appeal were misconceived in that they  did
    not assert that the judge had made findings which were not open to  him
    or were in any way perverse but  merely referred to the fact  that  the
    judge did not apply  the criteria set out in GJ  and  furthermore  that
    that country guidance case related to Tamils and not to Sinhalese  such
    as the appellant who assisted  Tamils  and  was  therefore  irrelevant.
    While I consider that the grounds of appeal  could  more  clearly  have
    asserted that the judge erred by not giving  reasons for  his  findings
    and conclusion, they  concentrated on the fact that the judge  had  not
    applied the relevant country guidance in  GJ and I  consider  that  the
    grounds, by focusing on the fact that the  judge  did  not  apply  that
    country guidance,  did clearly  point  to  the  error  of  law  in  the
    determination in that that CG determination which  focusing  on  claims
    made by Tamils can clearly be applied to any who assert that they would
    be persecuted because of their support  of  the  Tamil  cause.  By  not
    considering the claim within the context set out in GJ when making  his
    credibility findings the judge erred in law.

29.   It is therefore appropriate that I set aside the determination of  the
    first-tier judge.

Notice of Decision

The judgment of the First-tier Judge is set aside.

Directions

      1. Given that this appeal has already been remitted to the  First-tier
         on two occasions the appeal will remain in the Upper Tribunal for a
         full hearing on all issues.


      2. The time estimate, four hours.


      3. Sinhalese interpreter.


      4. The appellant  will  serve  a  further  bundle  of  documents  duly
         paginated  containing  the  appellant's  statements,  the   medical
         reports, relevant case law and background information.
