
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12590/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Oral Decision & Reasons       |
|On 7 April 2016                               |Promulgated on 16 June 2016   |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and
                                    [M K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J. Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H. Ti, Solicitor, Kesar & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the determination of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bartlett promulgated on 25 January  2016  in  which  she
    allowed the appeal of [MK] against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State made on 23 September 2015 refusing her claim  for  asylum.   [MK]
    had appealed under s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002.  It was this appeal that was allowed by  Judge  Bartlett  in  her
    determination.  However the background of this case is that  there  had
    been a previous hearing which had  been  conducted  in  Glasgow  before
    Immigration Judge Robb on 16 June 2008 in which the judge had dismissed
    [MK]'s appeal.  For the sake of continuity I shall refer to [MK] as the
    appellant as she was in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The circumstances in which Judge Robb came to dismiss  the  appeal  are
    clearly set out in the determination. It appears that there were  three
    significant credibility findings made as to the appellant's claim.  The
    first related to the degree of knowledge  displayed  by  the  appellant
    about the policies in the DRC  that  the  MLC  adopted  and  from  that
    stemmed an issue as to whether the appellant had the relationship  that
    she claimed with one of the leading politicians in that organisation.

 3. The basis upon which  the adverse credibility finding was made was that
    the judge did not consider the  appellant  had  an  adequate  level  of
    knowledge about the MLC's ideologies.  In particular it was  said  that
    the appellant did not  know  the  contents  of  some  of  the  specific
    policies adopted by the MLC.

 4. The second and most  significant  challenge  was  a  challenge  to  the
    appellant's claim that she had been raped and  tortured.   It  is  this
    element which is the focus of the reconsideration, if  I  may  call  it
    that, that was conducted by Judge Bartlett in the subsequent appeal.

 5. The evidence that the appellant had provided was that  she  claimed  to
    have been  repeatedly raped over a period of seven days and that during
    the rapes her genitals had been cut under torture;  that  she  did  not
    receive any medical attention; that the bleeding had  stopped  but  she
    was in bad shape when she left and  she  did  not  subsequently  go  to
    hospital.

 6. Judge Robb noted in paragraph 22 of the determination that  no  medical
    evidence to support her experiences was produced.  Notwithstanding  the
    fact that there was, according to the appellant, physical  evidence  of
    the injuries of which she complained, the Secretary of State  submitted
    that the lack of medical evidence was damaging to  the  credibility  of
    the allegation of rape and torture.  This was, in essence, the approach
    that was adopted by the judge.  He noted in paragraph 27 that there was
    the availability of evidence and that the absence of  medical  evidence
    was a relevant consideration.

 7. In paragraph 28 Judge Robb said:

         "Medical  evidence  of  rape  is  a  relevant  consideration.   Its
         usefulness varies from case to case.  In this appeal the  appellant
         claims to have been  repeatedly raped in March  2007  some  fifteen
         months ago. Although not medically qualified I have to wonder  what
         forensic evidence of rape might be identifiable after  that  period
         of time as rapes do not  necessarily  cause  significant  injuries.
         However she did say that she had been treated with antibiotics  for
         injuries resulting from her rape.  This  suggests  there  was  some
         lasting problem which could be addressed in a  medical  report.   I
         cannot judge what assistance such evidence would have been  to  the
         court but the failure to produce something when the appellant  says
         she has been medically treated leaves unanswered the valid question
         as to why no medical evidence is before the court.  I  am  entitled
         to take this absence of medical evidence into account in  assessing
         her credibility.

         Separately the appellant claims to have had her clitoris cut.  This
         suggests physical damage. It is reasonable to expect that  forensic
         evidence of this damage could be reported on by  a  doctor  failing
         which following examination of a doctor  might  have  reported  and
         explained why no useful evidence did exist.

         I find that the absence of any independent medical  evidence  about
         damage to her clitoris  is  relevant  and  something  which  I  may
         properly consider in assessing the credibility of the appellant  in
         the round."

    In due course the judge came to the conclusion  that  he  rejected  her
    case of rape in the way that she had claimed.

 8. In paragraph 44 the judge concluded:

         "The combination of the faults in her evidence about  the  MLC  and
         her involvement with Mr Bemba's household taken together  with  the
         lack of supporting evidence about her injuries and damage  lead  me
         to find, notwithstanding the low standard of proof required in this
         jurisdiction  and  after  giving  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  whole
         evidence  presented  for  the  appellant,  that  her   account   of
         involvement  with the  MLC, association  with  Jean  Pierre  Bembe,
         detention, imprisonment, rape and torture are false."

 9. The appellant did not appeal  that  determination  but  in  due  course
    another  decision  was  made,  the  decision  which  was  before  Judge
    Bartlett, and that permitted  this  issue  to  be  re-examined  by  the
    Tribunal.  It was re-examined on the strength of medical evidence which
    the case originally cried out for. In saying what I subsequently say  I
    am in no way criticising the decision of Immigration Judge Robb who, on
    the material before him,  undoubtedly  reached  the  correct  decision.
    There were real issues that  could  have  been  determined  by  medical
    evidence and the failure  to  provide  such  evidence  was  a  material
    consideration.

10. However by the time the case came to be examined  there  was  a  report
    from Dr Jillian Evenson who examined the  appellant  on  no  less  than
    three occasions at the Medical Foundation in London; on one occasion on
    10 April 2012, and on two further occasions in May 2012.  She wrote her
    report following those examinations.  In addition it appears  that  she
    had before her the counselling notes at the Medical Foundation for  the
    period 28 April 2011 to 26 April 2012, counselling which had carried on
    over a period of about one year. It was not therefore  the  case  of  a
    medical examiner with only a short opportunity to examine.  There  were
    three examinations and there were medical counselling notes to boot.

11. The significant evidence, and I am only going to highlight one part  of
    this evidence, is in relation to the examination which she conducted in
    respect of the appellant's genitals. That is described in paragraph  46
    of her report but I need not set out what the examination revealed.   I
    can go straight on to deal with the  conclusions  which  are  found  at
    paragraph 67 of the report.  This says:

         "Examination of [MK]'s perineum revealed an  incision  through  the
         left labium minus the  cut  ends  of  which  are  well  healed  and
         normally pigmented but have retracted leaving a very noticeable gap
         S12 in  the  continuity  of  the  lip  towards  the  clitoral  end.
         Anterior to S12 at the tip of the labium lies S11, a sphere of pink
         granulation  tissue  formed  during  healing  but  which  has   not
         progressed further to dense white scar tissue.  Perhaps because the
         cut here was severe and amputated tissue, these lesions are  highly
         consistent with the attribution that they  were  inflicted  by  the
         sharp edges of the end of a  rifle  as  the  weapon  was  viciously
         thrust in and out of  her  vagina  abrading,  cutting  and  tearing
         tissue in a random, irregular manner. [MK] inspected  her  perineum
         with a mirror some  time  later  and  understandably  believed  her
         clitoris had been cut in the assault.  However it is the left inner
         labium which has evidently been cut in two places.  The wounds  had
         to heal naturally, by secondary intention, which has contributed to
         the  resultant  anatomical  distortion.   The   scarring   it   not
         characteristic  of  traditional  female  genital  mutilation,   nor
         injuries suffered in childbirth, nor is it likely that it  occurred
         through accidental  or  self-inflicted  injury,  and  [MK]  has  no
         history of any of these events."

12. On the basis of this material the clear conclusion that was provided by
    the medical evidence was that the appellant had been the subject  of  a
    violent assault using an instrument similar to a rifle which  had  been
    viciously thrust in and out  of  her  in  a  way  that  could  only  be
    consistent with extreme violence.  There was  no  material  to  suggest
    that it was caused in any other way  and  it  does  not  appear  to  be
    possible to conclude that it was accidental.

13. That had a number of consequences.  First, it  provided  a  reason  for
    departing from the determination of Judge Robb.  He had suggested in no
    uncertain terms that the absence of relevant  medical  evidence  was  a
    significant factor, not simply in his consideration of  the  allegation
    that she had been possibly assaulted, but it  was  also  a  significant
    factor in his finding that none of the rest of the applicant's  account
    was credible.  Accordingly it was a matter that the second judge, Judge
    Bartlett, was required to take into account when she heard  the  appeal
    on 15 January 2016.  Second, the appellant's own prior account  of  her
    injuries was consistent with  the  medical  evidence  in  circumstances
    where she could not have known her account would be cortically examined
    by a forensic medical practitioner.

14. The Secretary of State makes three principal points in the  grounds  of
    appeal.  The first is that the judge misdirected  herself  in  applying
    Mibanga.  It has been described as a reverse Mibanga point.  In Mibanga
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA  Civ  367  the
    credibility  of  account  is  considered  in  the  context  of  medical
    evidence.  The issue  sometimes  arises  as   to  whether  the  medical
    evidence is considered after the conclusion of  the  findings  of  fact
    which are used to discredit the medical evidence (the  so-called  'cart
    before the horse') or whether the medical  evidence  is  considered  as
    part of the findings of fact and which is used to inform those findings
    of fact.  Similarly it is clearly wrong for the judge to rely  entirely
    upon a medical report as proving the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    account and then not engaging with the adverse credibility points which
    had previously been raised.

15. The second point that is made is in relation to the   decision  of  the
    Tribunal in JL (Medical reports, credibility) China [2013]  UKUT  00145
    (IAC) where it is said that those writing medical reports  for  use  in
    immigration and asylum appeals should ensure that  where  possible  and
    before forming their opinions they  study  any  assessments  that  have
    already been made of the appellant's  credibility  by  the  immigration
    authorities.  But it also goes on to say that they should not conduct a
    running commentary on  the  reasoning  of  the  judge  undermining  the
    credibility findings that have been made.

16. I note in the context of this case Dr Evenson referred expressly to the
    material that was before her in page 1 of her report.  It is clear that
    she referred to the determination of the appeal by  Judge  Robb  on  17
    June 2008.  I am also satisfied that she did not fall into the error of
    then conducting a blow by blow demolition  of  the  judge's  reasoning.
    She confined herself to her examination and the  physical  consequences
    of an event about which she was able to speak.

17. The final point made is in relation to Devaseelan  and  the  extent  to
    which a judge should not depart from previous findings unless there was
    sufficient evidence to permit such a departure.   In  this  case  I  am
    quite satisfied that there was sufficient evidence to  satisfy  such  a
    departure because the very thing that was crucial in the  determination
    of Judge Robb, namely the failure to produce medical evidence, had been
    satisfied when the case came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Bartlett.



18. So then it requires me to go on and consider the determination of Judge
    Bartlett.  First of all, it is clear that the  judge  knew  quite  well
    what the determination of Judge  Robb  had  said.   It  is  recited  in
    paragraph 6 of the Judge Bartlett's determination where the credibility
    findings which I have considered were considered.  (There was  a  third
    credibility finding in relation  to  the  circumstances  in  which  the
    appellant claimed she had left the  DRC  but  that  was  not  pursued.)
    There were  therefore  two  credibility  findings  which  required  re-
    examination, the one in relation to the appellant's  MLC  activity  and
    the second in relation to the allegation  of  rape  and  torture.   The
    judge drew extensively upon the medical report of Dr  Evenson,  setting
    out the relevant passages in paragraph 20  of  her  determination.  She
    then went on to consider Judge Robb's determination itself in paragraph
    30 of her determination  and  then  reviewed  Dr  Evenson's  report  in
    paragraph 30 of her determination and then reviewed Dr Evenson's report
    in paragraph 31, having contrasted what the judge had said in  relation
    to the same events in the determination of 2008.

19. The judge said in paragraph 31:

         "Having reviewed Dr Evenson's report  and  in  light  of  the  2008
         determination I find that the appellant has suffered  the  horrific
         rape, sexual violence and torture set out therein.  I consider that
         the evidence from Dr Evenson is a good reason for me to  make  this
         finding of fact as is the statement in the 2008 determination  that
         'the absence of medical evidence to support her testimony  and  the
         lack of explanation for its absence  I  do  find  damaging  to  the
         credibility of this claim'. The report from Dr Evenson is detailed.
          The conclusion was that the appellant's  scarring  throughout  her
         body is highly consistent with her claims of  sexual  torture.  The
         psychological findings from the report also support the appellant's
         account  and  the  physical  scarring.   I  do   not   accept   the
         respondent's claim that  the  fact  of  discrepancies  between  the
         information detailed in Dr Evenson's report  and  the  account  the
         appellant gave  in  the  asylum  interviews  is  to  undermine  her
         credibility in this regard.  It is not  reasonable  or  correct  to
         expect somebody who has  suffered  deep  and  sustained  trauma  to
         maintain wholly accurate and consistent memories or to recount such
         consistently.  I find her accounts to be broadly consistent and  it
         is this which is important rather than expecting her accounts to be
         exactly the same."

20. My assessment of this part of the determination of  Judge  Bartlett  is
    that she was properly taking into account  the  findings  of  the  2008
    determination.  She was revisiting them as a  result  of  the  material
    contained in Dr Evenson's report.  She  was  taking  into  account  the
    inconsistency allegations which had been raised  by  the  Secretary  of
    State and reached a perfectly sustainable conclusion that the appellant
    had been violated in the way that she had always  claimed.   It  is  of
    some note that the claim that was advanced by the appellant was a claim
    that she then had no reason to know would be supported in  such  detail
    by the report of Dr Evenson.  It would of course  have  been  possible,
    had she fabricated an account, to find that the  fabricated account did
    not match the medical findings that had been provided  by  Dr  Evenson.
    That is not the case here and the finding made by the  judge  that  her
    claim to have been attacked  in  the  way  that  she  had  stated,  was
    credible.

21. In paragraph 35 the judge also went on to consider the medical notes of
    the counsellor  and  concluded  that  it  was  not  credible  that  the
    appellant would maintain a deception with a counsellor whom she had met
    so many times over an extensive period of time and be able to  maintain
    what was in essence a lie.  Accordingly she found in paragraph 36  that
    the  account  given  by  the  appellant  to  Dr   Evenson   about   the
    circumstances of her detention, how her detention  came  to  pass,  was
    consistent with her scarring and mental health diagnosis and reasonably
    consistent with  the  account  given  in  the  asylum  interviews.  The
    discrepancies did not undermine her overall case.

22. In these circumstances the judge then went on to  reach  a  sustainable
    conclusion that the account that had been provided by the appellant was
    sufficient to maintain the asylum claim that she was advancing.  It was
    open to the judge to depart from the earlier finding.  This  inevitably
    affected Judge Bartlett's approach to other adverse credibility finding
    in relation to the appellant's political involvement.

23. This appeal makes a direct challenge to Judge  Bartlett's  approach  to
    the evidence.  The Secretary of State  might  have  accepted  that  the
    appellant was detained and raped but have then suggested that the claim
    failed, notwithstanding this.  In asking the Tribunal to reconsider the
    case it would have been open to the Secretary of  State  to  say,  even
    though the events described occurred, (even though  she  was  arrested,
    even though she was raped in the way that she claims by soldiers acting
     on behalf of  the  authorities),  nevertheless  this  did  not  itself
    establish a claim.  Yet, it does not seem to have been the way the case
    was advanced.  It is certainly not the way the challenge  was  made  in
    the grounds of appeal.  The respondent might have advanced her case  on
    the basis that, even if the appellant's claim  had  been  accepted  and
    taken at its highest, (even if  all  of  the  findings  made  by  Judge
    Bartlett were true), the asylum nevertheless failed.  That is  not  the
    way I read either the determination or the grounds of appeal.

24. In such circumstances the  issues  that  were  before  the  judge  were
    resolved in favour of the appellant and I consider they were reached in
    a way that was without legal  error.   I  dismiss  the  appeal  of  the
    Secretary of State and the determination of Judge Bartlett will  stand.



25. I am however satisfied that the judge was entirely wrong in relation to
    one element of the case.  In paragraph  27  of  his  determination  she
    said,

         "I will deal with the point initially which is the claim  based  on
         the EEA Regulations.  This is clearly untenable.  The children  who
         are  the  EEA  nationals  relied  upon  are  British  citizens  and
         therefore the  EEA  Regulations  are  not  the  correct  regime  to
         consider the appellant and the children.  The appeal on this ground
         is dismissed."

26. That was an entirely wrong application of the law.  The  appellant  has
    two children who are British children.  The judge did not make findings
    in relation to either Article 8 or the claim under the EEA  Regulations
    and in doing so I  am  satisfied  the  judge  was  wrong.   Clearly  by
    allowing the case on asylum grounds no significant difference was  made
    but it remains the case that where there are claims  under  Article  8,
    those should be resolved by the judge notwithstanding other  successful
    parts of the claim.  If an appellant  is  at  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm under Article 3, it is difficult to see  that  this  would
    not alone amount to a violation of Article 8.   There  is  however,  no
    cross-notice.   Nevertheless  the  consequence  of   Judge   Bartlett's
    findings of fact  must  be  that  the  appellant   must  succeed  under
    Articles 3 and 8.

27. In this case the judge would then have been faced with the  removal  of
    two British children.  The mother is the primary carer.  The derivative
    rights of residence are now found in Regulation 15A  of  the  2008  EEA
    Regulations as inserted by the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    (Amendment) Regulations 2012.

28. The essential requirements of the Regulations are that a person  P  who
    satisfies the criteria in paragraph (2) is  entitled  to  a  derivative
    right to reside in the United Kingdom for as long as  P  satisfies  the
    relevant criteria.  The criteria in relation to this appellant are that
    P is the primary carer of two British children each of whom is  also  a
    Union citizen, (the  relevant  EEA  national),  and  the  relevant  EEA
    national is under the age of 18, is not residing in the United  Kingdom
    as a self-sufficient person and would be unable to remain in the United
    Kingdom if P were required to leave.

29. There are definitions made including a definition of  a  primary  carer
    (reg.  15A(7))  and  described  as   the   person   who   has   primary
    responsibility for the child's care. As I understand it, the  appellant
    does indeed have  primary  responsibility  for  these  two  very  young
    children who are not mentioned, save in passing, in  the  determination
    but who, I was told, were born  respectively  in  2012  and  2014.  The
    father lives elsewhere and, whilst he has contact  with  the  appellant
    and  their  two  children,  he  does  not   apparently   have   primary
    responsibility for them.

30. It appears, therefore, that the appellant is  probably  entitled  to  a
    derivative  residence  card  pursuant  to   Regulation   15A   although
    surprisingly no such application was made for a residence card.  It may
    also be the case that a  residence  card  only  provides  more  limited
    rights than those that follow from a finding that the  appellant  is  a
    refugee.  However bearing in mind the age of the children, unless there
    is a reversal of the care arrangements, if the mother continues to look
    after the children for the foreseeable future, she is  or  will  become
    entitled to a series of derivative residence cards.  At that stage,  it
    seems unlikely that the mother will not  be  entitled  to  a  right  of
    settlement.  In any event,  she  will  be  protected  against  removal.
    These circumstances were matters which the judge was required  to  deal
    with in the consideration of Article 8.

31. Had this been the only element of an  Article  8  claim,  my  preferred
    solution would have been that, rather than pursue an Article  8  claim,
    the better route would be to adjourn the re-making  of  the  Article  8
    claim to await  the  outcome  of  the  application  for  a   derivative
    residence card and any consequent appeal.  It will only  then  be  that
    the  Tribunal  can  properly  determine  whether   removal   would   be
    disproportionate. However,  to avoid further ligation, I am  not  going
    to adjourn this appeal yet further to enable this aspect of the Article
    8 clam to be determined.  I will merely say that the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.

32. It will then be for  the  appellant  to  decide  whether  a  derivative
    residence card should be sought and whether that would  strengthen  her
    overall right to remain in the United Kingdom.  It would  at  any  rate
    ensure that such rights as the appellant appears to benefit from should
    be made the subject of formal recognition in the shape of  a derivative
    right of residence.

DECISION

1.   The appeal of the Secretary of State against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is dismissed.

2.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  [MK]'s  appeal  shall
stand.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                               19 April 2016

