
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/12950/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 February 2017                  |On 29 March 2017                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    N A A
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION maintained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brookes of Counsel, instructed by Irving & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, has permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Juss  sent  on  19  July  2016
    dismissing her  appeal  against  a  decision  made  by  the  respondent
    refusing to grant her asylum on 14 October 2015.  The appellant came to
    the UK in 2006 and is a long-term overstayer.  The appellant  has  four
    dependants aged 12, 9, 7 and 5.

2.   The principal ground on which the appellant relies is  that  the  judge
    failed to have regard to relevant  matters  in  relation  to  the  best
    interests of the children.  It is argued the judge failed  to  consider
    any of the evidence provided  in  the  appellant's  bundle  as  to  the
    children, such as the school reports, letters, support centre  letters,
    educational certificates and witness letters.  It is claimed  that  the
    judge wrongly derived from the Supreme Court decision in Zoumbas [2013]
    UKSC that the children's best interests would lie in their  being  kept
    together with the parents.  It was highlighted that two of the children
    had lived in the UK for over seven years.

3.   The second ground of challenge alleges a failure on  the  part  of  the
    judge to  make  findings  on  the  reasonableness  of  return  for  the
    dependent children, pursuant to s.117B(5) of the NIAA 2002, even though
    this was potentially determinative of the appeal.  There was also  said
    to be a corresponding failure to consider the unreasonableness  of  the
    children's return in the context of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

4.   In considering the appellant's grounds it is important to bear in  mind
    that the  judge  made  strong  adverse  credibility  findings  both  in
    relation to the claims she had made about her family  circumstances  in
    Nigeria and in the UK.  The judge did not believe  that  she  had  been
    mistreated by her husband's family or that she was estranged  from  her
    four brothers.  Nor, crucially, did  the  judge  accept  that  she  was
    separated from her husband and he  noted  that  in  December  2010  the
    husband had had his  Article  8  claim  rejected  because  it  was  not
    accepted he was  the  sole  carer  of  the  children.   None  of  these
    credibility findings is challenged in the grounds.   At  paragraphs  30
    and 31 the judge concluded:
         "30. Plainly, both the Appellant and her husband are attempting  to
             remain in this country in whatever way  they  can.   Both  the
             Appellant and her husband have spent  the  majority  of  their
             lives and formative years in Nigeria.  Although three of their
             four children were born in the UK; neither  of  their  parents
             have leave to remain here.  If the Appellant is  removed,  and
             if her husband is removed, the children, having no independent
             lives of their own, would go with the parents  to  Nigeria,  a
             country in which they would  have  sufficient  ties,  so  that
             family life could be kept intact and still  maintained.   They
             could easily be reintegrated into Nigerian society  given  the
             family connections they have there.  They  could  not  succeed
             under paragraph 276ADE.
         31.  I find that they cannot succeed under Article  8  freestanding
             jurisprudence either.  In considering Article  8  freestanding
             jurisprudence, regard must be had  to  the  interests  of  the
             children under Section 55 of the BCIA,  but  this  aspect  has
             been very properly fleshed out  in  the  refusal  letter  from
             paragraphs 46 to 50 and in the case of Zoumbas [2013] UKSC  74
             it was held that the children's 'best interests' would lie  in
             their being kept together with the parents and the same  would
             apply  here.   I  find   that   there   are   no   exceptional
             circumstances.  The medical condition of  the  Appellant  does
             not warrant such a categorisation."

5.    As  regards  the  principal  ground,  which  relates  to  the  judge's
    treatment of the best interests of the child, that treatment is open to
    the criticism that it is relatively brief and unstructured.  However, I
    am not entitled to set aside his decision unless satisfied he fell into
    material error.  I do not consider that he did.  At  paragraph  20  the
    judge noted that he had considered all of the documentary evidence  and
    at paragraph 18 he noted Mr Bradshaw's submissions on  the  appellant's
    behalf regarding her Article  8  circumstances.   Whilst  he  does  not
    expressly  refer  to  any  of  the  school  letters   and   educational
    certificates and other materials relating to the  children's  situation
    in the UK, there is no proper basis for considering  that  he  did  not
    have regard to these documents.

6.   I do not consider the judge's  decision  demonstrates  any  failure  to
    apply relevant  legal  principles  governing  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the child.  The judge made reference to s.55 of  the  BCIA
    and also to the Supreme Court case  of  Zoumbas.   Whilst  the  Supreme
    Court case of Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 does not specifically  state  that
    the best interests of children lie in  being  with  their  parents  but
    considered defeasibly that proposition is integral to its analysis  and
    it would be bizarre of any court or Tribunal to suggest that  that  was
    not the general position.  As Elias LJ stated in MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ at 40:  "It will generally be in the best  interests  to  live
    with his other parents or siblings as part of a family that is  usually
    a given for younger  children  absent  domestic  abuse  or  some  other
    reasons for believing the parents are unsuitable".  What the judge  was
    doing in referring to Zoumbas was highlighting the  fact  that  in  the
    case of the appellant's children they had two parents  who  were  in  a
    position to return to Nigeria together and there was thus no  issue  of
    separation or other any other basis to disapply the general  rule.   It
    is true that the judge does not  expressly  state  that  he  took  into
    account that in the case of children who had lived in the UK for  seven
    or more years strong reasons had to be shown for  removing  them.   But
    what Elias LJ concluded in MA (Pakistan) was that what this requires is
    no more than that the seven year rule must be given significant  weight
    (paragraph 46).  Further, turning to consider what the judge did, I  do
    not think it can be said he failed to attach  this  factor  significant
    weight.  At paragraph 18 he recorded submissions from  Mr  Bradshaw  to
    that effect and noted in paragraph 30 that three of the  four  children
    were born in the UK.  The judge also found in the same  paragraph  that
    the children have no independent life of their own;  that  finding  was
    consistent with the documentary evidence before  the  judge.   Also  of
    some importance in  this  case  is  that  at  paragraph  31  the  judge
    expressly voiced agreement with the reasons given by the respondent  in
    the refusal letter at its paragraphs  46  -  50.   In  the  letter  the
    respondent noted that none of the children had formed any deep,  strong
    friendships outside of the family unit and made  reference  also  to  a
    2012 Children's Service Assessment.  Mr Brookes takes  the  point  that
    the 2012 assessment was out of date, but the appellant's solicitors did
    not adduce a more up-to-date assessment and  the  documentary  evidence
    produced before the FTT did not refute the respondent's  assessment  in
    this regard.  I do not accept that this assessment was contradicted  by
    the initial assessment document under the heading  'Family  and  Social
    Relationships' This document mentions friendships but does not  specify
    "deep, strong" friendships.  It  was  self-evident  that  in  terms  of
    cultural and linguistic  ties  the  children  were  familiar  with  the
    culture  and  language  of  their  parents.   In  short,  the   judge's
    assessment of the children's best interests  was  entirely  within  the
    range of reasonable responses.

7.   As regards the second point, I do not accept that the judge  failed  to
    assess the test of the reasonableness of the children being expected to
    return to  Nigeria  with  their  parents.   He  recorded  the  parties'
    submissions regarding the issue at paragraph 17.  Whilst in  paragraphs
    30 - 31 he does not expressly refer  to  reasonableness,  it  is  clear
    enough that  he  was  considering  all  the  relevant  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE including reasonableness.  Mr Brookes submits that  in
    paragraph 30  the  judge  confined  his  assessment  to  the  issue  of
    integration, but the factors he mentions relate both to the  extent  of
    the children's connections in the UK (in particular the fact that three
    were born in the UK) and their potential connections in Nigeria.  Going
    back to MA (Pakistan), this case also helps clarify that in considering
    the appellant's position under paragraph 276ADE the judge  was  clearly
    entitled to treat the parent's poor immigration history as  a  relevant
    factor: see paragraph 30.

8.   The need for such an approach has been confirmed by  the  UT  President
    in Treebhowan and Others (NIAA 2002 Part 5A - compelling  circumstances
    test) [2017] UKUT 00013  (IAC).   In  light  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in MA (Pakistan) the judge was not obliged  to  give  specific
    consideration to PD and Others (Article 8  - conjoined  family  claims)
    Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 108.  Indeed,  in  light  of  the  Supreme  Court
    guidance in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC  60,  it  was  sufficient  that  his
    decision demonstrates a proportionality assessment weighing factors  on
    both sides of the state.   It does.

9.   It was entirely open to the judge to also consider  that  the  children
    would have sufficient ties in Nigeria and would be  able  to  integrate
    there given their family connection there.  The  grounds  make  a  fair
    criticism of the judge for not separately considering s.117B(5), but as
    Mr Brookes conceded  its  provision  comport  with  those  set  out  in
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  Hence any error on the part of the  judge  in
    failing to address paragraph 117B(5) expressly was not  material.   Nor
    do I find that there was any material error on the part of the judge in
    stating at paragraph 31 that he found "that there were  no  exceptional
    circumstances".  There is no reason to think that by  such  a  term  he
    meant anything different from compelling circumstances.

10.  For the above reasons, whilst the judge's decision has flaws,  they  do
    not disclose any material legal  error.   The  judge's  decision  shall
    stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                          Date: 26 March 2017
              [pic]

