
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12621/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 6th September 2017                 |On 14th September 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     pM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Williams of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
& Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Rowlands made following a hearing at  Hatton  Cross  on  16th  February
    2017.

    Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on [ ] 1983.   He  came  to
    the UK in February 2011 as a dependant on his wife's student visa.   On
    24th February 2015 that visa was curtailed on deception grounds and the
    claimant made an asylum claim  on 13th March 2015.  He was  refused  on
    18th September 2015 and his appeal against the refusal was dismissed on
    29th April 2016.  That decision was  subsequently  set  aside  and  the
    matter came before Judge Rowlands on 16th February 2017.

 3. He claimed that he and his wife had difficulties with a Mr  T,  a  very
    rich man with political connections in Sri Lanka.

 4. The judge assessed the evidence and wrote as follows:-

         "The real difficulty in this case lies with the credibility of  his
         evidence.  He has told different stories about  what  has  happened
         and given the impression of being someone prepared to say  whatever
         is necessary to back up his claim.  He has been inconsistent  about
         whether he knew or had ever been warned about the behaviour  of  Mr
         T, he has been inconsistent about whether he even knew  that  Mr  T
         existed, let alone the behaviour that he was exhibiting towards his
         wife's family.

         His wife gave evidence  in  support  of  him  and  I  was  somewhat
         surprised bearing in mind the report of Dr Persaud in which it  was
         suggested that she would not be fit to give evidence and  would  be
         too confused.  Clearly that wasn't the case.   However,  there  are
         issues over her evidence as well.  She is after  all  somebody  who
         has had her leave curtailed because of producing  false  documents.
         I note that that is something that has not  been  appealed  against
         and there is no explanation as to why the Home  Office  would  make
         this up if it weren't true.  Her history  in  this  respect  raises
         grave doubts over her credibility as well."

 5. Having raised his concerns about the credibility of the  oral  evidence
    the Immigration Judge then concluded:-

         "Notwithstanding all of this I am faced at the  same  time  with  a
         number of documents albeit provided mainly by family members  which
         actually confirm the truth of what  they  have  said.   Despite  my
         misgivings over their honesty faced with all these documents I have
         reached the conclusion that it is more likely than  not  that  they
         are telling the truth about the behaviour of this man  towards  the
         appellant's wife and consequently  towards  him  before  and  since
         their marriage."

 6. The judge found that the problems they faced from Mr T had  nothing  to
    do with any Convention  reason  and  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.

 7. He then turned to the question of the grant of humanitarian protection.
     He said:-

         "Clearly it would appear that there has been concentrated effort by
         Mr T to harass and threaten the appellant's wife, her  family,  him
         and his family and on the face of it there has been  no  assistance
         offered to them from the police.  The question is is  it  safe  for
         them to return or do they need protection?  Could  they  reasonably
         be expected to relocate somewhere else and still be safe from Mr T.
          The question of it being reasonable for them to relocate is linked
         inextricably to the appellant's wife's mental health.   So  far  as
         that is concerned I have considered the report of  Dr  Persaud  and
         have looked at it not in isolation but in line with all  her  other
         medical notes.  I have also considered the  documents  provided  by
         her father including the record of her hospitalisation in the past.
          I am satisfied that in Sri Lanka she was admitted to  hospital  on
         the basis of having attempted suicide and that the diagnosis of  Dr
         Persaud is correct in all the circumstances despite him having only
         a relatively short period of time to interview her.  I am satisfied
         that there is a real risk that her removal to  Sri  Lanka,  to  the
         very place where the experiences which have  probably  led  to  her
         current mental state, raises a real risk of a deterioration in  her
         mental state and the possibility of further suicidal  thoughts  and
         actions.  For these reasons I consider it  to  be  unreasonable  to
         expect them to relocate  in  Sri  Lanka  and  she  is  entitled  to
         humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.  His wife is clearly
         a dependant on his claim."

 8. The judge also allowed the appeal on  humanitarian  protection  grounds
    and on human rights grounds, for the same reasons.

    The Grounds of Application

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred in assessing credibility, failing to  separate  the
    assessment of the documents from  the  oral  evidence  and  failing  to
    consider the evidence in the round. She noted that the claimant's  wife
    was a dependant upon his claim and had not made a protection  claim  in
    her own right.

10. Second, there was no evidential foundation that there  is  a  state  of
    internal armed conflict or a level of violence capable  in  general  of
    adversely affecting an ordinary citizen in Sri Lanka, and the judge had
    failed to explain how there would be any breach of Article 3 and or why
    the appellant would not be able to carry on his own private life in Sri
    Lanka.

11. The claimant served a skeleton argument.  He argued that the judge  had
    considered all of the evidence in the round. He had  not  rejected  the
    oral evidence before turning to the documents,  but  simply  identified
    his concerns as he was required to do. The  judge  found  that  Mr  T's
    harassment was also directed at the claimant.

12. There was no requirement in Article 15 of the  Qualification  Directive
    for there to be an internal armed conflict.  The claimant could succeed
    if he showed that there was a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  including
    torture  or  inhumane  or  degrading  treatment  or  punishment  of  an
    applicant in the country of origin  (Article  15(b)),  and  the  mental
    health of his wife was plainly relevant to the issue of  reasonableness
    of relocation.

13. It was not necessary for the judge to repeat his reasoning with respect
    to Article 3.  So far as Article 8 was concerned it was plain that  the
    judge allowed the appeal on the basis of the  insurmountable  obstacles
    to his family life continuing in Sri Lanka.

    Submissions

14. Mrs Pettersen relied on her grounds and submitted that  the  judge  did
    not treat the documentary evidence  with  the  caution  required.   The
    documents were produced late and were not before the original judge who
    heard the appeal.  So far as internal flight was  concerned  the  judge
    had failed to consider whether there was psychiatric support  available
    to the claimant's wife elsewhere in Sri Lanka.

15. Mr Williams relied upon his skeleton and  submitted  that  the  judge's
    credibility findings were open to him.  He had considered the  risk  in
    relation to both the claimant and his wife.  The determination  of  the
    previous judge had been set aside and therefore it could  not  properly
    be said that the documents had  been  provided  late.   The  judge  was
    entitled to rely on the supportive affidavit from the claimant's father-
    in-law and the other documents from Sri Lanka.  There was no  need  for
    the judge to repeat his reasoning in respect to Articles 3 and 8.

    Decision

16. I am satisfied that the judge erred in law.

17. The first ground challenges the judge's  credibility  findings.   There
    were serious Section 8 issues in respect of both.  There was a  lengthy
    delay between the claimant's arrival in the UK and his claim to asylum,
    of some four years.  His wife had employed deception in relation to her
    student  visa.    Moreover,   the   judge   noted   that   there   were
    inconsistencies in the oral evidence which he had not resolved.

18. The judge  set  aside  these  concerns  on  the  basis  of  documentary
    evidence.  He did not say what the documents were, nor  why  they  were
    sufficiently weighty to offset the negative factors outlined above.  He
    did not address the fact that they had not been produced at an  earlier
    stage.

19. The judge was obliged to give proper reasons for his decision  and  has
    not done so.

20. The skeleton argument makes a justified criticism of the  Secretary  of
    State's Ground 4. It would have been possible to allow this  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection/Article 3 grounds if there had  been  a  proper
    evidential basis for concluding that there was a real risk  of  serious
    harm in the claimant's  home  area.   However,  the  reasonableness  of
    relocation was an integral part  of  his  considerations  and  in  that
    context the judge was obliged to consider whether the  claimant's  wife
    could obtain assistance for her mental health problems outside her home
    area.  He did not do so.

21. For  the  same  reason,  the  decision  in  respect  of  Article  8  is
    insufficiently reasoned.  It is not clear how the judge has reached the
    conclusion that  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  couple
    exercising family life together in Sri Lanka without a consideration of
    what help would be available to her there.

Notice of Decision

The judge erred in law.  The decision is set aside and will have to be  made
afresh.  It will be reheard at Bradford  before  a  First-tier  Judge  other
than Judge Rowlands.  The claimant  is  directed  to  serve  a  consolidated
bundle of documents to the First-tier  Tribunal  and  to  the  Secretary  of
State seven days before the hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed[pic]                             Date 13 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
