
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/12712/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 September 2017                      |On 16 October 2017               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                               NR (SRI LANKA)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel instructed by Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Devittie sitting at Taylor House on 6  April
    2017) dismissing his appeal  against  the  refusal  of  his  protection
    claim.  The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction  in  favour
    of the appellant, and I  consider  that  it  is  appropriate  for  this
    direction to be maintained for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose date  of  birth  is  25
    July 1990.  His case was that he was a fisherman in Sri Lanka,  as  was
    his father, until his father joined the United National Party  in  2004
    and subsequently became a Tamil Member of  Parliament.   The  appellant
    produced a newspaper article dated 24  April  (2006  apparently)  which
    reported the resignation of KR, a member of the Muslim  Congress,  from
    the  post  of  membership  of  the  North  Western  Provincial  Council
    following a threat  from  high  officials  who  had  contact  with  the
    Government.  It was claimed that KR had recently crossed over from  the
    ruling Party to the opposition Party, "hence the  threat."   He  was  a
    businessman in fishery and  had  been  elected  to  the  North  Western
    Provision Council to represent the area of Kateitty.  Due to the threat
    to his life, his close circle revealed that he might go abroad with his
    family.

 3.  The  appellant  produced  official  correspondence  from  the  Belgian
    authorities showing that KR had first been interviewed as a refugee  by
    the Commissioner General for Refugees and Stateless Persons in  Belgium
    on 26 November 2006, and had subsequently been granted asylum on 29 May
    2009.  The appellant said that the trigger for  the  departure  of  his
    father and step-mother from Sri Lanka had been on an occasion when some
    people had come to the family home and thrown a hand grenade which  had
    injured his step-mother in her leg.  She had left Sri Lanka  after  she
    had received treatment in hospital.

 4. Towards the end of 2008 the appellant had been approached  by  4  or  5
    members of the LTTE when he was in his fisherman's hut.  He was coerced
    into agreeing to provide them  with  assistance.   They  asked  him  to
    transport food and water in his fishing  boat  (Q&A  99).   They  would
    accompany him on these trips, which took place around once a month.

 5. In February 2009 he arrived with a party of uniformed LTTE soldiers  at
    "Sala Sea" and began to unload the provisions which were in his fishing
    boat.  Members of the Sri Lankan Army arrived, and  they  rounded  them
    all up and arrested them.  The appellant was taken in a van to Colombo,
    where he was detained.  Initially, he said that he was  not  questioned
    until he reached Colombo.  Later in the interview  (Q&A  131)  he  said
    that when he first encountered the army, they asked  him  what  he  was
    doing.  They pointed a gun to his head and they asked him  why  he  was
    here.  He told them that he had come  here  for  fishing.   They  asked
    about his father, and asked what his father was doing.  He said that he
    told them that his father was a District MP.  It was at that point that
    they put him in the van.

 6. He was asked if he knew the names of the members of the  LTTE  who  had
    enlisted his help and  accompanied  him  on  the  trips  which  he  had
    undertaken for the LTTE.  He said that he did not know their names (Q&A
    94).  It was put to him that he had given three names of Sea Tigers  in
    his screening interview.  He said that he had over-heard a member of  a
    Sri Lankan Army talking to someone on his 'walky-talky' and so  he  had
    heard the army announce that they had arrested these three people,  and
    so he knew that they were the leaders of the LTTE.  When he  was  asked
    to clarify whether these three people were the same as the  people  who
    were on the boat with him, he said that they were not (Q&A 95-98).

 7. Returning to  Colombo  took  9  hours.   On  arrival  in  Colombo,  the
    appellant was taken to the fourth floor.  He was  kept  there  for  one
    day, and then was taken on a 4-hour journey  to  Poosa  Camp.   He  was
    detained in this camp for 4 years, during  which  he  was  interrogated
    about his father's involvement with the LTTE and  the  Tamil  political
    Party, and also questioned about  his  father's  whereabouts.   He  was
    beaten with a baton.  In April 2013  he  was  visited  by  two  foreign
    people who were white.  They spoke to him and said that they would come
    back in two weeks.  He told these foreign people what had  happened  to
    him.  After they left, the army asked him what he  had  said  to  these
    people. The appellant told them, and the army beat him up  so  severely
    that he had to be taken to hospital.  He was under  guard,  but  on  an
    occasion when he went to the lavatory, he  saw  someone  who  knew  his
    uncle.  He told this person to inform his uncle  that  he  was  in  the
    hospital.  This uncle told his father, who  spoke  to  a  Minister  who
    arranged for his release.  About three days later, a  person  came  and
    told him that a Minister had arranged everything and he was going to be
    released.  The person who took him in the van away  from  the  hospital
    said that he should not stay in the country.

 8. He stayed at someone's house for 7 days, and then his  uncle  came  and
    told him that his passport was ready for him to go abroad.  He had left
    Sri Lanka on 9 May 2013, and had flown  to  Bahrain.   From  there,  he
    travelled to France on 10 May 2013, and he had arrived in the UK on  14
    May 2013.

 9. On 21 September 2015 the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her  reasons  for
    refusing to recognise the appellant  as  a  refugee,  or  as  otherwise
    requiring international human rights protection.  He had admitted  that
    his only involvement with the LTTE was to transport food and water  and
    to transport members of the LTTE.  He had  not  been  involved  in  any
    politics in the UK.  He stated that he did not wish to  join  the  LTTE
    and only joined because he was forced to do so.  It was not  considered
    credible that he was currently considered a threat by  the  Sri  Lankan
    Government due to  the  fact  that  he  had,  in  the  past,  completed
    compulsory LTTE-related activities.

10. Also, his account was internally inconsistent.  On another  version  of
    events, given in his asylum interview, his  fellow  fisherman  (T)  was
    already working for the LTTE, and he was not forced to help  them,  but
    did so willingly.  He claimed that his father was always talking  about
    helping the LTTE, but he also claimed that he did  not  know  that  the
    Government was anti-LTTE (Q&A 106).  He initially claimed that  he  was
    not questioned before being placed in the van,  but  he  later  claimed
    that he had been questioned before he got into  the  van.   He  claimed
    that he was detained and tortured  for  4  years  at  Poosa  Camp,  but
    despite this, he was incredibly vague about  the  questions  which  had
    been asked during his detention.  He had been unable  to  describe  the
    camp in detail.

11. He had claimed not to have spoken to any of the inmates  for  4  years.
    It is significant that he had initially only mentioned questions  about
    his father, and had changed his account when prompted about whether  he
    had been questioned about the act which he was caught  doing.   It  was
    simply not credible that was arrested in  the  process  of  undertaking
    LTTE activities, yet he failed to mention being questioned about this.

12. He said that  he  had  never  been  charged  with  anything  whilst  in
    detention, despite being caught in the act of helping the LTTE members.
     It simply was not credible that despite being caught  in  the  act  of
    doing something counter to the Government in Sir Lanka, he had not been
    charged.  His account of his escape was also not credible.  It was  not
    credible that he would be able to recognise someone who knew his uncle,
    despite having been in detention for 4  years,  and  it  was  also  not
    credible that - having been kept under tight security  for  4  years  -
    security was suddenly dropped so as to enable him to escape.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

13. Both parties  were  legally  represented  before  Judge  Devittie.   Mr
    Lingajorthy of Counsel appeared on behalf  of  the  appellant,  and  he
    relied on a skeleton argument which is in my  file.   In  the  skeleton
    argument, he referred to  the  medico-legal  report  of  Dr  Bernadette
    Gregory, dated 14 December 2015.  Her conclusion was that the appellant
    had "significant physical  and  psychological  evidence"  of  the  ill-
    treatment he described in  detention  in  Sri  Lanka.   Mr  Lingajorthy
    submitted that the torture which he  had  suffered  had  had  the  most
    profound impact upon him, including affecting his memory.  On the issue
    of risk on return, Mr Lingajothy set out the headline guidance given by
    the Tribunal in GJ & Others (Post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  He  submitted  that,  as  the  appellant  was
    already known to the authorities -  since  he  had  been  detained  and
    tortured "on previous occasions" - it was not unreasonable  to  believe
    that the Sri Lankan authorities  would  still  have  a  record  of  his
    alleged involvement with the LTTE.  As such, it remained highly  likely
    that the appellant would be on the Sri Lankan Government's computerised
    stop list, as he was an individual  against  whom  there  would  be  an
    outstanding  Court  order  or  arrest  warrant.    Alternatively,   the
    appellant would be on a watch list, and even if he was allowed to leave
    the airport, it is highly likely that  he  would  be  arrested  shortly
    afterwards.  That placed him at real risk that he would be treated as a
    person with significant LTTE links to "rekindle the organisation".

14. In his decision, the Judge set out the appellant's  case  as  it  stood
    prior to the appeal hearing at paragraph  [2].   At  paragraph  3,  the
    Judge set out the evidence which the appellant had "added" through  the
    adoption of his witness statement for the appeal hearing.

15. At paragraphs [6]-[7], the Judge addressed the expert  evidence  of  Dr
    Gregory.  It was agreed that the medical evidence tended to support his
    claim of having been tortured, and hence the credibility of  his  claim
    that he was detained for 4 years because of his LTTE activity: "I would
    nonetheless point out that the medical expert is not able to provide  a
    precise date when the injuries were caused".

16. At paragraph [8], the  Judge  said  that  in  the  final  analysis,  in
    determining the appellant's credibility, the medical evidence  and  its
    probative value had to be considered not in isolation but in the  round
    and in the context and totality of the evidence.  In this regard  there
    were,  in  his  view,  a  number  of  unsatisfactory  features  in  the
    appellant's evidence that,  in  his  opinion,  had  a  bearing  on  his
    assessment of the  appellant's  credibility.   The  Judge  went  on  to
    discuss these features of the evidence in sub-paragraphs  (i)-(iii)  of
    paragraph [8].

17. At paragraph [9],  the  Judge  said:  "The  medical  report  states  an
    inconsistency and the lack of  coherence  in  the  appellant's  account
    could be attributable to brain injury  that  he  sustained  during  his
    period  of  torture.   The  appellant  did  not,  however,  undergo  an
    examination of his brain to confirm that he sustained any brain injury.
     Moreover, my observation is that the appellant's lapse of memory seems
    to be very convenient, because there are aspects of his  evidence  that
    are extremely detailed - for example, how he came to escape;  what  was
    said in the  van;  and  indeed  his  account  of  his  escape,  in  his
    interview, is entirely coherent and detailed."

18. At paragraph [10], the Judge said: "The unsatisfactory features I  have
    identified, namely his failure  to  give  a  coherent  account  of  the
    persons he met in prison and the identity, and  more  importantly,  the
    lack of coherence of his account of the questions  put  to  him  during
    detention,  are  significant  features  that  go   to   undermine   his
    credibility.  I am not satisfied, weighing  all  the  evidence  in  the
    round, that the appellant's account  of  having  been  detained  for  a
    period as much as four years is reasonably likely to be true."

19. At paragraph [11], the Judge made the following findings: (a) he  found
    that the appellant was detained by the authorities and subjected to ill-
    treatment; (b) he found that the appellant's father  fled  the  country
    for the reasons that the appellant claimed; (c) he did not accept  that
    the appellant was kept in custody for a period of 4 years after the end
    of the civil war in May  2009,  as  he  was  a  relatively  low-profile
    activist and  he  had  extreme  difficulty  in  understanding  why  the
    authorities would have seemed fit to detain this appellant for  such  a
    significant period of time after all hostilities had ended in May 2009;
    (d) he  did  not  consider  that  the  appellant's  father's  political
    activities would have been  a  cause  for  such  a  degree  of  adverse
    interest in the appellant, as the appellant's father was  not  an  LTTE
    member - he was a member of a legal, political Party,  albeit  a  Party
    that was aligned to the Tamil cause - and it was not the contention  of
    the appellant's father that he was at any time detained in  Sri  Lanka;
    (e) He accepted that the appellant was involved in selling goods to the
    LTTE and that this was the cause of his arrest.

20. The Judge went on, in paragraph [12], to  set  out  the  same  headline
    guidance from GJ as was set out  by  Mr  Lingajorthy  in  his  skeleton
    argument.

21. At paragraph [13], the Judge said that  he  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant, having been detained towards the close of the civil war with
    several other persons - for a  period  much  shorter  than  the  4-year
    period he claimed - would be at risk in Sri Lanka on return for reasons
    of imputed or actual political opinion.  There was  absolutely  nothing
    in the profile of the appellant's father that supported the  contention
    that there was continuing adverse interest in  him,  since  his  flight
    from Sri Lanka was almost a decade ago.

22. At paragraph [12], the Judge said that the appellant was a  low-profile
    activist who last took part in such low-profile activities in 2008.  He
    did not have a profile which fell within the risk categories defined in
    GJ.  He did not accept that the authorities had any reason to  continue
    to have any adverse interest in the appellant's father, and still  less
    to impute the appellant a political opinion to  an  extent  that  would
    trigger the appellant's persecution upon his return.





The Reasons for Grant of Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

23. Ms Jegarajah substantially re-cast the grounds of appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, following the refusal of permission to appeal by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  She pleaded that the Judge had failed to  consider  the
    asylum interview.  Although the appellant was likely to  have  learning
    difficulties compounded by PTSD, he had provided  detailed  answers  in
    the asylum interview to the questions he had asked.  The  Judge  failed
    to take account of: (i) the fact that the appellant had  been  arrested
    while transporting goods with LTTE members from India to Sri  Lanka  in
    the final stages of the civil war; (ii) that he was told  that  he  was
    detained specifically to procure his  father's  return  to  Sri  Lanka;
    (iii) that he had disclosed that he was tortured to two members  of  an
    NGO (possibly a UN investigator); (iv) he was warned by the authorities
    not to disclose this torture "to the West"; (v) that he  was  taken  to
    the 4th floor of the CID Headquarters in Colombo, and then  transferred
    to a high security prison; (vi) that one of  the  witnesses  in  GJ,  a
    Security Consultant for the GOSL, stated that LTTE members who were  of
    lesser interest were rehabilitated, and those believed to be high-level
    members were prosecuted - whereas the appellant was not rehabilitated.

24. Had the Judge read the appellant's answers in interview, it would  have
    been apparent to him that the reasons  for  the  appellant's  prolonged
    detention were clear, and could not be said to be inconsistent with the
    country evidence; and he ought thereby to have allowed the  appellant's
    appeal.

25. On 10 July 2017, Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt granted permission to appeal
    for the following reasons:

       The FTTJ found substantial parts of the appellant's claim made  out,
       including  detention,  significant  ill-treatment  and  his   father
       fleeing Sri Lanka for political reasons.  It is arguable  that  even
       if the claim to have been released in 2013  was  not  accepted,  the
       FtTJ did not assess the appellant's profile  correctly  against  the
       Country Guidance case of GJ and Country Evidence on Sri Lanka.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

26. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Jegarajah developed  the  case  which  she  had  advancing  the
    grounds of appeal, by reference inter alia to  UP  (Sri  Lanka)  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 85.  She directed my attention  to  various  passages  in  the
    asylum interview upon which she relied.  Mr Bates, in reply, adhered to
    the Rule 24 response opposing the appeal which had been  settled  by  a
    colleague.  In essence, the challenge amounted to mere disagreement.

Discussion

27. The factual premise which underlies the error of law challenge does not
    stand up to scrutiny.  Firstly, it is not the case that the  Judge  did
    not take into account  what  the  appellant  had  said  in  his  asylum
    interview.  The Judge's summary of the appellant's case  prior  to  the
    appeal hearing, in paragraph [2] of his decision,  is  taken  from  the
    summary in the refusal letter, which in turn is almost entirely derived
    from the appellant's questions and answers  in  the  asylum  interview.
    Secondly, the argument that the appellant gave a clear  explanation  in
    the asylum interview as to why he had been  subjected  to  a  prolonged
    detention of 4 years, and as to why there was at least a real  risk  of
    him continuing to be of adverse interest to the Sri Lankan authorities,
    pre-supposes that the account given in the asylum interview was  clear,
    consistent and internally coherent.  But it was not so, for the reasons
    identified by the respondent  in  the  refusal  letter.  This  was  not
    disputed by Mr Lingajorthy.  His line was that the  discrepancies  were
    reasonably explained by the appellant's PTSD, which  had  impaired  his
    memory, and thus he was not a reliable historian on points  of  detail.
    As is noted in the Rule 24 response, the Judge addressed that  argument
    in paragraph [9] of his decision, finding that the appellant's lapse of
    memory seems to have been very convenient, as there were aspects of his
    evidence that were extremely detailed.  The Judge further observed that
    the appellant had not undergone an examination of his brain to  confirm
    if he sustained any brain injury.  It is not suggested that the Judge's
    crucial finding in paragraph [9] is erroneous in law, and I do not find
    that  it  is.   It  is  a  sustainable  finding,  which  has   profound
    ramifications for the overall credibility assessment.

28. As previously noted, in paragraph [8] the Judge identified a number  of
    unsatisfactory features in the evidence of the appellant which, in  his
    opinion,  had  a  bearing  on  the  assessment   of   the   appellant's
    credibility.  The first was that, in his interview, the  appellant  was
    unable to give a clear account of the persons  he  had  met  in  prison
    during a period of 4 years in incarceration, and  was  also  unable  to
    give a coherent account of the questions which were put to  him  during
    his interrogation.  The Judge observed that he  had,  after  all,  been
    arrested on specific allegations: he found it  entirely  unsatisfactory
    that he was unable to give an account of his interrogation, "consistent
    with allegations that he claims led to his arrest."

29. It was open to the Judge to make this adverse credibility  finding  for
    the reasons which he gave.  Although, on his account, the appellant had
    been caught red-handed transporting uniformed  LTTE  soldiers  carrying
    guns, as well as provisions, he did not initially  claim  that  he  was
    interrogated about this.  Instead, he claimed to have been interrogated
    about his father, although he had not  been  arrested  because  of  his
    father.  He said he had volunteered to the army that his father  was  a
    District MP, when in fact his father was no longer a District  MP,  but
    had left the country in September 2008.

30. The second adverse credibility finding made by the Judge was  that  the
    alleged delay in the appellant's release until 2013 was not consistent,
    in the Judge's view, with the background evidence, which indicated that
    the civil war ended in 2009 and, at the same time,  the  appellant  was
    not a high-profile LTTE activist, let alone a member of the LTTE.

31. Ms Jegarajah submits that this adverse credibility finding is erroneous
    in law, as se submits that the country  background  evidence  indicates
    precisely the opposite. She submits  that  the  torture  to  which  the
    appellant was subjected in detention is not consistent with  him  being
    taken to rehabilitation, but is consistent with him being perceived  as
    an LTTE  activist  who  had  information  of  strategic  value  to  the
    authorities which needed to be extracted by torture. She  submits  that
    his lengthy detention is also consistent with him being held for ransom
    so as to force his father to return to Sri Lanka to secure his release.

32. However, I consider that the Judge's findings are  entirely  consistent
    with the  guidance  given  in  GJ,  and  in  particular  the  following
    propositions: (a) the GOSL's concern now is not the past membership  or
    sympathy, but whether a person  is  a  destabilising  threat  in  post-
    conflict Sri Lanka (paragraph 311); (b)  it  is  not  established  that
    previous LTTE connections or sympathies (whether  direct  or  familial)
    are perceived by the GOSL as indicating now that an individual poses  a
    destabilising threat in post-conflict Sri Lanka  (paragraph  325);  and
    (c) an individual's past history will be relevant only  to  the  extent
    that it is perceived by the Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
    present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan state which lacks in  Government
    (paragraph 356).

33. The Judge's adverse credibility finding was clearly open to him, having
    regard to the fact that the  appellant  was,  as  the  Judge  accepted,
    arrested in February 2009, when (as Ms Jegarajah accepts) the civil war
    was reaching a climax, and the risk  of  persecutory  ill-treatment  to
    someone such as the appellant was at its highest.   The  torture  which
    the appellant received in detention is  entirely  consistent  with  the
    appellant being tortured at the time of maximum risk (February to April
    2009) and being later released, after the end of the civil  war,  as  a
    person who was no longer of any interest to the  authorities.   As  the
    Judge correctly stated, the medical expert was not able to confirm that
    the scarring had been inflicted between 2009 and 2013, as distinct from
    being only inflicted in 2009.

34. Ms Jegarajah relied on UB (Sri Lanka) & SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 85, a case
    in which the Court of Appeal considered the implications of neither the
    First-tier Tribunal nor the Upper Tribunal being referred to  the  Home
    Office Policy Guidance of 28 August 2015, entitled: "Tamil Separatism".
     Ms Jegarajah stated that the Judge had erred in law in not considering
    this guidance, in which the SSHD accepted as a matter of policy that  a
    person  with  the  appellant's  risk  profile  came  within  the   risk
    categories of GJ as he  was  a  person  who  had  provided  weapons  or
    explosives to the LTTE.

35. Ms Jegarajah did not produce a copy of the guidance, but read  out  the
    extract upon which she relied from her laptop.   Apart  from  the  fact
    that Mr Lingajorthy did not rely on  the  guidance  as  fortifying  the
    appellant's case under GJ, it  was  not  the  appellant's  evidence  in
    interview that he routinely transported weapons - still  less  that  he
    provided weapons to the LTTE.  He said that he might have been carrying
    a consignment of weapons in the boat which was seized by the Army,  but
    he did not know whether or not the items in the boat  were  weapons  or
    something else.  Moreover, he did not claim to have  been  interrogated
    at any point about the transportation of weapons, or indeed  about  the
    transportation of armed  LTTE  soldiers.   Furthermore,  he  was  never
    charged with  any  terrorist  offence,  including  an  offence  of  the
    transportation of weapons, and the fact that he was never charged  runs
    counter to the background evidence that, if he  had  been  caught  red-
    handed engaging in such activity, he would have been charged.

36. Ms Jegarajah submits that the Judge  failed  to  take  account  of  the
    additional risk factor of the appellant being  found  in  a  boat  with
    three leaders of the LTTE.   This ignores the fact  that,  whereas  the
    appellant initially claimed that three people in the boat were  leaders
    of the LTTE, he rapidly retracted this claim,  saying  that  the  three
    people who he had named at the screening interview had not been on  the
    boat.

37. Ms Jegarajah submits that the Judge failed to take  into  account  that
    there was the additional risk factor  of  the  appellant's  association
    with his father.  Her submission ignores the fact that  the  appellant,
    on his account, actually volunteered his connection to his father  when
    first apprehended by the army, which is not consistent with his  father
    being notorious in helping the LTTE.  (In his witness statement,  dated
    19 September 2016, the appellant said at paragraph 10 that he  informed
    the officers that his father was a local  politician,  as  he  believed
    that the officers would let him go if he said that).   Moreover,  given
    that the only independent evidence of the basis  on  which  his  father
    claimed political asylum in Belgium is  the  newspaper  article  of  24
    April 2006 (which contains no reference to the  father  supporting  the
    LTTE) and given the non-disclosure of the claim which  the  appellant's
    father actually presented to the Belgian authorities, it  was  entirely
    open to the Judge to find that it was not credible that the profile  of
    the appellant's father would have resulted in ongoing adverse  interest
    in the appellant on the part of the Sri Lankan authorities.

38. The third unsatisfactory feature identified by the Judge in paragraph 8
    was the appellant's account of how he came to escape.  The  Judge  said
    that there was very little evidence from the  appellant,  or  from  his
    father, to explain what actions (if any) were taken by  the  family  to
    establish the appellant's location and where  he  was  being  detained.
    The Judge did not accept that, almost 4 years after his detention,  the
    appellant would quite fortuitously meet a person known  to  his  uncle,
    who relayed information regarding where he was  being  held,  and  thus
    initiated a process leading to his departure from the Sri Lanka  within
    24 hours.  This adverse credibility finding is not in terms  challenged
    by Ms Jegarajah as being  perverse  or  inadequately  reasoned,  and  I
    consider  that  it  was  an  adverse  credibility  finding  which   was
    reasonably open to the Judge for the reasons which he gave.

39. In conclusion, on analysis, the error of law challenge is ultimately an
    expression of disagreement with a conclusion on risk on return that was
    open to the Judge, for the reasons which he gave.   The  conclusion  is
    neither perverse, nor inadequately reasoned.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 12 October 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




























