
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/12928/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                    |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 28 April 2017                      |        On 9 May 2017                |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                     AS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person.
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Frankish sitting at Bennett House, Stoke  on
    29 June 2016)  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse her a fresh asylum and human rights claim.
     The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction,  and  I  consider
    that the  appellant  should  continue  to  enjoy  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background Facts

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan,  whose  date  of  birth  is  7
    September 1981.  Her partner, N, is also a  Pakistani  national,  whose
    date of birth is 1 April 1981.  They have 3 children: L (born on 3 July
    2007), Z (born on 28 January 2010 and M (born on 11 July 2014).

 3. The appellant was a visitor to the United Kingdom in 2004 and 2006.  In
    March 2007 she arrived in the UK as a visitor for  a  third  time,  but
    overstayed.  As will be apparent from the chronology, the appellant was
    pregnant with L when she travelled to the UK. The appellant gave  birth
    to L in the UK during the currency of her visit visa.

 4. In November 2008 the appellant claimed asylum.  The basis of her asylum
    claim was that her family in Pakistan objected to her relationship with
    N, a married man, whom she had met on her first  visit  to  the  UK  in
    2004, and who was the father of their daughter L.  Her asylum claim was
    refused on 30 March 2009.  The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant's family had assaulted her after learning of  her  adulterous
    relationship; and, in any event, on return to Pakistan with N and their
    child L, there would be sufficiency of protection  for  them,  or  they
    could safely and reasonably relocate to another part of Pakistan.   The
    appellant was an educated adult woman who had spent most of her life in
    Pakistan and who had worked there as a teacher.

 5. The appellant appealed against the refusal of asylum,  and  her  appeal
    was dismissed.  All her appeal rights, including judicial review,  were
    exhausted on 28 February 2011.  Her partner, N, was a dependant on  the
    appellant's asylum claim.  N also made  an  asylum  claim  in  his  own
    right, following the initial dismissal of  the  appellant's  appeal  in
    November 2009.  His asylum claim, which was based on the same  asserted
    facts as the appellant's, was refused on 5 April 2012.

 6. N's immigration history was that he had first entered the UK in 2004 as
    a spouse. In her  decision  promulgated  on  5  November  2010,  Senior
    Immigration Judge Eshun (as she then was) said at paragraph  [23]  that
    his leave to remain as a spouse had expired at the end of 2006, and  on
    14 June 2008 N was arrested while working illegally  at  KFC.   He  was
    given reporting conditions, which he failed to observe.  He  became  an
    absconder after a few weeks.

 7.  Judge  Eshun  made  adverse  credibility  findings  against  both  the
    appellant and her partner.  She rejected N's claim that  he  could  not
    obtain a divorce from his British wife, Na, so  as  to  legitimise  his
    relationship with the appellant through marriage.   Judge  Eshun  found
    that the couple were deliberately preserving their  current  status  in
    order to enhance the appellant's asylum claim.  On the issue of risk on
    return, she found that N could live in "his  or  the  family  property"
    with the appellant and the children.  He had qualifications,  which  he
    had obtained from his studies in the USA, which  would  enable  him  to
    obtain a job and to maintain his family.

 8. When certifying N's asylum claim as  being  manifestly  unfounded,  the
    respondent noted  that  that  N  had  confirmed  at  a  Family  Returns
    Conference that both their children, L and Z, were  equally  proficient
    in English and Urdu.

 9. Preliminary steps were taken  towards  effecting  the  removal  of  the
    family to Pakistan.  On 8 April  2014  Thornhill  Solicitors  wrote  to
    Solihull Asylum & Removals Centre to announce that they had come on the
    record for the appellant.  On 1 September 2014 they made a fresh asylum
    claim on her behalf.  They said that the appellant had  come  into  the
    possession of a FIR which showed that her father in Lahore had  made  a
    formal complaint to the police in Lahore that she had been guilty of an
    extra-marital relationship with her long-term partner, and so  she  had
    committed the offence of zina, contrary to the Hudood Ordinance.   They
    submitted that it was likely that the police in Lahore would advise the
    local police in Islamabad, from where N originated, as to the issue  of
    this particular complaint.

10. The appellant had also commissioned a report from Doctor Roger Ballard,
    a Consultant Anthropologist.  He gave evidence of the problems that the
    appellant and her partner would  face  in  Pakistan  with  their  three
    children, given that they would be  returning  without  access  to  any
    family support of any kind.  The appellant's oldest child, L, was  born
    on 3 July 2007, and she had now been  living  in  the  country  without
    interruption for a period in excess  of  seven  years.   So,  she  came
    within the scope of Rule 276ADE (iv), so long as it could be shown that
    it would not be reasonable to expect her to leave  the  UK.   In  their
    view, the report from Dr Ballard amply demonstrated that  it  would  be
    unreasonable for her to leave the UK with her parents and siblings.

11. The solicitors made reference to EV (Philippines) -v- SSHD [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874.  Among the factors to be considered was the  extent  to  which
    the children would have  "linguistic,  medical  or  other  difficulties
    (their emphasis)" in adapting to life in Pakistan.  The  expert  report
    clearly showed the difficulties that the three  children  born  out  of
    wedlock would encounter whilst trying to adapt to life in  the  country
    of their nationality.

12. On 15 October 2015 the respondent gave her  reasons  for  refusing  the
    appellant's claim.  On the topic of the best interests  of  L,  it  was
    noted that she was receiving an education in the UK.  However,  on  her
    return to Pakistan, L  would  have  access  to  education  there.   The
    appellant had not provided any evidence to demonstrate that it would be
    unreasonable to expect her children to return  to  Pakistan  with  each
    other and herself.  The children were going to be returned together  as
    part of a family unit, and there  was  no  intention  to  separate  the
    children from their parents.  So, it was in  their  best  interests  to
    return to Pakistan with herself, their father and their siblings.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

13. The appellant was legally represented before Judge Frankish, but  there
    were no representation on behalf of the Secretary of State.  The  Judge
    received oral evidence from the appellant and N, who both gave evidence
    in Urdu through an interpreter.

14. In his subsequent decision, Judge Frankish upheld the decision  of  the
    respondent not to treat the appellant as making a fresh  asylum  claim,
    as defined in paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.  The Judge  noted
    that the grounds of appeal made no reference to  asylum,  and  that  Dr
    Ballard made no reference to the appellant or her partner facing a risk
    of a zina prosecution.  He characterised the key thrust of Dr Ballard's
    report as being that of bureaucratic obstacles to gainful employment.

15. Following Devaseelan -v- SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702, the Judge  said  that
    the position of SIJ Eshun was his starting  point.   N  was  not  found
    credible by SIJ Eshun, and the Judge found that N had now made  matters
    worse.

16. At paragraph [19], he said that, in respect of the children and Article
    8, considerable reliance was placed upon economic  hardship.   However,
    the report of Dr Ballard  accepted  the  availability  of  private,  as
    opposed to Government, work.  For this, he concluded that  N  was  well
    placed.  He was, after all, a computer graduate from the United  States
    of  America.  In  paragraph  [20],  the  Judge  set  out  Rule  276ADE,
    underlining sub-paragraph (iv).

17. At paragraph [22], he said that, while the appellant  herself  did  not
    fall within the Rules, her eldest daughter did under sub-paragraph (iv)
    - the issue being the reasonableness, or otherwise, to  expect  her  to
    return.  The Judge continued: "However, the grounds of appeal are wrong
    to rely on this as she  would  need  to  apply.   Nonetheless,  similar
    principles apply under Article 8 outside of the Rules."

18. At paragraph [23], the Judge said that,  with  the  effluxion  of  time
    since the first determination of SIJ Eshun, he  accepted  that  special
    circumstances may be said to have arisen to merit consideration outside
    the Rules.

19. At paragraph [24], he set out section  55,  regarding  the  welfare  of
    children.  At paragraph [25], the Judge said that the key guidance  was
    to be found in the case of Zoumbas -v- SSHD [2013]  UKSE  74,  together
    with ZH (Tanzania) -v- SSHD [2011] UKSE 4.  He went on to  set  out  in
    full paragraph [10] of Zoumbas.  At paragraph [26], the Judge said that
    the seven year point was reiterated in Azimi-Moyed & Others  (Decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197.  The Judge  went
    on in the same paragraph to set out the guidance given in  Azimi-Moyed,
    underlining the entirety of  sub-paragraphs  (i)  and  (ii),  and  also
    underlining the following words at  the  end  of  sub-paragraph  (iii):
    "Seven years as a relevant period".

20. The Judge continued in paragraph [27]: "No doubt the children are doing
    well in the UK.  They are  part  of  a  close  and  harmonious  family.
    However,  neither  I  nor  the  previous  determination,   have   found
    particular difficulties to return.  The children, including the  eldest
    child, would be returning as part of that close and  harmonious  group.
    I do not find that the best interest considerations  for  the  children
    serve to override the respondent's efforts  at  legitimate  immigration
    control."

21. The Judge then turned to the appellant's own  claim  under  Article  8,
    observing that she fell foul of Section 117B  of  the  2002  Act.   The
    Judge went on to set out section  117B  in  its  entirety,  underlining
    various passages.

22. The Judge concluded by saying that, under the  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27
    criteria,  it  could  not  be  considered  disproportionate   for   the
    appellant, with her immediate family, to have to return to a country in
    which they were all nationals, speak the language and were  assimilated
    to the cultural norms. He continued:  "Of  course,  if  the  respondent
    allows another 14 years to pass, a different judicial view may arise."



The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

23. The appellant's application for permission to appeal was refused  by  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, but on a renewed application permission  was
    granted on a limited basis by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Symes  on  7
    February 2017.  His reasons were as follows:

         The   human   rights   ground   of    appeal,    though    somewhat
         unparticularised,  shows  more  promise  given  the   scarcity   of
         reasoning in the First-tier Tribunal's decision below.  It  is  not
         possible, from the reasoning of Judge  Frankish,  to  be  confident
         that the governing principles were applied: in  particular  a)  the
         Judge appears to rely on the  precarious  nature  of  the  mother's
         presence to wholly discount the connections of her  elder  daughter
         with this country, notwithstanding that L had lived in the UK since
         her birth in 2007; and b) as shown  by  MA  (Pakistan),  a  child's
         residence in the UK in  excess  of  seven  years  should  be  given
         special attention in the balancing process albeit  that  it  is  of
         course not determinative: however there is no reasoning that  shows
         that the Tribunal recognised this.

         I accordingly find that, whilst no error of law  is  identified  in
         the approach of the First-tier Tribunal to the asylum dimension  of
         the claim, the Article 8 ground of appeal is a viable one.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

24. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, the appellant appeared in person, as she said that she  could  not
    afford legal representation.  She had served a reply to  the  Secretary
    of State's Rule 24 response  in  which  she  submitted  that  the  best
    interests of L, who was almost 10 now, had not been properly  assessed,
    having regard to the Home Office policy guidance and also to  what  was
    said in MA (Pakistan) by Elias LJ  at  paragraph  [49].   In  her  oral
    submissions, she added that her second child had now accrued over seven
    years' residence.

25. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr McVeety adhered to the Rule  24
    response opposing the appeal.  The best interests of  a  child  were  a
    primary, not a paramount consideration,  to  be  balanced  against  the
    public interest in effective immigration control, taking  into  account
    factors such as the poor immigration history of the appellant  and  the
    father of L, and their failed asylum claim.  The Judge was entitled  to
    find that the children's best interest considerations in this case were
    overridden by the public interest.  Seven years from the age of four is
    likely to be more significant than the first seven years of life.   The
    Judge's conclusion was adequately reasoned in  all  the  circumstances,
    and the grounds amounted to a disagreement with the Judge's findings.









Discussion

Best Interest Guidance

26. A useful summary of the learning on the best interests of  children  in
    the context of immigration is to be  found  in  Azimi-Moayed  &  Others
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC):

         30.  It is not the case that the best interests principle means  it
             is automatically in the interests of any child to be permitted
             to remain in the United Kingdom, irrespective of  age,  length
             of stay, family background or other circumstances.   The  case
             law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the  following
             principles to assist in the  determination  of  appeals  where
             children are affected by the decisions:

             (i)  As a starting point in the best interests of children  to
                  be with both their parents and if both parents  are  being
                  removed from the United Kingdom then  the  starting  point
                  suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part
                  of  their  household  unless  there  are  reasons  to  the
                  contrary.

             (ii) It is generally in the interests of children to have both
                  stability  and  continuity  of  social   and   educational
                  provision and the benefit of growing up  in  the  cultural
                  norms of the society to which they belong.

             (iii)    Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state
                  of origin can lead to development of social, cultural  and
                  educational  ties  that  it  would  be  inappropriate   to
                  disrupt, in the  absence  of  compelling  reasons  to  the
                  contrary.  What amounts to lengthy residence is not  clear
                  cut but past and present policies  have  identified  seven
                  years as a relevant period.

             (iv) Apart from the terms of published policies and Rules, the
                  Tribunal notes that seven years from age 4 is likely to be
                  more significant to a child than the first seven years  of
                  life.  Very young children are focused  on  their  parents
                  rather than peers and are adaptable.

             (v)  Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
                  leave or the reasonable expectation of leave to  enter  or
                  remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely
                  to give rise to private life deserving of respect  in  the
                  absence of exceptional factors.  In any event,  protection
                  of the  economic  wellbeing  of  society  amply  justifies
                  removal in such cases.
The Home Office Policy Guidance
27. The IDIs on Family Migration: Appendix FM  state  at  paragraph  11.2.4
    that the longer a non-British citizen child has resided in the UK,  the
    more the balance swings in favour of it being  unreasonable  to  expect
    the child to leave the UK,, and strong reasons are required to refuse a
    case where the child has accrued over seven years continuous residence.


The relationship between the Rule and Section 117B(6)

28. In AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held  that  the
    duty of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  quite  clear.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal was required  to  have  regard  to  considerations  listed  in
    Section  117B.   It  had  no  discretion  to   leave   any   of   those
    considerations out of account, if  it  was  a  consideration  that  was
    raised on the evidence before it.  The Tribunal continued in  paragraph
    [13]:

         There is also in our judgment no requirement that  the  FtT  should
         pose and answer the same question  more  than  once,  simply  as  a
         matter of form.  Thus since both  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
         Immigration Rules, and s117B(6), both raise the  same  question  in
         relation to a particular child, of  whether  or  not  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK: it is  a  question
         that need only be answered once

The question of reasonableness

29. In MA (Pakistan) and Others, R (on the application of) v Upper Tribunal
    (IAC) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at paragraph [45] Elias LJ said:

         In my judgment, the court should have regard to the conduct of  the
         applicant and any other matters relevant  to  the  public  interest
         when applying the 'unduly harsh' concept under Section 117C(5),  so
         should it when considering the  question  of  reasonableness  under
         Section 117B(6).  ...  The critical point is that  Section  117C(5)
         is in substance a  free-standing  provision  in  the  same  way  as
         Section 117B(6), and even so the court in  MM  (Uganda)  held  that
         wider public interest considerations must  be  taken  into  account
         when applying the 'unduly harsh' criterion.  It seems to me that it
         must be equally so with respect to the reasonableness criterion  in
         Section 117B(6).  It would not be appropriate to  distinguish  that
         decision simply because I have reservations whether it is  correct.
         Accordingly, in line with the approach in that case, I will analyse
         the appeals on the basis that the Secretary of  State's  submission
         on this point is correct and that the only significance of  Section
         117B(6) is that where the seven year Rule is  satisfied,  it  is  a
         factor of some weight leaning in favour of leave  to  remain  being
         granted.

30. At paragraph [46] Elias LJ said that the published Home  Office  Policy
    guidance merely confirmed what is implicit in adopting  a  policy  [the
    seven year rule] of this nature:

         After such a period of time the child will have put down roots  and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK. That may be less when the children are very  young
         because the focus of their lives will be on their families, but the
         disruption becomes more serious as they  get  older.  Moreover,  in
         these cases there must  be  a  very  strong  expectation  that  the
         child's best interests will to be remain in the UK with his parents
         as part of  a  family  unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a  primary
         consideration in the proportionality assessment.

31. At paragraph [48] Elias LJ cited with approval the explanation given by
    Clarke LJ in EV (Phillipines) at  [34]-[37]  as  to  how  the  Tribunal
    should apply the  proportionality  test  where  wider  public  interest
    considerations are in play, in circumstances where the  best  interests
    of the child dictate that he should remain with his  parents.  At  [36]
    Clarke LJ said that  if  it  is  overwhelmingly  in  the  child's  best
    interests to remain, the need to maintain immigration control may  well
    not tip the balance. By contrast if it is in the child's best interests
    to remain, but only on balance (with some factors  pointing  the  other
    way), the result may be the opposite. Clarke LJ continued in [37]:

         In the balance on the other side  there  falls  to  be  taken  into
         account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of  the
         country and the fact that, ex hypothesi,  the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the  parents  may
         also be relevant e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
         deceitfully.

32. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Symes observed that it was  not
    possible to be confident  that  the  Judge  had  applied  the  relevant
    governing principles.  Although not cited to me, I have regard  to  the
    Guidance given by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Muse  &  Others  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer [2012] EWCA Civ 10 on challenges to the adequacy of a
    judge's reasons.  In South Bucks District Council v Porter  (2)  [2004]
    UKHL 33, cited with approval by the Court of Appeal at paragraph  [33],
    Lord Brown said:

         The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and  they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example, by misunderstanding some relevant policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn (my emphasis).  The reasons need only refer to the
         main issues in the dispute, not to every material consideration.

33. I have set  out  the  relevant  background  at  some  length,  as  this
    illuminates the approach taken by the Judge, and it  explains  why  the
    primary focus in his consideration of the children's best interests was
    upon the prospects for their welfare and wellbeing in the event of  the
    relocation of the entire family to Pakistan, as the central  thrust  of
    the appellant's case was  that  the  children  would  face  significant
    cultural and societal obstacles in Pakistan on account of her not being
    married to N.

34. The Judge was clearly aware of the significance of the eldest child, L,
    having accrued over seven years' residence in the UK, as  he  expressly
    recognises that she comes within the scope of  Rule  276ADE  (iv).   He
    also clearly recognises that her period of residence  potentially  tips
    the scales in her favour in the weighing up of competing best  interest
    considerations, as he underlines the reference to the seven  year  Rule
    which appears in the third principle propounded by the  Upper  Tribunal
    in Azimi-Moyed.

35. In order to resolve the question of whether it is reasonable to  expect
    L to leave the UK and to go to Pakistan, the  Judge  has  followed  the
    approach approved by the Court of Appeal  in  MA  (Pakistan).   He  has
    considered best interests first, before  going  on  to  consider  wider
    proportionality considerations, such as the immigration history of  her
    parents.

36. The best  interest  analysis  presents  as  unbalanced,  as  the  Judge
    emphasises the advantages of relocation to Pakistan in  line  with  the
    first and second principles of Azimi-Moayed, whereas there is no  overt
    consideration of the countervailing advantages of L  remaining  in  the
    UK.  However, the absence of  a  discussion  about  the  best  interest
    considerations militating in favour of L remaining in  the  UK  is  not
    material, as the Judge reaches a conclusion  in  L's  favour.   For  he
    finds that overall it is in her best interests to remain.  In order  to
    reach this conclusion, the Judge cannot have discounted L's connections
    with this country. He must have accepted by necessary implication  that
    on balance L's best interests dictated that she should remain in the UK
    with her parents and siblings. For otherwise he would  not  have  found
    that the best interests of the children were  overridden  by  the  very
    poor immigration history of their parents. If he had found that overall
    L's best interests lay in her going to Pakistan that  would  have  been
    the end of the discussion. There would have been no  need  to  consider
    whether  wider  proportionality  considerations   overrode   the   best
    interests' outcome.

37. At the same time. it is clear from the Judge's line of  reasoning  that
    this was not a case where he found that it was  overwhelmingly  in  L's
    best interests to remain. He found that this was a case where it was in
    L's best interests to remain, but only on balance - with  some  factors
    pointing the other way.  Accordingly, it was open to the Judge to  find
    that the need  to  maintain  immigration  control  tipped  the  balance
    against the appellant, so as to make it reasonable to expect L to leave
    the UK with the appellant, her father and  her  siblings,  despite  the
    fact that L had accrued over seven years' residence.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 9 May 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
