
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12238/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 September 2016               |On 22 September 2016               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MARY [B]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr T Haddow (counsel) instructed by Latta & Co,
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Kempton,  promulgated  on1  July  2016
which allowed the Appellant's appeal on asylum and article 3 ECHR grounds.

Background

3.   The Appellant was  born  on  16  August  1982  and  is  a  national  of
Cameroon.

4.   On 26 November 2013 the  appellant  claimed  asylum  stating  that  she
feared forced marriage and FGM if returned to Cameroon. On 2 September  2015
the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's application.

The Judge's Decision

5.   The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Kempton ("the Judge") allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision on asylum and article 3 ECHR grounds.

6.   The respondent lodged grounds of appeal and  on  2  August  2016  Upper
Tribunal Judge Pitt gave permission to appeal stating inter alia:

    "2.  It is arguable that the respondent's grounds, taken  cumulatively,
    show an error of law in the determination. The decision  at  [34],  for
    example, does not reflect the tribunal's view of the expert  and  takes
    her evidence as capable of distinguishing NK (FGM -  Cameroon)  [2004]
    UKIAT 00247 which shows a limited risk of FGM for  women  in  Cameroon.
    The experts report also appears to be the basis of the finding at  [35]
    that sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal  flight  would  not  be
    available.

    3.   All grounds are arguable.

The Hearing

7.   (a) For the respondent, Ms O'Brien moved the grounds of  appeal,  which
she divided into two categories; (i) an inadequacy of reasoning  to  support
the Judge's sparse findings of fact, and (ii) the failure of  the  judge  to
resolve the conflict between an  expert  report  and  the  case  NK  (FGM  -
Cameroon) [2004]UKIAT 00247.

(b)  Ms O'Brien took me to [25] of  the  decision,  where  the  Judge  makes
reference  to  the  damage  done  to  the  appellant's  credibility  by  the
operation  of  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
Claimants etc) Act 2004, and asked me to compare the correct  self-direction
found there with the Judge's findings between [29] and  [31].  She  told  me
that the decision betrays an  absence  of  balancing  factors  in  assessing
credibility. In effect  (she  said)  although  the  Judge  directed  herself
correctly it is argued that between [29] and [31]  there  is  no  indication
that the Judge fairly took account of the impact of section 8  of  the  2004
Act.

(c)  Ms O'Brien told me that at [33] the Judge's findings  are  inadequately
reasoned and that it is impossible to determine  why  the  Judge  found  the
appellant to be a credible witness, nor what  effect  the  presence  of  the
corroborating witness has in the overall findings  made  by  the  Judge.  Ms
O'Brien told me that at [32] the Judge fails to  resolve  conflicts  in  the
evidence placed before her.

(d)  Ms O'Brien told me that there is a tension between the case of NK  (FGM
- Cameroon) [2004] UKIAT 00247 and  the  expert  report  relied  on  by  the
appellant. Although it is obvious  that  the  Judge  relied  on  the  expert
report, she argued that is  not  clear  from  the  decision  why  the  Judge
preferred the expert's report to the guidance given in NK (FGM  -  Cameroon)
[2004] UKIAT 00247

(e)  Ms O'Brien told me that the  Judge  gave  inadequate  consideration  to
internal relocation, paying only superficial attention to a crucial part  of
the case at [35] and [37]. She told me that the credibility findings in  the
decision  are  not  safe,  that  the  analysis  of  the  substance  of   the
appellant's claim was inadequate, that the  dissonance  between  the  expert
report and country guidance is not adequately resolved, and the question  of
internal relocation is neither considered non-analysed.

(f)  Ms O'Brien urged me to allow the appeal and set the decision aside  and
thereafter remit this case to the First-tier to be determined de novo.

8.   (a) For the appellant, Mr Haddow told me that  the  decision  does  not
contain any errors, material or otherwise. He adopted the terms of the  rule
24 note dated 6 September 2016, and told me that he believed the grounds  of
appeal fall into three  categories  (i)  A  challenge  to  the  adequacy  of
reasons given by the Judge (ii) A challenge  to  the  manner  in  which  the
Judge treated country guidance, and (iii)  A  challenge  to  the  manner  in
which the Judge dealt with the expert report.

(b)  Mr Haddow reminded me of the  error  of  law  test  and  the  onus  and
standard of  proof,  before  turning  to  the  Judge's  findings  about  the
credibility of the appellant. He reminded me that consideration  of  section
8 of the 2004 Act is not determinative of the appellant's claim; it is  just
one factor to be taken into account when assessing credibility. He  took  me
to the first sentence of  [31]  where  the  Judge  records  that  she  takes
account of all of the submissions and evidence in the case. He told me  that
a fair reading of the  decision  demonstrated  that  the  Judge  gives  good
reasons for finding the appellant credible.

(c)  Mr Haddow referred to SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA civ  940,  and  told
me that the Judge has departed  from  country  guidance  given  in  NK  (FGM
-Cameroon). He told me that the  experts  report  is  consistent  with  that
country guidance. In the alternative, if I  find  that  the  Judge  did  not
follow country guidance, then she has good reason  to  depart  from  country
guidance.

(d)  Mr Haddow told me that the Judge adequately considered the question  of
internal relocation at [35] and [37]  of  the  decision  and  made  a  clear
finding that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant to  relocate  within
Cameroon.  Mr Haddow told me that the Judge gave the flawless  consideration
to the expert's report. He asked me to dismiss  the  appeal  and  allow  the
Judge's decision to stand.



Analysis

9.   In R and Others v  SSHD  (2005)  EWCA  civ  982  the  Court  of  Appeal
endorsed Practice Direction 18.4 which states that any failure to  follow  a
clear, apparently applicable country guidance case or to show  why  it  does
not apply to the case in question is likely to be regarded as a  ground  for
review or appeal on a point of law.   The  Court  of  Appeal  said  that  it
represented a failure to take  a  material  matter  into  account.  Practice
direction 18(2) requires FtT Judges to  take  account  of  Country  Guidance
cases. In OM (AA(1) wrong  in  law)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2006]  UKAIT  00077  the
Tribunal said that country guidance stands until it is replaced or found  to
be wrong in law. Where a  country  guidance  case  is  replaced  because  of
changed country conditions or because further  evidence  has  emerged,  that
will not mean that it was an error of law for a Judge to  have  followed  it
up to that point. Where, however, a country guidance case  is  found  to  be
legally flawed the reasons for so finding will have existed both before  and
after its notification.  It  is  a  determination  inconsistent  with  other
authority that is binding on the Tribunal.  In  those  circumstances,  which
will be encountered only rarely, any  determination  of  an  appeal  decided
substantially on the basis of that country guidance will be  legally  flawed
also and cannot stand.

10.  In SA v Advocate General of Scotland (2015) CSOH 180 it was  held  that
whilst it is an error of law to fail to  follow  a  country  guidance  case,
unless there is a good reason explicitly stated for not  doing  so,  equally
where a reason for not following a country guidance  case  was  put  forward
the decision maker was bound to consider it and a failure to do so would  be
an error of law.

11.  In NK  (Cameroon)  2004  UKIAT  00247,  the  Tribunal  found  that  the
evidence showed that it was  women  and  particularly  young  girls  in  the
predominately Muslim area of Cameroon that were at highest risk.  There  was
no evidence of a  consistent  pattern  of  gross  common  mass  or  flagrant
violations of the human rights of women in the  country  as  a  whole.   The
appellant (in that case) could  relocate  internally  to  a  Christian  area
where she would be safe and where her family did not have the  resources  to
pursue her.

12.  At [18] of the decision, the Judge demonstrates  that  she  is  clearly
aware of the case of NK (FGM - Cameroon). On the  one  hand  the  respondent
argues that the appellant has failed to follow the case, on the other it  is
argued that the findings of the expert are consistent with the case  of  NK,
because in both the conclusion is drawn that 20% of women  in  Cameroon  are
at risk of FGM. NK (FGM - Cameroon) is not a country guidance case, so  that
undue emphasis is placed on the Judge's apparent departure  from  the  ratio
of that case.

13.  Although NK is not a country guidance case, it  clearly  has  relevance
in this case, and was relied on by the  respondent  in  submissions  to  the
First-tier. Nowhere in the decision does the  Judge  analyse  the  ratio  of
that case. No-where does  the  Judge  compare  the  findings  of  the  Upper
Tribunal in NK against the evidence contained  in  the  expert  report.  The
Judge clearly places reliance on the expert report, but  she  does  not  say
why, nor does she attempt to distinguish the  conclusions  form  the  expert
from the ration of NK. NK may not be country guidance,  but  it  should  not
have been ignored by the Judge.

14.  The problem apparent from a fair reading of the decision is that  there
is an inadequacy of reasoning. It is not clear from a fair  reading  of  the
case whether the Judge finds NK persuasive, nor is it clear whether  or  not
NK supports the expert's opinion.

15.  The Judge's findings of fact are brief. They appear to start  at  [31],
and are set out between [31] and [37]. At [25] the Judge  is  clearly  aware
of the impact of section 8 of the 2004 Act, but  at  [31],  when  discussing
the appellant's reasons for delaying in her  claim  for  asylum,  the  Judge
does not factor in the obligation to find that there is some damage  to  the
appellant's credibility. The Judge finds that the appellant  is  a  credible
witness in the final sentence of [31] but that finding appears to relate  to
the appellant's academic achievements. The result is that it  is  not  clear
to the objective reader why the appellant's account is accepted.

16.  In JT (Cameroon) v SSHD 2008 EWCA Civ 878  the  Court  of  Appeal  said
that  section  8  factors  should  be  taken  into  account   in   assessing
credibility and were capable of damaging it but the section did not  dictate
that the relevant damage to section 8 inevitably results.  It  was  possible
to  read  the  adverb  "potentially"  into  section  8(1)  before  the  word
"damaging".  In this case the Court of Appeal concluded  that  there  was  a
real risk that section 8 matters were given a statement and  compartment  of
their own and were not taken into account as part of a global assessment  of
credibility.

17.  In MA v UT 2014 CSIH  111  it  was  said  that  a  proper  approach  to
credibility required an assessment  of  the  evidence  and  of  the  general
claim.  In  asylum  claims,  relevant  factors  were,  first  the   internal
consistency of the claim; secondly the inherent plausibility of  the  claim;
and thirdly the consistency of the claim with external factors of  the  sort
typically found in country guidance.

18.  In AK (Turkey) 2004 UKIAT 00230  the  Tribunal  said  that  it  was  an
essential  part  of  an  Adjudicator's  responsibility  to  make   a   clear
assessment as to the credibility or otherwise of all oral  evidence  and  to
give  proper  intelligible  and  adequate  reasons  for  arriving   at   his
conclusions.

19.  At [34] the Judge considers the expert's  report  and  finds  that  the
expert is a person who

    "... ought to be objective."

The Judge does not set out the expert's qualifications nor  does  the  Judge
discuss the content of the report, nor does the Judge explain why she  finds
that report to be persuasive and reliable. The  expert  report  is  not  set
against the background materials which were  available  to  the  Judge,  and
which are not adequately referred to in the decision.

20.   The  crucial  feature  of  this  case  is  the  question  of  internal
relocation which is discussed by the respondent between  paragraphs  37  and
43 of the  reasons  for  refusal  letter.  The  Judge  deals  with  internal
relocation in five short sentences at [35]  and  draws  the  conclusion,  at
[37] that internal relocation is unduly  harsh.  That  conclusion  might  be
correct, but the difficulty is that the Judge  has  not  set  out  evidence-
based findings of fact nor has the Judge  set  out  adequate  reasoning  for
reaching the conclusion that she does.

21.  In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC),  it  was
held that

    (1)  It was  axiomatic  that  a  determination  disclosed  clearly  the
    reasons for a tribunal's decision.

    (2)  If a tribunal found oral evidence to be implausible, incredible or
    unreliable or a document to be  worth  no  weight  whatsoever,  it  was
    necessary to say so in the determination and for such  findings  to  be
    supported by reasons. A bare statement that a witness was not  believed
    or that a document was afforded no weight was unlikely to  satisfy  the
    requirement to give reasons.

22.  I must find that the decision is tainted by a  material  error  of  law
because of the  inadequacy  of  reasoning  contained  in  the  decision.   I
therefore set the decision aside

23.  The Judge's decision  cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
entirety. All matters must be determined of new.

REMITTAL TO FT

24.  Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    '(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive  a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)  the nature or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.'

25.  I find that this case should be remitted  because  of  the  nature  and
extent of the judicial fact finding which will be necessary to make  a  just
decision in this case. In this case none of the  findings  of  fact  are  to
stand.

26.  I remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Glasgow,
before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Kempton.



CONCLUSION

Decision

27.  The decision of the First-tier tribunal is tainted by  material  errors
of law.

28.  I set aside the decision. The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed   Date 19 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

