
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12881/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 10 September 2013                          |On 4 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                           MR JEYARAJAH GANEESHGAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Akther (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                 RESUMED HEARING - DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant whose date of birth is 11 December 1981 is a  citizen  of
    Sri Lanka.  This is a resumed hearing before me  following  a  decision
    made that there was an error of law.

Background

2.   The appellant was granted leave to remain as a Tier 4  Student  Migrant
    until 16 July 2012.  He applied on 1 August 2011 for variation  of  his
    leave on the basis that he was entitled to be recognised as  a  refugee
    in the United Kingdom.  His application was refused by  the  respondent
    under paragraph 336 of the Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended) on  9
    November 2011.  In addition it was decided that he would not be granted
    humanitarian protection and or that he was not entitled to  be  granted
    any other form of leave following consideration of his claim under  the
    European Convention for Human Rights.  A  further  decision  was  taken
    that he should be removed to Sri Lanka  pursuant  to  directions  given
    under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

3.   The appellant's appeal was heard  before  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Buckwell on 22 December 2011.  Judge Buckwell did not find the
    appellant's account to be credible and  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds. An application for permission to appeal was granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge B W Dawson.

4.   The initial error  of  law  hearing  took  place  before  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Wood on 13 August 2012.  In a decision  dated  24  April
    2013 he set out his reasons for finding that the judge made a  material
    error of law as follows. He found that the Judge failed to consider, as
    a discrete issue, the risks to the appellant in the event of his return
    to Sri Lanka.  On all other grounds the First-tier Tribunal decision of
    13 January 2012 was upheld and there were no other material  errors  of
    law.

5.   The matter came before me on 2 May 2013 by way of a resumed hearing  to
    deal with the issue of  risk  on  return.   The  matter  was  adjourned
    pending determination of up-to-date country guidance on Sri Lanka (GJ &
    others(post civil war returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319) .

The Hearing Before Me

6.   An application to adduce new evidence was made  by  Miss  Akther.  This
    evidence was not before the  First-tier  Tribunal  nor  raised  in  any
    subsequent proceedings or grounds in the Upper  Tribunal.   Ms  Everett
    opposed the application on the grounds that it was new  evidence  which
    had not been tested or subject to scrutiny  by  the  Tribunal  and  the
    respondent would require an opportunity to cross-examine.

7.   I decided that there were no grounds on which the appellant  could  now
    seek to introduce what was  effectively  entirely  new  material  in  a
    supplementary bundle at the resumed hearing which was to  consider  the
    issue of risk on return. There had been no compliance with Rule 15A  of
    the Procedure Rules 2008 and I refused the application.




Submissions
8.   As to the substantive issue of risk on return Ms Akther submitted  that
    the appellant was affiliated with the LTTE and that  in  her  view  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had not entirely  rejected  this  issue.  The
    appellant may be perceived as being a low level member of the LTTE.

9.   She acknowledged that the  new  country  guidance  case  GJ  emphasised
    risks facing  those seeking to revive the LTTE in Sri  Lanka  and  that
    the authorities were now focused on rooting out the opposition and  any
    separatist movement.  The appellant was a Tamil and  had  relatives  in
    the LTTE.  It was likely he would be interviewed in London  before  the
    decision was made to issue travel documents.  The fact that he had been
    based in the UK since January 2010 was relevant and in  particular  the
    fact that he came from London would be viewed with suspicion.  The fact
    that he would be of interest  would  be  flagged  up  at  the  airport,
    although it was conceded that he would not necessarily  be  stopped  at
    the airport. He may be followed up  later.   The  authorities  now  had
    sophisticated intelligence in place. She submitted that  the  appellant
    would appear on the computer " stop" list at the airport  which  placed
    him in the GJ risk factors.  He would face risks  as  a  failed  asylum
    seeker from the UK.

10.  Ms Everett submitted that  following  GJ  there  was  no  risk  to  the
    appellant.  He was found not to be credible in his claim and the  Judge
    of the First-tier found the evidence given by the  appellant  that  his
    uncle was in the LTTE was very weak.  There was no evidence of any LTTE
    membership activities or activities in London and as was  indicated  in
    paragraph  356  of  GJ  the   authorities   with   their   increasingly
    sophisticated intelligence were seeking to root out and identify  Tamil
    separatists.  There was no evidence that the appellant was a journalist
    or that there were any factors  showing  that  he  faced  any  risk  on
    return.  Simply coming from London as a failed asylum  seeker  did  not
    amount to a risk factor.  There  was  no  evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant even after arriving in Sri Lanka intended to pursue the Tamil
    cause.

Decision and Reasons

11.  At the end of the hearing I dismissed the appeal.

12.  I took into account the submissions made by both  representatives  with
    regard to the issue of risk on  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   I  took  into
    account the risk factors now listed in the recent country guidance case
    of GJ where it is clear that the Tribunal  emphasised  that  the  risks
    were faced by those looking  to  revive  the  LTTE/Tamil  cause  and/or
    separatism.  Having considered all of the evidence  before  me  I  find
    that there is no evidence that the appellant would face any  real  risk
    on return.  He was found to be lacking in credibility as to the core of
    his claim and there is no evidence to show that he has been involved in
    any political activities in the UK and or any involvement  either  past
    or present with the LTTE.  The suggestion that  he  would  be  at  risk
    because of his uncle's activities in the LTTE is  not  sustainable.   I
    find that the evidence on this issue was indeed very weak.  I find that
    the appellant would be returning to Sri Lanka as a failed asylum seeker
    Tamil who originally entered the UK as a student. I find no evidence to
    show that he is  involved  in  any  activities  or  support  for  Tamil
    separatism.  There is no evidence to show  that  the  appellant's  name
    would appear on any "stop" list.  There is nothing to show that  he  is
    an individual who is or is perceived to be a threat to the integrity of
    Sri Lanka as a single State because he is or is  perceived  to  have  a
    significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil  separatism  within
    the diaspora and or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.  I  also
    take into account that the Tribunal  in  GJ  considered  that  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities were aware that many  Sri  Lankan  Tamils  travelled
    abroad as economic migrants and that almost everyone  in  the  northern
    province had some level of involvement with the LTTE during  the  civil
    war.  The emphasis in post-conflict Sri Lanka of an  individual's  past
    history will be relevant only to the extent that it is perceived by the
    Sri Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary  Sri
    Lankan State or the Sri Lankan Government.

13.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed on all grounds.
     The original decision made by the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.






Signed                                  Date 27.9.2013
G. Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

