
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12529/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Upper Tribunal     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th October 2016                 |On 31st October 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     OAS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Singh, Counsel


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  As a
protection claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to  the  Secretary  of
    State as "the Respondent" and  to  Mr  OAS  as  "the  Appellant"  which
    reflects their respective positions  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The Respondent appeals with permission against the decision of a First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Bagral) allowing the  Appellant's  appeal  against
    the Respondent's refusal to grant him asylum.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran and is  of  Kurdish  ethnicity.   He
    entered the UK in November 2008 claiming asylum on arrival.  His  claim
    was refused and a subsequent appeal dismissed as his claim was found to
    be lacking in credibility.  The  Appellant  then  put  forward  further
    submissions to the Respondent on 11th February 2011, 6th February  2013
    and 25th October 2013. These were  all  subsequently  refused  with  no
    right of appeal. The  Appellant  lodged  further  submissions  on  26th
    November 2014 and these  latest  submissions  were  recognised  by  the
    Respondent as a fresh claim.  This claim was refused by the  Respondent
    on 16th September 2015.

 3. The Appellant exercised his right to appeal against  that  refusal  and
    the appeal which came before  Judge  Bagral  on  10th  June  2016,  was
    allowed by a decision promulgated on 8th August 2016.   The  Respondent
    now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 4. The Appellant's claim as originally made out centred on a claim that he
    and his girlfriend in Iran had sex in order to coerce her parents  into
    agreeing to their marriage.  He said as a result of this there  was  an
    arrest warrant in existence.  That part of the  Appellant's  claim  was
    found not credible in a decision issued  by  Judge  Mark-Bell  on  10th
    February 2009 and it is right to say that Judge Bagral  found  no  good
    reason to depart from those findings.  Therefore those findings  remain
    unchallenged before this Tribunal and are to be regarded as final.

 5. Judge Bagral then proceeded to assess the Appellant's  risk  on  return
    against the profile of an Iranian Kurd with no political profile either
    in Iran or in the UK and as someone who was of no adverse  interest  to
    any individual in  Iran  or  to  the  Iranian  authorities.  The  judge
    accepted that the Appellant had exited Iran illegally.  She  took  into
    account the evidence contained in two expert reports and concluded that
    she was satisfied that the Appellant's ethnicity alone, was  sufficient
    to create a real risk  of  harsh  interrogation  and  ill-treatment  on
    return, such as to comprise an Article 3 risk.

Onward Appeal

 6. The only Ground of Appeal raised  by  the  Respondent  centres  on  the
    following.  It is said that the judge allowed the appeal on  the  basis
    that the Appellant has made out that there is a general risk on  return
    to Iran for Kurds.  It is said that this finding is  made  despite  the
    judge referring in her decision, to the most  recent  country  guidance
    decision in SSH and HR (Illegal Exit: Failed  Asylum  Seeker)  Iran  CG
    [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC).  The grounds go on to say that it was found in
    SSH and HR that there was no such generalised risk to Kurdish returnees
    to Iran. In the present case the Judge had found there was such a  risk
    based on 'one solitary expert's report'.  This,  it  was  claimed,  was
    inadequate.  It was said  further  that  the  judge  failed  to  remind
    herself of the need to find that there had been a durable change in the
    country since the previous country guidance of SB  (Risk  on  Return  -
    Illegal Exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 0053.

Error of Law Hearing

 7. I heard submissions from  both  Mrs  Pettersen  and  Miss  Singh.   Mrs
    Pettersen's submissions broadly  kept  to  the  lines  of  the  grounds
    seeking permission, but she did emphasise that both appellants  in  SSH
    and HR, were Iranian Kurds and like the Appellant in the present  case,
    were deemed to  have  no  political  profile,  nor  any  other  factors
    attracting the attention of the authorities.

 8. Miss Singh's submissions it is right to say  were  rather  fuller  than
    those of Mrs Pettersen and are set out in her skeleton argument  served
    as a rule 24 response.  At  the  end  of  submissions,  I  reserved  my
    decision which I now give with reasons.

Consideration

 9. The appeal before the FtT was heard on 10th June 2016.  The CG decision
    in SSH and HR was not published until 4th  July  2016.   It  could  not
    therefore be referred to at the  hearing  on  10th  June.   It  is  the
    Respondent's claim that the judge erred in law by making  her  findings
    in contra distinction to the recent country guidance of SSH and HR  and
    despite making reference to it relied upon one report  from  Dr  Joffe.



10. I find that the judge has given  the  impression  of  straying  into  a
    consideration of matters which were not argued  before  her.  No  doubt
    this was to emphasise the difference in evidence in the case before her
    and what was before the CG panel. This may have led  to  an  impression
    that in some way the judge has, as Mrs Pettersen said "cut  across  the
    grain" of a CG case. Of course, it is accepted by both  representatives
    that the FtT is bound by CG cases but I find that on a fair reading  of
    the judge's decision she has simply sought to emphasise  that  she  was
    looking at matters from a different  evidential  viewpoint  to  the  CG
    case.

11. However I return to the sequence of events relating to this matter  and
    which are set out above.  Quite simply when the FtT heard  the  present
    appeal on 10th June 2016, the CG case was not published.  Therefore  it
    was not in evidence before her. It did not therefore form part  of  the
    case she was hearing.

12. The judge I find, carefully reviewed the evidence which was before her,
    relying no doubt heavily upon the report of Dr  Joffe  but  also  on  a
    report from Dr Khakhi, both of whom, she recorded, are renowned experts
    on Kurdish/Iranian affairs.  Having relied upon that evidence,  as  she
    was entitled to do, she concluded that the Appellant had made  out  his
    case.

13. It is also correct to say that the Respondent raised no real  challenge
    to either of the expert's reports (other than  a  sterile  point  about
    them being generic). It is hard to  see  therefore  why  the  Judge  is
    criticised for relying on that evidence. Having assessed  the  evidence
    before her the judge arrived at conclusions with reasons why the appeal
    should be allowed.  She sets out her fully reasoned findings in [20] to
    [38].  Had she stopped  there,  I  do  not  think  that  any  criticism
    whatsoever concerning her decision, could result. Instead  however  she
    went on to say in [39] that she was "now aware" of the CG case  in  SSH
    and HR. and that she was not minded to reconvene  the  hearing  because
    she had all the evidence she required before her. That was correct  and
    it is hard to see why she seemingly decided to justify her decision, by
    bringing into the reasoning, a reference to the decision in SSH and HR.
    other than perhaps to emphasise that different evidence was before her.



14. It is correct to say that the arguments put before the  CG  panel,  did
    not rely on either Appellant's ethnicity as Kurds.  Indeed the CG panel
    specifically stated at [34] that it was not suggested to them  that  an
    individual faces risk on return on the sole  basis  of  being  Kurdish.



15. Different information of course, was before  the  FtT  in  the  present
    appeal. Finally, the grounds took issue with Judge Bagral  reliance  on
    'one solitary expert' (Dr Joffe). In fact, as Miss Singh pointed out Dr
    Joffe's report was fully sourced and as I noted above was not seriously
    challenged by the Respondent. In addition Judge Bagral also relied on a
    report from Dr  Khaki.  Therefore,  I  find,  she  decided  the  appeal
    according to the evidence which was before her, evidence which was  not
    before the CG panel.  It was proper to do so.

16. For the foregoing reasons therefore I find that the decision of the FtT
    discloses no error of law requiring it to be set aside.   The  decision
    stands.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     28 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
