
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12488/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 12 January 2017                       |On 24 January 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                            Md. mohammadi aghdam
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A de Ruano of AD Ruano Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell of the Specialist Appeals Team



                            DECISION AND REASONS




The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran  born  on  21  September  1986.  He
    states that on 23 June 2011 he arrived in the United Kingdom.  On  that
    date he claimed asylum because he feared persecution on return to  Iran
    because he had been discovered in a relationship with a married  woman.
    Subsequent to arrival in the United Kingdom the  Appellant  claimed  he
    had forsaken Islam and become an atheist and that  on  return  he  will
    additionally face persecution because  of  his  renunciation  of  Islam
    which has been publicly recorded on a website  and  in  digital  social
    media.

 2. He is single and has no dependants.  At interview he said  his  mother,
    an older brother and a married sister remained in Iran.  He  also  said
    that he was a draft evader.

 3. The Appellant's claim originally was based on a claim that he had  been
    discovered to have had sex with  a  married  woman  and  to  have  been
    discovered and reported to the authorities who subsequently raided  his
    home and his business premises.   Subsequently  those  aspects  of  the
    claim were not pursued and  a  revised  claim  based  entirely  on  his
    renunciation of Islam and that the Iranian authorities will be able  to
    identify him as an apostate from references to him and  the  photograph
    of him on the website of the Council of Ex-Muslims  of  Britain  (CEMB)
    and his use of digital social media.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 4. The Appellant's appeal against refusal of the original  decision  based
    on his claim to have had sex with a married woman was dismissed on  all
    grounds by a determination of Immigration Judge Williams promulgated on
    1 September 2011.  By a determination sent  to  the  Respondent  on  23
    April 2012 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal and upheld the decision of Judge Williams.

 5. The Appellant then made a further claim for asylum which now included a
    new claim based on his  renunciation  of  Islam  which  the  Respondent
    refused on all grounds for reasons given in a letter  of  14  September
    2015.  The appeal was heard by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  J
    McIntosh to whom the Appellant admitted being a draft evader:  see  p.4
    of the record of proceedings. She went on to dismiss the appeal on  all
    grounds in a decision promulgated on 9 February  2016.   That  decision
    was set aside by a decision of  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGinty
    promulgated on 4 May 2016, principally on the basis that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had not taken account of the decision in AB  and  Others
    (Internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 00257 (IAC).

 6. The appeal was heard afresh by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Beg who
    by a decision promulgated on 26 September  2016  dismissed  it  on  all
    grounds.

 7. On 20 October 2016 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Saffer  refused
    permission to appeal on the basis that  the  grounds  advanced  by  the
    Appellant were no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge.   The
    Appellant renewed his application and on 7 December 2016  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Roberts granted permission to appeal on the  basis  that
    the Judge had not "given a sufficient explanation as  to  why  she  has
    concluded that the 'pinch point' risk  to  him  in  minimal  given  the
    comments in AB and Others..." (sic).

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8.  The  Appellant  was  present  accompanied  by   his   representative's
    interpreter.  Mr de Ruano explained that he had very little English and
    I suggested to the interpreter that he could give a summary of what was
    said to the Appellant.

 9. The parties agreed that the issue before the Upper Tribunal was whether
    Judge Beg had made a material error in law in the manner in  which  she
    had applied the guidance in AB and Others to the facts as she had found
    them.  They also agreed that the recent country  guidance  decision  of
    SSH and HR (Illegal exit: failed asylum seeker)  Iran  CG  [2016]  UKUT
    00308 (IAC) had no impact on this appeal.

Submissions for the Appellant

10. Mr de Ruano referred to the grant of permission to appeal of 7 December
    2016 which I have already quoted.  The  Appellant's  name  and  picture
    were available on a website.  In AB the Upper  Tribunal  had  found  at
    paragraph 449:-

         Certain things are quite clear  and  uncontroversial.   Iran  is  a
         country that does persecute some people who oppose it.  Persecution
         takes many forms.  We have been given detailed examples of a  small
         number of people sent to prison  for  a  long  period  of  time  in
         conditions that must be very challenging.

    He reminded me the lower standard of proof was applicable and submitted
    that it was inevitable that there  was  a  real  risk  something  could
    happen to the Appellant on return.  Judge  Beg  had  erred  in  law  by
    giving insufficient reasoning to support her finding that there was  no
    real risk to the Appellant on return to Iran.  Her decision  should  be
    set aside.

Submissions for the Respondent

11. Mr Whitwell noted that Judge  Beg's  decision  had  been  described  by
    Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Roberts  as  "clearly  a  detailed  and
    thoughtful one". He referred to paragraphs 471 and 472 of AB and Others
    which state:-

         471. However, as  might  more  frequently  be  the  case,  where  a
             person's  leave  to  remain  had  lapsed  and  who  might   be
             travelling on a special  passport,  there  would  be  enhanced
             interest. The more active they had been the  more  likely  the
             authorities' interest could lead to persecution.

         472  The mere fact that a person, if extremely discrete, blogged in
             the United Kingdom would not mean they would necessarily  come
             to the attention of the authorities in Iran. However, if there
             was  a  lapse  of   discretion   they   could   face   hostile
             interrogation on return which might expose them to  risk.  The
             more active a person had been on the internet the greater  the
             risk. It is not relevant if a person had used the internet  in
             an opportunistic way. The authorities are not concerned with a
             person's motivation. However in cases in which they have taken
             an interest claiming asylum is viewed negatively. This may not
             of itself be sufficient to lead  to  persecution  but  it  may
             enhance the risk.

    Mr Whitwell submitted that the Upper Tribunal had linked the  level  of
    risk to an individual to the level of activity.  He stressed  that  the
    degree of risk increased the greater the degree of activity.

12. The Judge at paragraph 13 had said that the Appellant "said he  is  not
    active on the internet and has been homeless for six years.  Nor is  he
    active on his laptop."  At paragraph 26 she referred  to  his  Facebook
    profile and that "he accepted that it did  not  state  that  he  is  an
    atheist."

13. At paragraphs 29-34 she had set out in full the  submissions  made  for
    the Appellant by Mr  de  Ruano  who  had  appeared  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal based on the learning in AB and Others.  The Judge  had  given
    due consideration to the learning in AB and Others in  the  context  of
    the facts as found and had given sustainable reasons for dismissing the
    appeal.  Her decision contained no error of law and should stand.

Response for the Appellant

14. Mr de Ruano replied that minimal activity on  the  web  and  electronic
    social media did not negate the risk on return.  At paragraph 455 of AB
    and Others the Upper Tribunal had said:-

         .... It is probably the case that the more active persons  are  the
         more likely they are to be persecuted but the reverse just does not
         apply.  We find that the authorities do not chase everyone who just
         might be an opponent but if that opponent comes to their  attention
         for some reason then that person might be in quite serious  trouble
         for conduct which to the ideas of western liberal society  seem  of
         little consequence.

     Even if the Appellant is not sincere in his claimed atheism there  was
    material on the web which indicated that he was  an  atheist.   If  the
    Appellant were to deny being an atheist if on return this  was  put  to
    him and the Appellant were to deny being  an  atheist,  the  fact  that
    there was this reference to him on a website  would  be  sufficient  to
    place him at risk. The decision should be set aside.

Consideration

15. The Judge at paragraph 29 of her decision set out the  standing  of  AB
    and Others and at  paragraphs  31  and  33  referred  to  the  skeleton
    argument for the Appellant and at paragraphs 32 and  33  addressed  the
    substance of paragraphs 451, 455, 457, 460, and 462 of  AB  and  Others
    and indeed set out word for word the whole of paragraphs 466-472 of  AB
    and Others.  At paragraph 34 the Judge made findings about  the  extent
    of the Appellant's internet  activity  and  at  paragraphs  35  and  36
    addressed the issue of the  Appellant's  rejection  of  Islam  and  his
    appearance on the website of the CEMB.  At paragraphs  40-42  she  made
    findings that the Appellant's sur place claim based on his atheism  was
    self-serving.  I note that this  does  not  negate  the  claim  in  its
    entirety: see Damian v SSHD [1999] EWCA Civ. 3000 and  YB  (Eritrea)  v
    SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ. 360.  The issue is  whether  the  authorities  in
    Iran if they were aware of the Appellant's activities would  be  likely
    to treat them as insincere and opportunistic.

16. The Judge had in mind the "pinch point" moment of return and the  risks
    involved because she dealt extensively  with  that  in  addressing  the
    learning in SB (Risk on return - illegal exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]  UKAIT
    00053 at paragraph 30.  This paragraph opens with  the  statement  that
    "the court considered the capability  of  the  Iranian  authorities  to
    monitor the use of social and other internet  based  media  by  Iranian
    nationals  based  outside  of  Iran".   The  Judge  accepted  that  the
    submission to which she referred anything that the Iranian  authorities
    would disapprove of or to bring him to their attention.   She  repeated
    this in the closing  sentences  of  paragraph  34  that  "there  is  no
    credible evidence... the Appellant is a  regular  blogger...  that  the
    appellant has written anything that can be construed as a criticism  of
    the Iranian state or government."

17. The Upper Tribunal's grant of permission was on the sole ground that it
    was arguable the Judge  had  not  given  a  sufficient  explanation  to
    support her findings in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  case  and  the
    learning in AB and  Others.   On  a  careful  reading  of  the  Judge's
    decision, I have come to the conclusion that she more  than  adequately
    dealt with the issues and that the decision contains no material  error
    of law and therefore it shall stand.

Anonymity

18. There was no request for anonymity and having heard the appeal consider
    none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error  of
    law such that it should be set aside.  It shall therefore stand.

    The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  24.
i. 2017

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
