
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12097/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 June 2016                              |On 11 July 2016               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     TB
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Z. Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Nathan, Counsel, instructed by Theva
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Anstis, promulgated  on  28  April  2016,  in
    which he allowed TB's appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision
    to refuse to grant asylum.


 2. For the purposes of this appeal I refer to the Secretary  of  State  as
    the Respondent and to TB as the Appellant, reflecting  their  positions
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. As this is an asylum appeal I make an anonymity direction.


 4. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "It is arguable that the judge did err in coming to his  conclusion  at
    [47]. Whilst the judge did come to a finding although  implicit  rather
    than explicit that the authorities had come looking for  the  appellant
    in 2013 (the penultimate sentence of [47] being the  judge's  reasoning
    why there were substantial grounds for believing that  the  authorities
    had come looking for the appellant), it is arguable  (for  the  reasons
    set out at paragraph 3 of the grounds) that the judge's  reasoning  was
    inadequate.


    Whilst the judge considered that the risk on return  to  the  appellant
    would arise because he was perceived as a threat to  the  integrity  of
    the Sri Lankan state (see [38] - "a kingpin  of  smuggling  weapons  to
    LTTE") it is arguable the judge does  not  explain  adequately  why  he
    would be so perceived on  return.   As  is  pointed  out  by  the  last
    sentence of 3b) of the grounds and the first sentence of paragraph  3c)
    it is equally likely that the lack of visits from the authorities after
    2013 was because they had concluded that he was not of interest  rather
    than there being no point in further investigation because he  was  out
    of the country (see the end of [46])."


 5. The Appellant did not attend the hearing. I heard oral submissions from
    both representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions

 6. Ms Ahmed relied on the grounds of appeal.


 7. Mr. Nathan submitted that paragraph 3 of the grounds was predicated  on
    a mistake made in paragraph 2 of the grounds.  He  submitted  that  the
    grounds were correct when referring to paragraph [42] of the  decision,
    but not correct in their reference to paragraph [38].  In  the  reasons
    for refusal letter the Respondent had  rejected  the  entirety  of  the
    Appellant's account.  Therefore the judge had considered the key issues
    starting with the Appellant's brothers' work for  the  LTTE,  which  he
    accepted in paragraph [31].


 8. In paragraph [32] the judge turned to the detention  of  the  Appellant
    and his move to India.  In relation to the  detention,  he  found  that
    this did not go to the issue of risk in any event and so "parked"  this
    point, paragraph [34].  In paragraph [35] the judge  found  that  there
    were no inconsistencies or difficulties in matters of substance in  the
    Appellant's account of events in India.  At paragraph  [36]  the  judge
    turned to look at events since the Appellant's arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom.


 9. He submitted that paragraph [38] had to be looked at in the context  of
    these earlier paragraphs.   Although  it  started  by  saying  "On  the
    Appellant's account of events, he could not be considered a  threat  to
    the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state", the  judge  then  stated
    that the interest of the Sri Lankan authorities in him only made  sense
    if it was based on a misconception of his involvement  with  the  LTTE,
    and if they considered him as a "kingpin of smuggling  weapons  to  the
    LTTE".  Mr. Nathan submitted that the second sentence of this paragraph
    was the relevant part.  The judge found that the Appellant could not be
    considered a threat to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka  only  on  his  own
    account of events.


10. The judge then turned to consider the Appellant's position,  given  the
    misconception by the authorities that he was a  "kingpin  of  smuggling
    weapons" (paragraphs [39] to [42], and [45] to [47]).  Having  accepted
    the Appellant's account of his brothers' involvement, and  his  account
    of events in India, the judge turned to consider  the  absence  of  any
    official documents as weighed against the evidence  of  the  Appellant,
    his father and grandmother.


11. Mr. Nathan accepted that paragraph [47] considered in  isolation  could
    raise concerns.  However, considered together with paragraph  [38]  and
    the findings before it, there was no error of law  in  paragraph  [47],
    given that the judge accepted the evidence of  the  Appellant's  father
    and grandmother.


12. I was referred to paragraph [59] of the Appellant's  witness  statement
    where he said that he did not know how the authorities found out  about
    his LTTE involvement.  "I can not know  that.  I  can  only  speculate.
    Perhaps they arrested T and he revealed about my involvement  with  the
    LTTE."  Mr. Nathan submitted that there was no way that  the  Appellant
    could know.  The Appellant's account of his involvement with the  LTTE,
    which was for humanitarian assistance, would not point  to  a  risk  on
    return.  However, it was necessary for the judge  to  consider  whether
    the misconception on the part of the Sri Lankan authorities, which  led
    to them believing that he was smuggling weapons  through  India,  would
    lead to a finding that he was perceived by the Sri  Lankan  authorities
    to have a greater involvement with the LTTE than he actually  had.   He
    submitted that the Sri Lankan and Indian authorities were looking  into
    investigating the Appellant.


13. In conclusion he submitted that the evidence of the Appellant's  father
    and grandmother had been accepted,  and  there  was  no  error  in  the
    judge's finding that the Appellant would be at risk on return.


14. In response Ms  Ahmed  submitted  that,  even  if  paragraph  [47]  was
    considered in the light  of  the  other  paragraphs  referred  to,  the
    reasoning was inadequate.  There was no explanation as to why  and  how
    the Appellant would be perceived  as  adverse  to  the  authorities  in
    paragraph [38].  Even taking all of  the  decision  into  account,  the
    reasoning on material issues was inadequate.


15. Ms Ahmed referred to paragraphs [29] and [47] and submitted that it was
    confusing as to where the judge had laid  the  burden  of  proof.   The
    burden clearly rested on the Appellant.


16. In response to the reference to paragraph [29],  Mr.  Nathan  submitted
    that the judge found  in  paragraph  [29]  that  there  was  no  direct
    evidence from the Respondent, but  instead  the  Respondent  relied  on
    inconsistencies and contradictions which the judge then  considered  in
    full.  There was no element in which the judge reversed the  burden  of
    proof.  In relation to where  the  decision  contained  reasoning  that
    would bring the Appellant within the context of GJ  and  others  (post-
    civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC),  I  was
    referred to paragraph [10], where the head note to GJ was set  out  and
    to paragraph [38] where the judge used language taken directly from GJ.
     He submitted that the judge had the correct test in mind for assessing
    the risk.


Error of Law


17. Paragraph [38] states:


    "On the Appellant's account of events, he could  not  be  considered  a
    threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state.   The  interest
    of the Sri Lankan authorities in him only makes sense if it is based on
    a misconception of his involvement with the LTTE and if they considered
    him, as described in his statement, as a "kingpin of smuggling  weapons
    to the LTTE"."


18. Paragraph [46] states:


     "This has not been an easy matter to decide.  The 2013 visits  to  the
    Appellant's homes appear unlikely, but they are  testified  to  by  the
    Appellant's grandmother and father, and there is an explanation (albeit
    speculative) as to how this interest could have arisen.   I  would  not
    expect that such visits would result in documentation  which  could  be
    produced to the tribunal.  It is curious that  there  appears  to  have
    been no interest from the authorities in the  Appellant  since  2013  -
    although presumably if they are satisfied that he is out of the country
    they will also have  concluded  that  there  is  no  point  in  further
    investigation."


19. Paragraph [47] states:


    "The Appellant only has to prove his case  to  the  lower  standard  of
    proof and I have decided that the Appellant has shown that there  is  a
    real risk of persecution for a Convention reason on his return  to  Sri
    Lanka.  Whilst the events he describes seem unlikely, there is evidence
    from his grandmother and father that they occurred, and the  Respondent
    has nothing to suggest that they did not occur.  In those circumstances
    I am satisfied that there is a real risk of persecution on a return  to
    Sri Lanka."


20. I find that paragraph [38] is clear that, on the  Appellant's  account,
    he could not be considered a threat.  However, it then goes on to state
    that the interest of the Sri Lankan authorities in the  Appellant  only
    makes sense if it is based on a misconception of his  involvement.   In
    paragraphs [39] to [42] the judge considered how this  allegation,  and
    therefore the authorities' misconception of the Appellant's  role,  may
    have come  about.   In  paragraph  [39]  the  judge  records  that  the
    Appellant admitted that he did not know if T had been arrested  or  had
    said anything to the authorities.  In paragraph [40] the  judge  stated
    that the Appellant had no first-hand knowledge of  the  visits  by  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka and India.  The judge noted that the Appellant
    relied on the evidence of his father and grandmother.


21. In paragraph [41]  the  judge  states  that,  on  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence, there is no indication of any interest in  the  Appellant  by
    the authorities since 2013.  In paragraph [46] he  states  that  it  is
    "curious" that there "appears" to have been  no  interest  since  2013.
    However, in paragraphs [46] and [47] the judge appears  to  accept  the
    evidence of the Appellant's father and grandmother that the authorities
    were interested in him.  He states in paragraph [47]  that  the  events
    described seem "unlikely", but then seemingly accepts the evidence from
    the grandmother and father that these events did occur, and notes  that
    "the Respondent has nothing to suggest that they  did  not  occur".   I
    find that it is not for the Respondent to provide evidence to show that
    these events did not occur, but it is for the Appellant  to  show  that
    these events did occur.  It is not clear in  this  paragraph  that  the
    judge has not come to his conclusion owing to a lack of  evidence  from
    the Respondent to show that the claimed events did not in  fact  occur.
    I find that the judge has given inadequate reasons for finding that the
    visits took place as claimed.


22. I find that there are inadequate reasons given for why the  authorities
    would  consider  that  the  Appellant  had  not  been  doing  only  the
    humanitarian work that he claims to have been  doing,  but  instead  to
    have been smuggling weapons for  the  LTTE.   I  find  that  there  are
    inadequate reasons given for why the  authorities  would  have  such  a
    misconception of the Appellant's involvement.


23. Further, and in any event, by accepting the evidence of the Appellant's
    father and  grandmother,  in  conjunction  with  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant set out in paragraph [41], the judge  found  that  there  had
    been no interest in the Appellant from the authorities since  2013.   I
    find that there are inadequate reasons given  for  why  the  Appellant,
    whose relatives' homes had not been visited since 2013, would still  be
    of interest to the authorities in 2016.  There is no  consideration  of
    why someone in his position would fit into the categories set  down  in
    GJ, especially given the finding in paragraph [42] that  attendance  at
    demonstrations and commemorations in the United Kingdom would not  have
    brought him to the attention of the authorities.


24. It is not clear from the decision that the judge fully  considered  GJ.
    The headnote from GJ is set out, and the  language  used  in  paragraph
    [38] reflects the language in  GJ.   However  I  find  that  there  are
    inadequate reasons given for why the Appellant would be perceived as  a
    threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state.


25. I find that the decision involves the making of an  error  of  law  for
    failure to give adequate reasons for why the Appellant would be at risk
    of persecution on return to Sri Lanka, i.e.  why  he  fits  within  the
    categories of persons at risk of persecution or serious harm set out in
    GJ.


26. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, and having regard to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal, as was agreed by Ms Ahmed and Mr. Nathan at
    the hearing.


Notice of Decision


27. The decision involves the making of a material error of law and  I  set
    it aside.  No findings are preserved.


28. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 8 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
