


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/12718/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Liverpool                   |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On:  29th March 2017                  |On: 12th May 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between


                               Tahira Haidari
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Lawson, Cohesion Legal Services Centre
For the Respondent:           Mr Harrison,    Senior Home Office Presenting
                       Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan. She was born in 1997.










    Anonymity

 2. This case was originally  concerned  with  a  claim  for  international
    protection and for that reason I  had  previously  made  an  order  for
    anonymity, having had regard to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of
    2013:  Anonymity  Orders.   Those  protection  grounds  are  no  longer
    pursued. The Appellant is not a minor and the case does not involve any
    medical or other personal issues such that an order for anonymity would
    be appropriate. The order is therefore lifted.




    Background


 3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as an  unaccompanied  minor
    in May 2011. She was then aged 14.   She applied for  asylum  and  this
    was refused, although she was granted Discretionary  Leave  (DL)  until
    the 14th October 2014.  Initially  placed  under  the  care  of  Surrey
    County Council she was permitted to go and live with  British  national
    Mr Asadullah Haidari, who claimed to be her father.  This  was  despite
    the fact that an earlier application for family reunion entry clearance
    had failed for want of DNA evidence establishing that the  relationship
    was as claimed. The Appellant continues to live with Mr Haidari today.


 4. Shortly before  her  DL  was  due  to  expire  the  Appellant  made  an
    application for further leave and/or asylum.  It  was  the  refusal  of
    that application that led to the appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal
    which has become the subject of this challenge.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Brookfield)  did  not  find  that  the
    Appellant would be at any risk of harm in Afghanistan. It rejected  the
    suggestion that relatives  there  might  force  her  into  an  unwanted
    marriage. It was not accepted that they would do  so  contrary  to  the
    wishes of her father, Mr Haidari.  As to the general risks  that  might
    be faced by a young woman on her own in Afghanistan, the Tribunal found
    that she would not be alone, since  she  could  turn  to  her  paternal
    relatives for support, that is to say the sister and brother-in-law  of
    Mr Haidari.  She would be financially supported by Mr Haidari.

 6. Turning to consider whether the Appellant should be granted  a  further
    period of  DL  on  Article  8  grounds  the  Tribunal  notes  that  the
    Appellant's claimed relationship with Mr Haidari remained a  matter  of
    contention. DNA evidence had been produced but this  was  inconclusive.
    An earlier appeal against the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  had  been
    dismissed on the ground that the biological relationship had  not  been
    proved.  Social workers at Surrey County  Council  made  the  placement
    simply on the basis  of  unverified  documents  from  Afghanistan.  The
    Tribunal did not regard itself bound by their  decision.   Overall  the
    Tribunal was not satisfied that the Appellant was related as claimed to
    Mr Haidari.  It was nonetheless prepared to accept that  the  Appellant
    had established a private life in the United  Kingdom.  she  had  lived
    here since 2011 and had attended school and college.  Two  universities
    had offered her a place to study law.    At  the  date  of  the  appeal
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant  was  19.  The   only
    potentially  applicable  sub-paragraph  of  276ADE(1)  was  (vi)  which
    required her to show that there were "very significant obstacles to her
    integration" in Afghanistan. For  the  same  reasons  that  the  asylum
    appeal had been dismissed, this the Appellant could not do.  She  spoke
    the language, had paternal relatives there to whom she could  turn  for
    support and could even continue with her education. As  for  Article  8
    'outside of the Rules' the  Tribunal  did  not  consider  the  decision
    disproportionate. Mr Haidari could  visit  her  in  Afghanistan  if  he
    wished, she could carry on with her education and there were no factors
    which outweighed the public interest in her removal.




    Error of Law

 7. The matter came before me on the 1st February 2017 when I was asked  to
    determine whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in its approach.


 8. It is perhaps evident from the way that I have summarised the  findings
    of the Tribunal (above) that there was a fundamental  contradiction  at
    the heart of the decision.  The  protection  and  private  life  claims
    failed because the Appellant's relationship with Mr Haidari was treated
    as proven: as her father he could protect her from any unwanted marital
    advances, and together he and his family would be able to  support  and
    protect her in Afghanistan. By contrast  the  Article  8  claim  failed
    because the relationship was not accepted.   The Tribunal  declined  to
    accept that the DNA evidence established his paternity, and from  there
    proceeded directly to consideration of Article 8 private life  with  no
    further  mention  of  family  life.  The  distinction  is  not   always
    important, but in this appeal it was.


 9. The first complaint that I find to be made out is that the Tribunal too
    readily dismissed the significance  of  the  DNA  report.  It  was  not
    conclusive, but it didn't have to be. In  establishing  precedent  fact
    under Article 8 the Appellant had to show she shared a family life with
    Mr Haidari on a 'balance of  probabilities'  only.  The  report  itself
    appears at annex Q of the Appellant's bundle.  It states that the  test
    results showed one inconsistency which  meant  that  the  results  were
    "inconclusive". The report explains this term as follows:


         "... the inconsistency we have observed is most likely  to  be  due
         either to a paternal mutation (in this scenario the Alleged  Father
         would be the biological father of  the  child),  a  close  relative
         being the biological father of the child or the  individuals  share
         an alternative blood relationship".
                                                               [my emphasis]


    The use of the term "most likely" indicates that as far as  Anglia  DNA
    were concerned, the Appellant was  more  likely  than  not  to  be  the
    daughter, or other blood relative, of Mr Haidari. That should have been
    the starting point for consideration of whether she had  established  a
    'family life'.


10. Add to this the weight of the accumulated evidence: the conclusions  of
    Surrey County Council, the evidence of the  Appellant  and  Mr  Haidari
    himself and the evidence of a supporting witness.  The  fact  that  the
    Appellant remained living in his household, where she  continued  as  a
    young adult to  be  dependent  upon  him,  was  also  relevant.  It  is
    difficult to see, given the unchallenged evidence  of  the  substantive
    relationship, why  the  Tribunal's  focus  fixed  so  intently  on  the
    biological.  I accept, as did the  Respondent  (at  the  error  of  law
    hearing represented by Senior Presenting Officer Mrs Aboni),  that  the
    failure to consider whether the Appellant had a 'family  life'  was  an
    error.


11. I am satisfied that it  was  a  material  error.    Any  assessment  of
    proportionality would have to begin with an assessment of  the  quality
    and depth of the family life that the Appellant enjoys with Mr  Haidari
    - whether as a de facto or actual father - and his wider family in  the
    United Kingdom.  I note that a further omission in the determination is
    any consideration at all of the relationships that the Appellant enjoys
    with the children in this family, with whom she has lived - and  shared
    a room with - since her arrival in the United Kingdom.

12. For the reasons set out above I  am  satisfied  -  and  the  Respondent
    accepts - that this determination must be set aside in its entirety.



    The Re-Made Decision

13. The parties agreed that the matter should come back before me  for  the
    decision to be re-made.  I heard brief evidence from the Appellant  and
    submissions from the parties. At the close of proceedings  I  indicated
    that I would allow the appeal on Article  8  grounds  'outside  of  the
    rules'.  In light of that  indication  Mr  Lawson   withdrew  the  case
    before  me  on  asylum  grounds  and  with   reference   to   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).   My reasons are set out below.












    The Immigration Rules


14. My starting point must be the rules.  Although the Appellant is now  an
    adult, (having turned 18 in April 2015) she was 17  years  old  at  the
    date that her application was made.


15. The Respondent does not appear  to  have  given  any  consideration  to
    whether the Appellant qualified for leave to remain with  reference  to
    paragraph 298 of the Immigration Rules.   To be fair to the Respondent,
    the reason  for  that  would  appear  to  be  the  fact  that  such  an
    application had not been  formally  made,  albeit  that  it  is  raised
    tangentially in the letter which covered her  application  for  further
    discretionary leave[1].  It was of course the position at the  date  of
    that application that Mr Haidari was not accepted by the Respondent  to
    be the Appellant's parent. In light of the findings that I  make  below
    it may be that this is a matter that the parties should revisit by  way
    of representations and review. It appears  to  me  that  the  Appellant
    prima  facie  met,  at  the  date  of  her  application,  all  of   the
    requirements for indefinite leave under this provision, but I am not in
    a position to make a definitive finding on it: the Respondent  has  not
    had an opportunity to consider whether she  did  so  qualify,  and  the
    papers before me do not contain all of the relevant material,  such  as
    evidence of adequate maintenance and accommodation.


16. The only rule that was  considered  by  the  Respondent  was  paragraph
    276ADE(1),  which  relates  to  private  life.  At  the  date  of   the
    application the Appellant was 17, but could not qualify under the  only
    limb relating to children, since she had not at  that  date  accrued  a
    continuous period of residence of seven years. At the date of  decision
    she had turned 18,   and  the  only  potentially  applicable  limb  was
    276ADE(1)(vi)  which  required  her  to  show  that  there  were  "very
    significant obstacles" to her integration in Afghanistan.

17. That is a high test, and as the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    illustrates, in this case it was one tightly bound to  the  Appellant's
    protection claim.   That is a matter no longer  pursued  before  me.  I
    therefore embark upon my consideration of Article  8  'outside  of  the
    rules' on the following basis. The Appellant's case under paragraph 298
    is unproven. The Appellant's case  under  276ADE(1)(vi)  is  no  longer
    pursued, but the  remaining  scope  for  consideration   of  Article  8
    'outside of the rules' is a wide one, for the simple  reason  that  the
    exclusive focus of that  rule  is  life  in  the  proposed  country  of
    relocation.   Article 8 requires a holistic evaluation of  all  of  the
    Appellant's personal circumstances, which in this case  centres  firmly
    on her life in the United Kingdom.




    Private and Family Life


18. The standard of proof to be applied to  the  question  of  'family  and
    private life' is the balance of probabilities and the  burden  lies  on
    the Appellant.


19. The central matter in dispute between the parties is whether Mr Haidari
    is in fact the Appellant's biological father, or failing  that  whether
    their relationship is substantively one of father and daughter.

20. An assertion to that effect was first made in 2005 when  the  Appellant
    applied for entry clearance as the dependent child of a refugee. I have
    not been provided with any information pertaining to  that  application
    other than to be told  that  it  was  withdrawn  after  the  Respondent
    requested DNA tests to be taken.

21. A second application was made on the 12th November 2009.   I  have  not
    been shown a copy of the refusal notice in respect  of  that  decision,
    but I am told that the ECO was not prepared  to  place  weight  on  the
    Afghani hospital documents produced since they were not contemporaneous
    to birth.  There was no death certificate pertaining to the Appellant's
    mother who  was  said  to  have  died  in  2002  and  there  was  still
    insufficient evidence to  demonstrate  the  claimed  relationship.  The
    Appellant appealed that decision  and  on  the  31st  August  2010  the
    appeal,  and  the  linked  appeal  of  the  Appellant's  brother,  were
    dismissed by Immigration Judge Lowe.  Judge  Lowe  noted  the  evidence
    that Mr Haidari had visited Pakistan on 4 occasions  between  2005  and
    2008 and had produced photographs showing him spending time with  these
    children. That evidence was however outweighed by discrepancies in  the
    evidence about how the hospital records  had  been  obtained,  why  the
    original applications had been withdrawn  and  the  negative  inference
    drawn from the lack of DNA.  It was also noted that no mention is  made
    of Mr Haidari having children in the determination which  resolved  his
    asylum claim.  Overall Judge Lowe was not satisfied that Mr Haidari was
    a credible witness, or that the burden of proof had been discharged.

22. What happened next was that the Appellant  made  her  own  way  to  the
    United Kingdom. She spent two months crossing Asia and Europe with  the
    "assistance" of people traffickers and arrived here, aged (just) 14, on
    the 3rd May 2011. She claimed asylum. She told the Home Office that her
    father was Asadullah Haidari.  She  relied  upon  a  birth  certificate
    naming him as her father, and  a  death  certificate  relating  to  her
    mother.  Her representatives also commissioned and  submitted  the  DNA
    test that is still relied upon today.

23. She was placed in the care of Surrey County Council. I have been  shown
    a letter from Kelly Henry,  Team Manager of the Asylum Support Team  at
    Surrey CC dated 6th May 2011:

         "Tahira's father, Asadullah Haidari (16.08.74) presented himself at
         Staines Police Station at the time  of  referral  in  order  to  be
         reunited with his daughter. UKBA representatives, who were  present
         at the police station, made us aware  that  applications  had  been
         previously made for Tahira to be reunited with her father  but  had
         been refused as it  could  not  be  substantiated  that  they  were
         related. As such Tahira was placed in a foster care placement until
         further checks could be made.


         Tahira and Mr Haidari continue  to  assert  their  relationship  as
         father and daughter, and to request to be  reunited.  My  colleague
         Andrew Martin and myself subsequently met with Mr Haidari today and
         he presented documents as proof of their relationship (passport and
         birth certificate). As we had no concern about  their  relationship
         we agreed for her to  be  released  into  his  care  at  the  above
         address".

24. I am told by the Respondent (by both Mrs Aboni and Mrs  Harrison)  that
    the Respondent was aware of, and apparently consented to, this decision
    by Surrey CC social services.


25. Notwithstanding that arrangement, the Respondent  was  subsequently  to
    reject the Appellant's asylum claim, and claim  to  be  related  to  Mr
    Haidari, on the basis that the new evidence she had  supplied  did  not
    displace the findings made by Judge Lowe.  The Afghani  documents  were
    afforded little  weight  after  a  Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT  00439
    assessment, and the DNA results were  considered  to  be  inconclusive.
    Applying the principles in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 the claim  was
    rejected on the 21st November 2013.

26. The Appellant was still living with Mr Haidari and his family when  she
    made her application for further discretionary  leave/asylum,  that  is
    the subject of this appeal, in October 2014.

27. The matters that weigh against the relationship being proven as claimed
    are all set out in the 2010 determination of Judge Lowe. In essence, Mr
    Haidari gave "evasive" evidence in which several contradictions emerged
    about the  family  circumstances,  for  instance  about  why  the  2005
    applications were withdrawn and who was caring for  the  Appellant  and
    her brother.  He was found to have lied about when he  found  out  that
    the children's mother had died.  As I  mention  above,  the  judge  who
    determined Mr Haidari's asylum appeal makes no mention  of  him  having
    children; Judge Lowe was also puzzled as to why the birth and  hospital
    certificates had been produced in respect of this application, but  not
    that made in 2005.

28. Those findings must be my starting point: Devaseelan  (op  cit).  I  am
    entitled to depart from them, or build  upon  them,  in  light  of  new
    evidence that was not available at the date of the hearing before Judge
    Lowe.

29. That evidence, first and foremost, is that of the Appellant herself. Ms
    Haidari appeared to me to be  a  thoughtful,  sincere  and  intelligent
    young woman who answered the questions put to her without hesitation. I
    have had regard to  her   credible  -  and  before  me  unchallenged  -
    evidence about the following matters. She was born  in  Afghanistan  in
    1997 and in the early  years  of  her  life  lived  with  her  parents,
    grandmother, aunt, uncle  and  brother.  In  2002  everything  changed,
    because Mr Haidari - whom  she  refers  to  as  her  father  -  escaped
    Afghanistan to claim asylum in the UK. Shortly after he left her mother
    died. She remained under the care of her grandmother. The Appellant was
    aware that Mr Haidari had twice applied for her and her brother to join
    him here.  In spring 2011 her step-mother's brother  arranged  for  her
    and her brother to travel to the UK. The journey was long and difficult
    and they were separated on the way.  As to  her  relationship  with  Mr
    Haidari the Appellant asserts that she has  always  known  him  as  her
    father. She has always called him, and no  others,  pader.     She  has
    never considered the possibility that she might not  be  his  daughter.
    Since she has lived in the United Kingdom she has lived with  him,  her
    step-mother and half-siblings.  She says of Mr  Haider  and  her  step-
    mother: "I know they love me and they do care a lot  about  my  safety,
    care about my education  and  care  about  my  well-being".  There  was
    nothing in any of that which I found to be implausible or inconsistent.
    I am conscious that the direct voice of the Appellant is something that
    neither the ECO, nor Judge Lowe, nor the Secretary of State has had  an
    opportunity to hear.  I attach very significant weight to her evidence.


30. It is not contested that the Appellant has lived with  Mr  Haidari  and
    his new wife, Mrs Fazila Haidari,  for  approximately  six  years.  The
    couple have four children: [F] who is 10, [S] 8, [Y] 6 and [A]  who  is
    just 2.  In addition to the Appellant's evidence, this is confirmed  by
    Mr and Mrs Haidari in their witness statements  dated  16th  May  2016.
    Mrs Haidari writes that she married Mr Haidari in Pakistan in 2005. The
    Appellant attended the wedding - she can be seen  in  the  photographs.
    She was about eight years old then.  Since she arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom Mrs Haidari has treated her as her own daughter:

         "I love and nurture Tahira as much as I do my own children.  Tahira
         is an amazing child. She is of  excellent  character.  My  children
         adore Tahira and they call her Khoahr Jan which  in  Dari  language
         means "dear  sister".  Daily  we  have  our  dinners  together.  My
         children will not eat their food until Tahira sits with them. There
         are times when Tahira is a little late from school and my  children
         wait for her at the door.


         The children play with Tahira daily. Tahira is a huge helping  hand
         for me at home too as she minds the children while I am  busy  with
         housework. Tahira helps my school going children  in  their  school
         work too and this saves their time going for tuition elsewhere.  My
         daughters sleep with Tahira daily because my  daughters  enjoy  her
         story telling.


         Tahira is doing very well in her studies and she wants to  continue
         her studies and achieve her ambition as  a  lawyer.  She  has  been
         offered admission in two universities and she is very excited about
         this".


31. This evidence is wholly consistent with  that  of  the  Appellant,  who
    describes the relationships in this family as warm and loving.  I  note
    that the whole family attended each hearing and appeared to be  a  very
    close knit unit.  Although I did not hear any oral  evidence  from  Mrs
    Haidari, her statement was agreed by the Respondent. I am  prepared  to
    attach significant weight to  it,  as  it  accords  with  that  of  the
    Appellant, and indeed my own observations.   She refers to  photographs
    of the Appellant attending her wedding - these were produced before  me
    and I accept that the young girl depicted  looks  very  much  like  the
    young woman who appears  before  me  today.   There  are  a  series  of
    photographs of this event. Mr  Haidari  can  clearly  be  seen  as  the
    bridegroom, with the girl who is said to be the Appellant by his  side.
      I  note  that  their  appearance  is  strikingly  similar  in   these
    pictures[2].


32. The Appellant's bundle contains a 'birth certificate' issued by  Ariani
    Hospital. Although the birth is said to have taken place  on  the  12th
    April 1997 the certificate was not issued until the 3rd  October  2008.
    This is one reason why the certificate should be treated with  caution;
    another is the easy availability of forged documents in Afghanistan.  I
    bear those factors in mind.  I  do  note  however  that  this  document
    appears to have been issued with reference to hospital records:  I  say
    this since it includes the Appellant's birth weight and the name of her
    mother's midwife. I agree with the Respondent that this  document  must
    be viewed in the round in accordance with Tanveer Ahmed principles.


33. The additional material in the bundle is as follows.  There is the  DNA
    report from Anglia DNA, discussed above in the context of the 'error of
    law' decision.    There is a statement from a Mr Adjmal Azizi, a  Dutch
    national of Afghani origin. Mr Azizi writes that he knew Mr Haidari  in
    Afghanistan: they are first cousins. Mr Azizi states that  he  attended
    the wedding of Mr Haidari and the Appellant's mother, and  was  present
    in Afghanistan when the Appellant was born.   He confirms that  to  his
    knowledge, she has always been regarded as the daughter of Mr  Haidari.
    He has spent time with the family here and confirms that  the  children
    are always around the Appellant. He describes Mrs Haidari as a  "lovely
    mother" to the Appellant.  He lives in Manchester and  frequently  sees
    them  at  family  gatherings.    The  bundle  also  contains   numerous
    photographs of the family together.

34. I remind myself that my starting point must be the  decision  of  Judge
    Lowe. Judge Lowe produced a long and detailed  determination  in  which
    several reasons were given for finding Mr Haidari to be an unimpressive
    witness. I have not heard evidence from him myself and so that it not a
    matter than I can comment upon.  What I have beyond his  unsatisfactory
    evidence is this.  I  have  the  credible  evidence  of  the  Appellant
    herself. I have the credible  evidence  of  Mrs  Haidari.  I  have  the
    supporting statement of Mr Azizi.  Importantly there is the DNA  report
    which, although 'inconclusive' as far  as  Anglia  DNA  are  concerned,
    indicates that the "most likely" explanation for the results shown  are
    either that Mr Haidari is her father (but that there is a  mutation  in
    the paternal DNA), or that he is another blood relative.  There is  the
    uncontested evidence that the Appellant has lived as an  integral  part
    of the Haidari family for the past 6 years, and that she enjoys a  warm
    and close relationship with Mr Haidari's younger children.   Having had
    regard to all of that evidence  I  am  satisfied,  in  accordance  with
    Devaseelan, that there is now sufficient evidence  before  me  for  the
    Appellant to have discharged the burden of proof.


35. I am satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that Mr Haidari  is  the
    Appellant's father, and that [F],  [S],  [Y]  and  [A]  are  her  half-
    siblings.  The DNA evidence establishes a biological relationship,  but
    it is the evidence of the substantive family life which leads me to  my
    conclusion. The Appellant is integrated into this family unit in a  way
    that she would not be if she were, for instance, a niece or cousin.   I
    am satisfied that applications for entry clearance were twice made, and
    people traffickers paid for her to get here, because she is in fact  Mr
    Haidari's daughter.  It may well be that he sought to  obfuscate  about
    the family circumstances when he gave evidence before Judge  Lowe,  but
    that does not obscure the clear conclusion that on the evidence  before
    me, he is more likely to be her father than not.

36. Even if I am wrong to so find, Mr Harrison was unable  to  contest  the
    overwhelming evidence of  a  substantive  family  life.  Article  8  is
    concerned with substance over form and there can be  no  question  that
    'family' life is what the Appellant enjoys  with  the  Haidari  family.
    It is true that she is now an adult, but  she  is  a  young  adult  who
    remains living  at  home,  and  is  dependent  upon  Mr  Haidari,  both
    financially  and  emotionally.  There  being  no  bright  line  between
    minority and majority I am satisfied that in all of  the  circumstances
    here, this is a young woman who has not established an independent life
    and who remains very much part of the family as a whole. It is probably
    the case that today many twenty  year  olds  in  her  position  remains
    'children' of the  family,  but  in  this  family  that  continuity  of
    dependency is underscored by the cultural context, in which there is an
    expectation that the Appellant will remain living at home until she  is
    married.  I note in this regard that it is her intention to  remain  at
    home whilst attending university.

37. I have been sent a  letter  by  Louise  Walsh,  Sociology  lecturer  at
    Manchester College.   This confirms that the  Appellant  studied  there
    for her 'A' levels in Sociology, Governments and Politics, and  English
    Language & Literature. The Appellant's report is appended  which  shows
    that she had  100%  attendance  and  that  her  behaviour,  effort  and
    attainment  were  consistently  ranked  as  "outstanding".   Ms   Walsh
    describes the  Appellant  as  "dedicated,  conscientious  and  bright".
    Similarly glowing reports are provided from  the  Appellant's  previous
    school, Manchester Academy, which  explain  how  she  was  awarded  the
    'Principle's Merit' and had her name recorded in the prestigious  'Book
    of Meritorious  Students".   A  letter  from  UCAS  confirms  that  the
    Appellant  has  been  offered  a  place  to  study  law  at  Manchester
    Metropolitan University. At the hearing she refused to be dissuaded  by
    the protestations of both bar and bench that this is a difficult career
    to pursue today. She spoke eloquently and confidently about her  desire
    to be a lawyer, and her passionate commitment to justice, in particular
    for women. I am satisfied that the Appellant has demonstrated that  she
    enjoys a private life in the  United  Kingdom,  not  just  through  her
    attendance at school and college, but through  the  interests  she  has
    developed and her emotional investment in her future here.


38. I am satisfied that the Appellant has established a meaningful  private
    and family life in the UK and  that  her  removal  would  result  in  a
    substantial interference with it.  There  being  no  dispute  that  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department has, as a matter of law, the
    power to remove persons with no legal entitlement to be here, I proceed
    to consider the  only  matter  left  in  issue:  whether  it  would  be
    proportionate to remove the Appellant to Afghanistan today.


    Proportionality

39. My starting point are those matters found by parliament to reflect  the
    public interest in cases involving Article  8  ECHR,  as  expressed  in
    s117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


40. The Appellant did not have the requisite leave  to  enter  the  country
    when she arrived in 2011.    The maintenance of  effective  immigration
    controls are in the public interest and although she has  been  granted
    Discretionary Leave in the  past,  it  is  a  matter  that  must  weigh
    significantly against her that she does not qualify for leave to remain
    under any of the immigration rules today.

41. The Appellant, as demonstrated by her college and  school  records  and
    her oral evidence before me, speaks very good English. This  is  not  a
    factor that weighs in her favour, rather it is a neutral factor.

42. The Appellant is  not  financially  independent,  because  by  her  own
    admission she remains entirely reliant on Mr  Haidari.  It  is  in  the
    public interest that persons seeking leave to  remain  in  the  UK  are
    financially self-reliant, and although she is no burden to  the  public
    purse, this is a matter  that  must  weight  against  her:  Rhuppiah  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803.

43. The private life that she has established whilst in the United  Kingdom
    has been developed whilst her status is precarious, and to that  extent
    little weight can be attached to it.

44. The factors set out at s.117B of the 2002 Act are not the only  matters
    that I must take into account. In this case the central focus  must  be
    the family life that the Appellant enjoys with her father,  step-mother
    and minor half-siblings. There  is  little  doubt  that  the  Appellant
    herself attaches enormous weight to that family life. She is  obviously
    very happy to be part of this household and I have no  doubt  that  the
    sense of security that it brings her is greatly magnified by  the  fact
    that she and her father  were  for  many  years  apart,  and  that  she
    undertook a long and perilous journey to  be  reunited  with  him.  The
    separation of father and daughter was not a matter of choice;   as  was
    subsequently accepted by both Tribunal and Respondent, Mr Haidari faced
    a real risk of serious harm in Afghanistan.   On the  findings  that  I
    have made this is a family who should have been reunited long  ago.  In
    retrospect it can be said that the refugee family reunion  applications
    that were made, first in 2005  and  then  in  2009,  should  have  been
    successful. Whatever the weaknesses of the evidence as it  stood  then,
    it is not of course the fault of the Appellant that they were not:  she
    was a young child at the time and played  no  part  whatsoever  in  the
    litigation.     I have attached significant weight to the very warm and
    loving relationships that the Appellant enjoys with  her  brothers  and
    sisters.  I accept the evidence of Mrs Haidari that they are  all  very
    close and that she is very much part of their lives. She shares a  room
    with her sisters. I accept that the bond that these children  have  got
    with the Appellant is one that means a great deal  to  them,  and  that
    they would be bewildered and distressed if she were to be removed  from
    their lives to a distant country.   Although those  children  would  of
    course continue to have each other and their parents,  I  am  satisfied
    that it would be contrary to their best interests if the Appellant were
    to have to leave the UK.


45. The Appellant has now spent six years in the United Kingdom,  which  in
    the ordinary scheme of things would not be a  particularly  significant
    period of residence in which to develop a private life. I must  however
    give some weight to the fact that for most of that  period  she  was  a
    child.  It has been held  that  for  a  cognisant  young  person  these
    formative years will attract greater weight than those spent in the  UK
    as an infant: Azimi-Moeyed [2013] UKUT 213.  I bear  that  guidance  in
    mind, and find it wholly applicable in this case. It is hard to imagine
    that the Appellant would have been the young woman she is today if  she
    had spent the past six years in a village in  Afghanistan  rather  than
    attending school and college in Manchester.  Whilst she would obviously
    have enjoyed the same degree of intelligence that she possesses  today,
     I consider it  unlikely that she would be  the  same  confident  young
    woman, advocating education and women's rights and playing an important
    role of responsibility  within  her  family  unit.   Like  anyone,  her
    environment has played a significant role in her  personal  development
    and I attach weight to the fact that the most important aspects of  her
    private  life  have  been  developed  in  this  country,  rather   than
    elsewhere.


46. The weight that is to be attached to the public  interest  in  removing
    persons with no leave to remain is a significant  one.   I  am  however
    wholly satisfied that in this case it is  outweighed  by  the  personal
    factors relating to the Appellant. She came to this country as a  child
    and has grown up here. She continues to be  an  integral  part  of  her
    father's family and looks to him for support, love and guidance. She in
    turn plays that role to her younger siblings.  This is a matter with an
    unfortunate litigation history, but as I have said it is  no  fault  of
    the Appellant's that she was not long ago given leave to enter  as  the
    child of a refugee.   Taking all of the relevant factors into account I
    am satisfied that it would be disproportionate to refuse to  grant  her
    leave to remain and to remove her from the United Kingdom.

    Decisions


47. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  errors  of  law
    such that it is set aside.


48. The decision is remade as follows:

    "the appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".

49. There is no order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                9th May 2017
                           -----------------------
[1] Letter from Greater Manchester Immigration Aid Unit dated 9th October
2014 at page M10 of Appellant's bundle
[2] Particularly those at U14 and U21 of the Appellant's bundle.

