
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/12802/2015
                                                               AA/12806/2015
                                                               AA/12811/2015
                                                               AA/12812/2015
                                                               AA/12803/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th October 2016                 |On 24th October 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                (1) MONIR [H]
                              (2) MOSAMMAD [A]
                                  (3) [JA]
                                  (4) [AYA]
                                  (5) [ANA]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Muquit (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Abone (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are a family of Bangladeshi nationals and the first  and
    second Appellants are husband and wife, being born on  10th  June  1971
    and 1st May 1977, respectively.  The third, fourth and fifth Appellants
    are their children and they were born in  Bangladesh  on  2nd  February
    1999, 3rd February 2002 and 10th June 2004.  The Appellants appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated
    29th September 2015 rejecting their appeals for refugee  asylum  status
    and for humanitarian protection on the basis that the decision  by  the
    Respondent would not be a breach of the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
    under the Refugee Convention  and  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

 2.  The  Appellants'  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Heatherington on 2nd June 2016 and promulgated on 15th June  2016.   In
    paragraph 78 of the determination, the judge observed that:

         "The first Appellant is 44.  The second Appellant is 39.   Most  of
         their lives has been spent in Bangladesh including their  formative
         years.  The first Appellant has been in the United Kingdom for less
         than three years and the second Appellant for  eight  years.   They
         are have full immigration records.  They are  Bangladeshi  citizens
         with no status or rights to  be  in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  is
         undisputed that they entered this  country  illegally.   They  also
         always knew they had no right to be in the United Kingdom when they
         conceived Jannat and the child due to be born in  August  2016.   I
         attach little weight to any private  life  they  have  established"
         (paragraph 78).

 3. The judge went on  to  consider  the  position  of  the  children,  and
    applying the Court of Appeal decision in  EV  (Philippines)  [2014]  as
    well as the Supreme Court decision in  Zoumbas  [2013]  UKSC  74.   The
    judge concluded that all the children are  Bangladeshi  nationals,  and
    that they were now age 17 years, 14 years, 12 years and  Jannat  was  1
    year old.  The judge also noted that since 2007, the third, fourth  and
    fifth Appellants have only known life in the United  Kingdom.   Jannat,
    who was 1 year old had only known life in the UK as well.  However, the
    judge went on to state that, "The children have mostly only known  life
    with their mother.  Until 2007 and since 2013 the  children  have  only
    known life with both  their  parents".   It  was  further  noted  that,
    "during their eight years living in the United Kingdom I found that the
    third, fourth and fifth Appellants  have  developed  close  bonds  with
    their  friends  and  peers  from  their  neighbourhood   and   schools"
    (paragraph 83).  The third, fourth and fifth Appellants  were  also  at
    school "and they have made good progress" (paragraph 85).

 4. The judge was not oblivious to the demands of immigration  control  and
    noted that immigration ought to be controlled competently  and  without
    lengthy delays but that, "It is not clear why there  has  been  such  a
    delay in progressing the second Appellant's 2007 asylum claim  and  the
    associated claims of the  third,  fourth  and  fifth  Appellants.   The
    Secretary of State must shoulder the blame" (paragraph 86).  Whilst  it
    was a case that the court's function was not to  discipline  or  punish
    the Secretary of State (see paragraph 87), nevertheless it was clear on
    the basis of longstanding authority, such as EB  (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL
    41, that delay can be relevant in a number of ways, not least that  the
    longer someone was in the UK the more likely it  was  that  he  or  she
    would develop important social connections in  this  country  and  have
    significant private or family life here, but also that this may  reduce
    the significance to be given  to  immigration  control  when  assessing
    whether a decision to  remove  the  individual  is  proportionate  (see
    paragraph 88).

 5. The judge's conclusion was that the third, fourth and fifth  Appellants
    "have enjoyed United Kingdom culture for more  than  eight  years"  and
    that they speak English, and they have "bonded with their  friends  and
    peers in their neighbourhood and schools in  the  United  Kingdom"  and
    that "they have been separated from Bangladeshi  culture  for  most  of
    their lives" and "have some Bengali, but this consists of easy  Bengali
    words", such that their lack of ties in Bangladesh are such  that  "the
    balance points to there being insurmountable obstacles to  family  life
    continuing in Bangladesh" (paragraph 90).

 6. The appeal was allowed.

 7. The Grounds of Appeal argued that the Article 8 assessment was  flawed.
    On 6th July 2016, permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that
    the judge's failure to demonstrate that consideration had been shown to
    whether  circumstances  requiring  an  Article  8  consideration  on  a
    freestanding basis were present and failed also to give weight  to  the
    public  interest  in  removal  and  failed  to  apply   the   statutory
    considerations set out in Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

 8. At the hearing before me on 14th October 2016, Ms Abone,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State relied upon the Grounds  of
    Appeal.

 9. First, the judge at paragraph 74 conducted the assessment for Article 8
    without any reference to the Appellants' individual  failures  to  meet
    the Immigration Rules and  the  concurring  leave  to  show  compelling
    circumstances outside the Rules, which SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA mandatory
    has been the starting point for the assessment of public interest.

10. Second, the judge made no findings on the administrative delay  in  the
    case even though she acknowledged that the binding authority  indicated
    that only evidence of a blanket failure in the system could lead to the
    reduction of a public interest.

11. Third, the judge had at paragraph 90 materially  erred  in  failing  to
    give lawful reason why the public interest did not outweigh the private
    lives of the three children.  She found that the children  had  limited
    Bengali but explained that the parents of the children  did  not  speak
    English,  such  that  there  must  have   been   the   possibility   of
    communication between them in Bengali.

12. Fourth, the judge failed to apply Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  in
    relation  to  the  children's  private  rights.   The  judge  gave   no
    explanation as  to  why  the  conditions  in  Bangladesh  would  affect
    negatively the future lives of these children bearing in mind that they
    would be with their parents and the appeal had been thoroughly rejected
    and there was no weighing on the public interest side.

13. The Appellants representative  relied  upon  his  "response  to  SSHD's
    grounds".  He had made the following submissions.  First, he  explained
    that given that the family had resided in the UK for seven years,  that
    the Appellants would succeed under paragraph 276ADE(1)(b) as  it  would
    not be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.  Second,  the
    children had lived continuously in the UK for eight  years  since  2007
    and had been separated from  Bangladeshi  culture  for  most  of  their
    lives.  They spoke English and only a little Bengali such that, as  the
    judge found, this consisted of easy Bengali words.   Third,  and  since
    2007, the children had lived in the UK and known life only  in  the  UK
    and had developed close bonds with their friends  and  peers  from  the
    neighbourhood and schools and had made good progress at school  as  the
    judge found.  Accordingly, and for  all  these  reasons,  the  children
    satisfied the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(b) and were  entitled
    to remain in the UK.

14. Given that the judge also found that the family  lived  together  as  a
    family unit, and normally the best interests of the children are met by
    remaining with their parents, the judge was not oblivious to the  needs
    of immigration control, but had viewed the existence of delay,  without
    any explanation being given for  it  by  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State, as one that would have strengthened the Article 8 claim  of  the
    family in accordance with the House of Lords judgment in EB (Kosovo).

15. Finally, the Secretary of State has misconceived the facts because  the
    Article 8 claim was not allowed outside  the  Immigration  Rules  on  a
    freestanding basis,  but  was  one  which  was  considered  within  the
    Immigration Rules, namely, to fall under paragraph 276ADE(1)(b).

Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  It  is  true  that  paragraph  276ADE(1)(b)  provides  for  a
    situation where a child is under the age of  18  years  and  has  lived
    continuously in the UK for at least seven years, with the  result  that
    this allows a child  to  make  an  application  for  leave  to  remain,
    bringing into the Immigration Rules the old policy of DP5/96 which  had
    the same effect, but there are exceptions to this Rule, in the form  of
    qualifications, if the applicant or their family  have  a  particularly
    poor immigration history.  This was the case here.

17. A presence within the  jurisdiction  of  seven  years  alone  will  not
    suffice because the Rule stipulates that it must also  additionally  be
    the case that "it would not be reasonable to expect  the  applicant  to
    leave the UK".  The judge thought it was  not  reasonable  because  the
    third, fourth and fifth Appellants had enjoyed United  Kingdom  culture
    for more than eight years, spoke English, and  had  bonded  with  their
    friends and peers in their neighbourhood and schools in the UK."

18. However it is arguably going  too  far  to  say  that  they  have  been
    separated from Bangladeshi culture in  circumstances  where  their  own
    parents retained the culture and speak  Bengali.   In  any  event,  the
    overall ethos of paragraph  276ADE  appears  to  have  been  overlooked
    because as the recent Court of Appeal judgment in Koori [2016] EWCA Civ
    552 makes clear, "paragraph 276ADE is  designed  to  strike  a  balance
    between competing interests and to identify when the public interest in
    proper immigration control should give way to the  demands  of  private
    and family life" (paragraph 35).

19. In this case, the judge added particular importance to  the  fact  that
    the second Appellant, the wife,  had  made  a  2007  application  which
    remained outstanding and had not yet been determined,  such  that  this
    delay was inexplicable, and entirely to be laid  at  the  door  of  the
    Respondent Secretary of State.  However, as the Rule 24 response  makes
    clear the delay in this  respect  related  to  an  untenable  (and  the
    language used by the Respondent is "a  completely  fabricated")  asylum
    and Article 3 human rights argument.

20. It is in any event, clear that, as the judge rightly  observed,  it  is
    not part of the  judicial  function  to  discipline  or  reprimand  the
    executive body tasked with the implementation of immigration control in
    an area of important public policy.  The case of Koori [2016] EWCA  Civ
    552 provides a helpful reminder, in circumstances where spurious claims
    are  made,  that,  "an  administrative  body  cannot  keep   revisiting
    decisions which affect individual rights: there must  be  finality,  at
    least unless there is a powerful public interest to the contrary"  (see
    paragraph 31).

21. This is a case where, as the judge properly recognised,  the  Appellant
    had "never planned to leave the United Kingdom" and "he  chose  not  to
    claim asylum; he only did so nine months later and then only because he
    had no other option".  Moreover, "he planned to stay indefinitely.   He
    brought all his money from Italy, intending never  to  leave.   He  was
    able to enter the United Kingdom in 2013 by telling lies.  He was not a
    seven day tourist" (see paragraph 62).

22.  In the circumstances, the individual failures  of  the  Appellants  to
    meet the Immigration Rules should have been considered in  the  context
    of the public interest before it was decided that this did not outweigh
    the private rights of the three children.

23. The failure was significant in the light of Section 117B  of  the  2002
    Act where, generally speaking, the maintenance of effective immigration
    control is in the public interest, and even where there is a qualifying
    child, it is necessary to, in the context of the overarching policy, to
    consider whether it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is  remitted
back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined  by  a  judge  other  than
Judge Heatherington under Practice Statement 7.2(b) because the  nature  and
extent of any judicial fact-finding which is  necessary  in  order  for  the
decision in the appeal to be remade is such that it is appropriate to  remit
the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                      22nd October 2016
