
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12954/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14th April 2016                       |On 28th April 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and

                               MR JAKIR AHMED
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the :     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Hacker, Legal Representative

                            DECISION AND REASONS

                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT


 1. The Secretary of State brings this appeal against a decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mill's decision promulgated on 25th  February  2016
    allowing this  Bangladeshi  claimant's  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds
    outside of the rules. The disputed refusal followed an  application  to
    extend discretionary leave granted when a minor in the  context  of  an
    earlier refusal of asylum.

 2. Permission was granted on the ground that the judge had failed to apply
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act correctly in  that  the  judge  had  given
    weight to the claimant's private life which had  been  accrued  in  the
    context of precarious leave in a manner which was inconsistent with the
    provision of Section 117.

 3. Before me there was some elaboration in respect of the argument  as  to
    whether or not the  judge  was  entitled  to  look  at  the  claimant's
    circumstances outside the remit of the Immigration Rules in any  event.
    The judge expressly did so erroneously finding that the claimant  would
    have been entitled to make  and  succeed  in  an  application  under  a
    discretionary  leave  policy  predicated  upon  his  having   completed
    discretionary  leave  of  six  years.   Erroneous,  as  the  claimant's
    representative accepted, when the position was scrutinised, because  in
    fact the claimant  has  no  opportunity  to  complete  six  years  with
    discretionary leave before making an application, to the point that the
    policy has no application to him, and can afford him no benefit.

 4. The point as to whether the judge was entitled to proceed  to  consider
    Article 8 outwith the rules fell away because  Mr  Jarvis  acknowledged
    that irrespective of the erroneous understanding  outlined  above,  the
    judge was entitled to look  at  the  claimant's  case  outside  of  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules because the character  and  quality
    of his family life with  his  foster  parents  fell  for  consideration
    outside of the remit of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.

 5. Mr Jarvis maintained however that the judge had fallen  into  error  in
    bringing forward  his  mistaken  belief  as  to  applicability  of  the
    benefits of the discretionary leave policy and the opportunity  of  the
    claimant to succeed under the terms of it, into the  overall  balancing
    exercise conducted in respect of the wider Article 8  ECHR  assessment.
    Outside  of  that  erroneous  understanding  the  facts   revealed   an
    insufficient basis upon which to allow the appeal as per s 117.

 6. In response Ms Hacker argued that looking at the  judge's  decision  in
    the round, and accepting the finding of no entitlement under  paragraph
    276ADE, the judge was entitled, having opened the  door  to  the  wider
    ambit of Article 8, to revisit the position as he found  it  to  be  in
    respect of the claimant's private life,  and  to  give  weight  to  his
    relationship with his foster parents, and cumulatively to find that the
    particular strength of  the  claimant's  private  life  allowed  for  a
    different outcome.  The  overall  consideration  followed  sufficiently
    correct self-direction, accurate findings of fact and  an  appreciation
    of the factors set out at Section 117, to the point that the judge  had
    not made any material error.

 7. Both representatives were in agreement that in the event that  I  found
    that there was an error that I would be in a position  to  re-make  the
    decision and there being no application to submit further or additional
    evidence that I would be in a position to do so today.

 8. In my consideration I  note  firstly  that  the  judge  considered  the
    position under the  Rules  and  concluded  that  there  were  not  very
    significant obstacles to the  integrating or re-establishing himself in
    Bangladesh, and the judge had set out those conclusions in some  detail
    following consideration of why it is that he has chosen not  to  be  in
    contact with his family in Bangladesh and the support that he  had  had
    from foster parents and the State in the United Kingdom through Norfolk
    Children's Services, the qualifications that he has  obtained  and  his
    enjoyment of various sporting activities in the  United  Kingdom.   The
    judge finds at [29] to [31]:

         "29. The Appellant is a  native  citizen  of  Bangladesh.   He  was
         brought up there until the age  of  around  11/12  years.   He  was
         educated there.  The Appellant,  I  believe,  will  retain  a  good
         command  of  the  Bengali  language  which  would  enable  him   to
         communicate with others readily and enable him  to  establish  life
         there.

          30. The Appellant is ambitious and determined.  He has a number of
         skill sets having undertaking his secondary and tertiary education,
         participated  actively  in  a  range  of  sports   and   undertaken
         vocational training.  He is  unlikely  to  return  to  impoverished
         village life but instead seek to establish himself in  the  capital
         of Dhaka."

         31.  I  believe  that  the  Appellant  could,  with  a  degree   of
         difficulty, establish a meaningful life for himself in  Bangladesh.
         He may be deeply unhappy about the prospect  and  have  a  lack  of
         desire initially but I do not consider, on the  basis  of  all  the
         evidence before me and the facts which I find established, that the
          has established that there would be very significant obstacles  to
         his integration into  Bangladesh  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
         276ADE."

 9. The judge revisits those issues at [47] and [49] in the context of  the
    ECHR consideration.  I am satisfied that  in  doing  so  he  has  given
    significant weight to his mistaken  belief  set  out  at  [36]  of  his
    decision and set out at [37] of his decision that the   claimant  would
    have the opportunity, or would be entitled to an opportunity,  to  have
    the weight of that private life considered  again,  this  time  in  the
    context of the Immigration Rules and discretionary leave policy,  where
    Section 117 would not be a significant factor not being relevant to the
    consideration by the Secretary of State but addressed to  the  judicial
    function.

10. I pause to note that although Mr Jarvis had  some  concerns  about  the
    judge's dealings in respect of the historical  mental  health  evidence
    that was evidence which was not relied upon as having  any  significant
    impact in respect of paragraph 276ADE or  in  respect  of  the  overall
    balancing exercise.  Ms Hacker described it as  being  something  which
    was in the background of the  judge's  mind  but  not  something  which
    carried significant weight.  I think she is right in that  because  the
    judge states in the decision that  it  would  not  have  a  significant
    impact in terms of the seriousness of the difficulties he would face on
    return.  I say that because it is plain that if  he  did  think  so  he
    would have included it at [26] and also at [31], and it is reflected in
    his finding that although the claimant might be  deeply  unhappy  about
    the prospect of return, his mental state carried no additional  weight.



11. Ms Hacker took me to [45] and argued that the judge has reached his own
    assessment with the public interest as reflected by a snapshot  of  the
    information set out at [45]  i.e.  that  the  public  support  for  the
    claimant gave a good indication that the public  interest  lay  not  in
    removing him but in allowing him to remain.  The difficulty  with  that
    approach is that Section 117 fixes the public interest, and it fixes it
    firmly to the point that those who do not meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules should, without significant  countervailing  factors,
    have no other entitlement to remain.

12. I find there has been misdirection with the inclusion of an  irrelevant
    issue in the assessment  of  proportionality  and  a  failure  to  take
    account of the little weight Parliament has indicated  a  private  life
    developed in the context of precarious leave should have in the overall
    balance in the context of removal of someone  who  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The correct starting  point  is
    the finding in respect of  276ADE.   There  is  no  opportunity  for  a
    further application in the context of any beneficial  policy.   On  the
    evidence considered and facts found at  the  First-tier  there  are  no
    countervailing factors capable of warranting leave outside of the rules
    in the context of Article 8 ECHR.

13. It follows that I am satisfied that the judge has fallen into an  error
    of law and that it had been material in the context of the  outcome  of
    the decision requiring the decision to be set aside.  It falls to me to
    re-make the decision today and for all the reasons that I have set  out
    above I do so dismissing the claimant's appeal on human rights grounds.
     There was no counter appeal before me in respect  of  the  Immigration
    Rules findings and the appeal is already dismissed  on  those  grounds.



Decision

14. The decision of the First tier tribunal reveals a material error and  I
    set it aside and remake it dismissing the Appellant's appeal.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

