
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/12366/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at HMCTS Employment Tribunals, Liverpool|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th January 2017                          |On 24th July 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           MR ABDULLA AHMED SABER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M Davies, promulgated on 18th August 2016, following a hearing at
    Manchester Piccadilly on 9th August 2016.  In  the  determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of  Iraq.  He  appeals  against  the
    decision of the Respondent dated 9th September 2015, refusing his claim
    for asylum in the United Kingdom on the basis of his Kurdish  ethnicity
    because he comes from  an  area  that  is  controlled  by  the  Kurdish
    Regional Government in Iraq.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim has been that he fears ISIS (Daesh) because  they
    seized control of Mosul and the Appellant was unable to return to work.
     He had been involved in mechanical engineering and he claims  to  have
    established  a  company  which  was  involved  in  mechanical  work  on
    electricity substations.  He claims that he was prevented from carrying
    out such work on an electricity substation in  Mosul  because  it  came
    under the control of Daesh.  He and his partner then employed  a  crane
    driver by the name of Huer, who he alleges was  subsequently  kidnapped
    by Daesh, resulting in Huer's family blaming the  Appellant  for  being
    involved in Huer's abduction, such that they  have  now  threatened  to
    kill him or do him serious harm.   He  claims  he  has  been  receiving
    threatening telephone calls from Daesh.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge rejected the Appellant's claim that he was unable to continue
    carrying on work after Mosul came under  the  control  of  Daesh.   The
    judge also rejected the claim that Huer  was  abducted  such  that  the
    Appellant can now be blamed for his abduction  by  Huer's  family.  The
    Appellant had claimed that  after  he  received  threatening  telephone
    calls he sought guidance from his uncle  who  worked  for  the  Kurdish
    Security Forces and the judge held that "it is wholly  incredible  that
    if the Appellant subsequently had a problem with Huer's family, members
    of the Bradost Tribe, for the reasons he has claimed that he would  not
    utilise the services of his uncle again ..." (paragraph 62).  The judge
    also held that he could not understand why the Appellant should  choose
    to leave Iraq when he had  no  direct  contact  whatsoever  with  those
    threatening him.  Moreover, he had every opportunity to move  elsewhere
    in the Kurdish Regional Government area.  Indeed, he  could  return  to
    another area which is not under the control of Daesh, namely,  an  area
    which is controlled by the  Kurdish  Regional  Government.   The  judge
    rejected entirely the suggestion that he was at risk from Huer's family
    or from members of the Bradost Tribe in  the  area  controlled  by  the
    Kurdish Regional Government.  Internal relocation was  entirely  within
    the reach of the Appellant and he could not succeed in this claim.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge, before coming  to  the
    findings that he did, which I have set out above, stated at the  outset
    that,

         "The fact that the Appellant passed through both Italy  and  France
         en route to the United Kingdom and did not claim asylum is evidence
         that does damage his credibility.  The reason for that is  that  it
         is clear having spent some months in Turkey that the Appellant left
         Turkey with the intention to seek international protection.  He has
         given no evidence whatsoever  as  to  why  he  did  not  seek  that
         international protection in either Italy or  France  where  he  was
         well able to do so.  That in my view does damage  his  credibility"
         (paragraph 60).

 6. The grounds state that the Appellant's journey to  the  United  Kingdom
    was not a matter raised by the Secretary of  State  in  her  letter  of
    refusal.  It was not raised by the Secretary of State's advocate at the
    Case Management Review hearing.  It was  not  canvassed  during  cross-
    examination either.  Since the Respondent did not rely on Section 8  of
    the 2004 Act, and since the Appellant had  prepared  his  case  on  the
    assumption that his credibility was not  damaged,  there  had  been  an
    inherent unfairness caused to the  Appellant.   Judge  Davies  did  not
    inform the parties of his  concerns  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    journey to the UK at  the  hearing.   He  did  not  ask  the  Appellant
    questions about his journey.  In short, the Appellant had been given no
    opportunity to deal with the judge's concerns.

 7. On 12th September 2016, permission to appeal was given by the  Tribunal
    on the basis that the refusal letter did not rely on Section 8  of  the
    2004 Act and the Record of Proceedings shows that  the  Respondent  did
    not rely on Section 8 either and so it was wrong for the judge to  have
    based his decision on this without giving the parties  the  opportunity
    to address this matter.

 8. On 2nd October 2016, a Rule 24 response was entered by the Secretary of
    State on the basis that the Appellant's account was largely incredible.
     The Appellant was unable to support his claim that his problems  arose
    from working on an electrical substation in Mosul.  The judge explained
    why he found it implausible  that  the  Appellant  would  not  use  the
    services of his uncle to resolve the position with  the  Bradost  Tribe
    and  benefit  from  security  in  the  KRG  area.   Moreover,  internal
    relocation was available to the Appellant.

The Hearing

 9. At the hearing before me, Mr  Draycott,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant repeated the grounds that had been set out in the Grounds  of
    Appeal.  The core aspect of the claim was a fear that the Appellant had
    on account of his work in Mosul from ISIS (Daesh), as well as the blood
    feud that had arisen with the Bradost Tribe.  If the judge was to raise
    Section 8 as an issue it was something that should have arisen  at  the
    end of his analysis.  It was not the starting point and this  had  been
    made clear in the case of JT Cameroon [2009] 1WLR 1411 and the case  of
    SM (Section 8: Judge's Process) Iran [2005] UKAIT 00116.  In the  first
    of these cases the qualifying word  "potentially"  should  be  inserted
    before the word "damaging."  In the second of these cases it  was  held
    that,

         "Given the terms of Section 8, it is inevitable  that  the  general
         fact-finding process is somewhat  distorted,  but  that  distortion
         must be kept to a minimum.  There is no  warrant  at  all  for  the
         claim, made in the grounds, that the matters identified by  Section
         8  should  be  treated  as  a  starting  point  of  a  decision  on
         credibility."

10. Mr Draycott submitted that the  situation  was  particularly  invidious
    given that Section 8 had not even been raised before the  hearing.   It
    was not raised at the hearing either.

11. For his part,  Mr  Harrison  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response  and
    submitted that the judge has to take into account Section 8 even it  is
    not raised if he deems it to be relevant.   The  Appellant  did  travel
    through other European countries and he took time  to  decide  when  to
    seek international protection.  The judge had to start  somewhere  with
    Section 8 and although this had been set out at the  beginning  of  his
    findings at paragraph 60 this did  not  mean  to  say  that  the  other
    findings  that  followed  thereafter  could  not  stand  independently.
    Indeed, if one looks at them carefully, they do stand independently  of
    the Section 8 evaluation made at the outset.

12. In reply Mr  Draycott  submitted  that  immigration  hearings  are  not
    "inquisitorial" hearings but are "adversarial" and the judge should not
    have entered the arena, and if he did do so, he  ought  to  have  given
    notice to the parties, which he did not do, thereby depriving  them  of
    the right to deal with the issues that were in his mind.

13. At the end of the Hearing I proceeded to make  my  decision  which  was
    then immediately sent for typing, and I give below herewith my reasons,
    for deciding this appeal as I did.

My Consideration of the Appeal

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    [2007]) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons  are  as
    follows.

15. First, whereas it is entirely arguable that the judge independently  of
    his statement at paragraph 60  makes  separate  and  discrete  findings
    against the Appellant from paragraphs 61  to  64  in  relation  to  his
    claim,  before  concluding  ultimately  that  internal  relocation   is
    available to him (at paragraph  65),  the  question  is  whether  these
    findings have been tainted by a finding reached at the outset that  the
    Appellant's credibility is damaged because he travelled  through  Italy
    and France before arriving in Turkey and then moving on to  the  United
    Kingdom to make an asylum claim.  The case of SM [2005] UKAIT 00116  is
    clear that, "there is no warrant at all  for  the  claim  made  in  the
    grounds that the matters identified by Section 8 should be treated as a
    starting point of a decision on credibility."

16. Second, and even more importantly, the fact that  the  judge  does  not
    raise this matter in open court, in the absence of  it  having  earlier
    been raised in the refusal letter, deprived the representative for  the
    Appellant the chance of dealing with this matter of travelling  through
    other countries before arriving in the UK to make an asylum claim.

17. Third, the judge also, in rejecting the Appellant's core claim, namely,
    that his difficulties  arose  when  ISIS  took  over  Mosul,  made  the
    statement that, "none of the evidence produced in the form of documents
    by the Appellant supports that contention" (paragraph 62),  whereas  it
    is well-established that cooperation is not a requirement in an  asylum
    claim: see Ates [2002] UKIAT 06221.

18. Finally, there is the matter  raised  in  the  Skeleton  Argument  with
    respect to the case of Bagdanavicius (2004) 1WLR 1207, where the  Court
    of Appeal stated that, even if there was state protection available  in
    the receiving state, it may be the case that  state  authorities,  "are
    unlikely  to  provide  the   additional   protection   his   particular
    circumstances reasonably require," and if this  is  the  case  then  he
    would have a well-founded fear of persecution.  This is a  matter  that
    would need to be properly probed by a First-tier Tribunal Judge  again,
    but it is arguable, that  given  what  I  have  already  identified  as
    amounting  to  errors  of  law,  that  this  may  or  may  not  have  a
    significance, but it would be for the judge in the First-tier  Tribunal
    to determine afresh.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.   I  re-make  the  decision  as  follows.   This  appeal  is
remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined by a judge  other
than Judge M Davies  pursuant  to  Practice  Statement  7.2(a)  because  the
effect of the error has been  to  deprive  a  party  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's case to  be
put before the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th July 2017
