
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12801/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 May 2017                                 |On 8 May 2017                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     sa
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by Bolton Citizens Advice
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I found an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision and  gave
    my reasons for so finding in a decision which  was  promulgated  on  23
    November 2016:

         "1.  I shall refer to the  appellant  as  the  respondent  and  the
         respondent as the appellant (as they appeared  respectively  before
         the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant SA was born in 1985 and is
         a female citizen of Pakistan. She entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
         2008.  Her  leave  to  remain  expired  in  2009.   She  entered  a
         relationship with an Indian citizen in the  United  Kingdom  during
         which she claims to have suffered domestic violence.  On 13  August
         2015, a decision was made to refuse to grant the  appellant  asylum
         upon her application.  The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (Judge Alty) which, in a decision promulgated on  27  June
         2016, allowed the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The appeal  on
         asylum grounds and in respect of  Articles  2/3  of  the  ECHR  was
         dismissed.  The appellant has  not  challenged  that  part  of  the
         decision before the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The appellant has a  child  living  with  her  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  The child was born in 2012.  At [35] at the beginning  of
         her analysis of Article 8, Judge Alty wrote:

         The appellant has been in the UK for eight years and  has  a  child
         here.   She  has  developed  links  with  community   and   church.
         Therefore I am also satisfied that she has developed a family  life
         capable of being interfered with under the first  stage  of  Razgar
         [2004] UKHL 2004 (sic)  and  that  such  interference  is  material
         enough to potentially engage Article 8 under stage 2 (sic).

         3.   I accept Mr McVeety's submission that the judge has  conflated
         private and family life in her analysis.  It is not  at  all  clear
         why the judge considered that the appellant and her  child  have  a
         family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  simply  because  they   had
         "developed links with  community  and  church".   Those  links  can
         properly be categorised as elements of the private  lives  of  both
         the appellant and her child; the family life of the  appellant  and
         child is in this instance that which  they  enjoy  together  rather
         than third parties who are not related to them.  It is difficult to
         see  how  that  family  life  would   suffer   a   significant   or
         disproportionate interference given  that  the  appellant  and  her
         child would be removed together to Pakistan where their family life
         may be continued.   It  is  clear  that,  if  the  removal  of  the
         appellant and the child severs links with their local community and
         church in Blackburn, then that does not constitute an  interference
         of the family life of either the appellant or the child.

         4.   The conflation of family life and private  life  has  led  the
         judge into legal  error.   As  Mr  McVeety  properly  pointed  out,
         Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
         (as amended) provides that little  weight  should  be  given  to  a
         private life that has been established by a person at a time  "when
         the person's immigration status  is  precarious".   Further,  given
         that the appellant's visa expired in 2009 and that she did not make
         an application for asylum until some  time  after  that  date,  she
         cannot establish that she has always  been  living  in  the  United
         Kingdom lawfully; in consequence, and by the application of Section
         117B(4), little weight should be given to  private  life  developed
         during the period between the expiry of her visa and her claim  for
         asylum and subsequent appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

         5.   At [38] the judge does consider Section 117B  concluding  that
         the appellant's English is "not fluent"  and  that  there  was  "no
         evidence to indicate that she  is  financially  independent".   The
         judge was right to take these matters into account but  it  is  not
         entirely clear to me how those factors have influenced her analysis
         and the outcome of the appeal.  Likewise, the  comments  the  judge
         makes at [41] regarding the  "ostracism  and/or  discrimination  on
         return to Pakistan given that she is a young  lone  woman  with  an
         illegitimate child" may be a factor although I  consider  there  is
         some force in Mr McVeety's submission that it is not clear on  what
         basis the judge has sought to  bring  this  factor  back  into  the
         appeal, having rejected the submission that it is  a  proper  basis
         for allowing the appeal on either asylum or Article 3 grounds.

         6.   In the light of what I  have  said  above,  I  find  that  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.




         Notice of Decision

         7.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 27 June
         2016 is set aside.  The decision  will  be  re-made  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal following a resumed hearing  at  Manchester  before  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Clive Lane.  The findings of the judge in respect of
         the appeal on asylum and Articles 2/3 ECHR grounds  are  preserved.
         The findings in respect of Article 8 ECHR are set aside."

 2. For the resumed hearing at Manchester on  2  May  2017,  the  appellant
    attended and  gave  evidence  in  English.   She  adopted  her  written
    statement  as  her  evidence-in-chief  and  was  cross-examined  by  Mr
    Harrison, for the respondent.  The appellant's child, S,  was  born  in
    December 2012 and is now aged 4 years.   The  father  of  S  (A)  is  a
    citizen of India.   The  appellant  was  cross-examined  regarding  A's
    status in the United Kingdom.  The appellant said that  she  understood
    that A continues to "sign" with the Immigration Officer indicating that
    he has no settled status.  The appellant had suffered domestic violence
    at the hands of A and, at the time of the hearing before the First-tier
    Tribunal, the relationship between  herself  and  A  appeared  to  have
    broken down completely.  At the resumed hearing, however, the appellant
    gave a different picture of the current state of the relationship.  She
    described S's fondness for her father; indeed, the appellant and S  had
    spent the night with A in Manchester prior to the resumed hearing and A
    had agreed to look after S whilst the appellant  was  at  the  hearing.
    The appellant was somewhat evasive as regards the  re-establishment  of
    the relationship with A when cross-examined by Mr Harrison.  She seemed
    unable to remember when the relationship had recommenced  although  she
    believed that it was at some time before S's  last  birthday  (December
    2016).   The  appellant  said  that  she  wished  to   recommence   her
    relationship with A but that she is taking matters quite slowly at  the
    present time,  especially  in  the  light  of  their  previous  unhappy
    history.

 3. The appellant said that her father and mother  were  deceased  but  the
    rest of her family live in Pakistan although she has  no  contact  with
    them.  She has no contact with her former husband  who  also  lives  in
    Pakistan.  The appellant said that she is a qualified midwife who  last
    worked in Pakistan in 2008 in that capacity.  She has never worked as a
    midwife or otherwise whilst in the United Kingdom.

 4. The appellant described her social  life  which  appears  to  be  based
    largely upon a Catholic church in Blackburn.  About ten members of  the
    congregation come  to  the  appellant's  house  every  week  for  choir
    practice.

 5. I reserved my decision.

 6. The balance of probabilities is the standard of proof in the Article  8
    ECHR appeal.  There remains no appeal in respect of asylum and Articles
    2/3 ECHR.

 7. The evidence which the appellant gave regarding the recommencement of a
    relationship with  A  was  vague;  she  appeared  reluctant  to  answer
    questions about the relationship.  I am prepared  to  accept,  however,
    that the appellant was  not  deliberately  attempting  to  obscure  the
    truth; it seems more likely that she  simply  "doesn't  want  to  think
    about the past" as she put it.   The  fact  remains,  however,  that  a
    relationship with A is not firmly re-established.  The  couple  do  not
    live  together  and  the  appellant's  main  motivation  for  having  a
    relationship with A appears to be so that  A  can  enjoy  contact  with
    their daughter, S who appears to be fond of A.  On  the  basis  of  the
    evidence as at the date of hearing, I find that  S  and  the  appellant
    have a family relationship but that such family life as S,  A  and  the
    appellant may enjoy is rather weak as contact between them  all  occurs
    only intermittently.  I accept that A has contact with S  although,  in
    the light of the vagueness of the appellant's evidence, I am unable  to
    sure to the appropriate standard that this contact  takes  place  every
    week as she stated.

 8. I accept that the appellant has a private life based around her friends
    from the congregation  of  a  Catholic  church  which  she  attends  in
    Blackburn.  I accept that she holds choir meetings at her own home.

 9. The Article 8 assessment turns on the question of  proportionality.   I
    have regard to Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 (as amended):

         'Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.'

10. I accept that the appellant is able to speak English (it is  not  clear
    why she has had an Urdu interpreter at the past court hearings) and she
    does not have an income or financial assets which have  been  disclosed
    to the Tribunal.  A is not  a  "qualifying  partner"  and  S  (being  a
    citizen of Pakistan, like her mother) is not a qualifying child.  As  I
    recorded in my error of law decision, that, for much of her time in the
    United Kingdom, the appellant's status has  been  that  of  an  illegal
    overstayer and her residence here has been in  consequence  precarious.
    I attach little weight to her private life formed through the church on
    account of the fact that this has (a) been formed while her status  has
    been precarious and (b) can be replicated upon return to Pakistan  with
    members of a similar congregation worshipping there.

11. Mr Holmes in his submissions made much of section 55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and its application to  the  facts
    of this case.  I accept that the child S was born in the United Kingdom
    but is a citizen of Pakistan.   Mr  Holmes  urged  me  not  to  make  a
    decision which would lead  to  S  being  removed  from  the  supportive
    environment of the United Kingdom but the fact remains  that,  although
    she attends nursery school at the present time, she has  yet  to  start
    full time school as such and it is not clear what input,  if  any,  she
    receives from Social Services or similar agencies at the present  time.
    S's primary relationship is, of course, with her mother.  I accept that
    S has a relationship with her father, A, and I find  that  it  is  that
    relationship which has primarily led  the  appellant  to  recommence  a
    relationship with A notwithstanding the domestic violence which she had
    suffered at his hands in the past.  Mr Holmes submitted that  the  fact
    that A is Indian and the appellant  and  S  are  from  Pakistan  was  a
    significant factor in the proportionality  exercise  since  the  family
    would be split by  being  removed  to  different  countries.   But  the
    difficulty with that submission is that I have no evidence  at  all  to
    show that A would not be admitted to Pakistan as  the  partner  of  the
    appellant.   It  is  not  for  the  Tribunal  simply  to  accept   such
    submissions in the absence of any evidence.  In any event, it  was  not
    clear to me at all from the appellant's evidence that she would wish to
    live with A on a permanent basis  either  in  Pakistan,  India  or  the
    United Kingdom.  As I have noted, S is not a qualifying  child  so  the
    provisions of Section 117B(6) do not apply in this instance.  I have to
    say that on the basis of the evidence which I received both written and
    oral, that there is simply not enough evidence  to  justify  permitting
    the appellant and S to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of the
    contact currently taking place between A and S.  I accept Mr Harrison's
    submission that, other than the contact which does take place, there is
    no evidence at all that A is taking any active role in the life of S or
    that he is likely to do so in the future.   It  is  apparent  from  the
    evidence that all decisions in respect of S's education and welfare are
    taken by the appellant.  As regards S's best  interests,  I  find  that
    those are met on the facts of this  case  by  her  remaining  with  her
    mother, the appellant.

12. Set against the factors  favouring  the  appellant  in  the  Article  8
    assessment, that there is the  public  interest  concerned  with  their
    removal.  The appellant's immigration history is  not  good.   She  has
    formed a relationship in this country and had  a  child  born  of  that
    relationship at a time when she was well aware that she had no right to
    be here.  On return to Pakistan, the appellant and S will  be  able  to
    continue their family life together and, as I have noted above, I  have
    no firm evidence to show that A would not  be  able  to  accompany  the
    family to Pakistan in order to enjoy family life with them if,  indeed,
    that is intended by any of the parties.  At  the  resumed  hearing,  Mr
    Holmes made nothing of the possible stigma which  the  appellant  would
    face upon return to Pakistan as the mother  of  an  illegitimate  child
    and, in the absence of any firm evidence as regards that matter,  I  do
    not take it into account as a weighty factor.   I  am  aware,  however,
    that the appellant is a qualified midwife and there would appear to  be
    no reason why she should not be able to resume such work upon return to
    Pakistan.  By doing so, she would be able to provide for herself and  S
    notwithstanding the fact that she has little contact  with  members  of
    her family in Pakistan.  I find that the public interest concerned with
    the appellant's removal is relatively strong in  this  instance  and  I
    find that such factors as may weigh against that public interest are on
    the facts insufficient to lead me to allow the appeal on Article 8 ECHR
    grounds.  I am satisfied that it would not be disproportionate for  the
    appellant to be removed with S to their country of nationality.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  the  respondent  dated  13
August 2015 to refuse her asylum is dismissed on all grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 4 May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 4 May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
