
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12224/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice Belfast  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26 July 2017                           |On 21 August 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                                     M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss McIlveen instructed by Nelson-Singleton
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly, promulgated on 14  September  2016,
    allowing her appeal against the decision made on 7  September  2015  to
    refuse to grant her asylum and/or humanitarian  protection.   She  was,
    however, granted leave to remain outside the Rules.

 2. It is accepted that the respondent is an Eritrean national.  It is also
    accepted that she was born in Ethiopia to Eritrean parents and that she
    and they were forced to leave Ethiopia and duly  returned  to  Eritrea.
    It is accepted also that she left to avoid the draft and that she has a
    well-founded fear of persecution in Eritrea.

 3. The respondent is  married  to  an  Ethiopian  national  who  has  been
    recognised as a refugee  and  granted  asylum  on  2  July  2014.   The
    Secretary of State was satisfied that the  applicant  is  an  Ethiopian
    national given that she had applied for and had been granted a visa  to
    the United Kingdom on 14 March 2007 using an Ethiopian  passport.   The
    respondent's case is that this passport had been obtained unlawfully by
    her husband upon payment of a bribe.

 4.  When  the  matter  came  before  Judge  Farrelly,  he   accepted   the
    respondent's account and found that she would be at risk on  return  to
    Eritrea.  He accepted also that she had obtained the Ethiopian passport
    by bribery but, having directed himself in connection with  ST  (Ethnic
    Eritrean - nationality - return) Ethiopia [2011] UKUT 00252 noted  that
    the respondent had not gone to the embassy  to  see  if  she  would  be
    entitled to that nationality and that  although  he  had  not  had  the
    benefit  of  detailed  argument  about  her  entitlement  to  Ethiopian
    nationality [33] and he had no submission  as  to  the  effect  of  her
    marriage to  a  European  national,  he  considered  it  had  not  been
    demonstrated that she was entitled to  an  Ethiopian  nationality.   He
    also considered that the respondent could not return to Ethiopia due to
    she and her husband having children although they are now separated.

 5. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had: -

      1) Misdirected himself in law in that he had reversed  the  burden  of
         proof wrongly requiring the Secretary of State to  prove  that  the
         respondent was Ethiopian; and,

      2) had erred in discounting the relevance  of  a  possible  return  to
         Ethiopia on the  basis  that  the  respondent's  husband  had  been
         recognised as a refugee from  Ethiopia,  this  matter  having  been
         considered and decided in the respondent's favour by the  grant  of
         leave to remain, this being irrelevant to the question of the  risk
         to her given that she had not claimed any risk on  account  of  her
         husband's political activities.

 6. I heard brief submissions from both parties.  It was accepted that  the
    judge had erred in reversing the burden of proof.  It was accepted that
    it was for the respondent in  this  case  to  show  that  she  was  not
    entitled to Ethiopian nationality.

 7. Mr McVeety did, however, concede that none of the findings of fact made
    by the judge were disputed.

 8. The factual situation in this case is not the same as that in ST or for
    that matter MA (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civil 289.  It is not in  dispute
    that the respondent is an Eritrean citizen or that she  was  forced  to
    leave Ethiopia.  The Secretary of State's case  is  that  she  has  not
    shown that she would not now be able  to  avail  herself  of  Ethiopian
    nationality.  I accept that the judge did err in reversing  the  burden
    of proof in this case requiring the Secretary of State to show that the
    respondent was entitled to Ethiopian nationality.  It is  evident  both
    from MA (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civil 289 that it was for the respondent
    to have taken steps to approach the embassy and to show  that  she  was
    not a national and was not entitled to the national of Ethiopia.  I  am
    therefore satisfied that the decision involved the making of  an  error
    of law.

 9. I am not, however, satisfied that  this  error  was  material.   As  Mr
    McVeety for  the  Secretary  of  State  accepted,  there  has  been  no
    challenge to the expert report of Dr Campbell.   His  evidence,  and  I
    have no reason to doubt this, is that if the respondent were to  return
    to Ethiopia, it is likely she would be detained and  interrogated.   He
    was of the opinion that it was likely that her background would come to
    light resulting in the invalidation of her  passport  and  nationality;
    that she would be deemed to be an Eritrean national but would  have  no
    civil or legal right in Ethiopia and was at risk of being placed  in  a
    refugee camp.

10. There being no challenge to this evidence, I am satisfied that were the
    decision to be set  aside  then  on  the  basis  of  this  unchallenged
    evidence that the respondent has a well-founded fear of persecution  in
    Ethiopia, if she is a national of that country, on the basis  that  she
    is also an Eritrean national.  She would not be able to lie  about  her
    background or that she is married to a refugee and in the circumstances
    there is a real risk that she would face persecution on  account  of  a
    Convention reason.

11. Accordingly, although the decision of Judge Farrelly did amount  to  an
    error of law, I am not satisfied that it would in all the circumstances
    of this case be a proper exercise of discretion  to  set  the  judgment
    aside given that on the basis of the evidence and the lack of challenge
    to the expert report which was accepted by the judge in the  First-tier
    that the appeal would be allowed.

Summary of Conclusions

1.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error  of  law  but  not  one  capable  of   affecting   the   outcome.
    Accordingly, the judgment is not set aside.

2.   I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  respondent
    has a well-founded fear of persecution in both Eritrea and Ethiopia.

3.   I maintain the anonymity direction is made by the First-tier Tribunal


Signed                                  Date 18 August 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
