
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12684/2015

                                                               AA/12685/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Bradford                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 November 2016                | On 2 February 2017                |


Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL



Between

                                   (1) Zs

                                   (2) ns

                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss. P. Solanki, of Counsel, instructed by Asylum
Aid

For the Respondent:    Mr. M. Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background / Substantive Issues under Appeal

1.   The Appellants are mother and son and are citizens of Pakistan born  on
    1 January 1966 and 1 February 1998 respectively. The Appellants arrived
    in the UK on 27 January 2015 with entry clearance conferring  leave  to
    enter as visitors. On 13 March 2015 the First Appellant claimed  asylum
    naming the Second Appellant as a dependant. The First Appellant's claim
    was refused for the reasons set out in a  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated  25  September  2015.  The  Respondent  accepts  that  the  First
    Appellant is a national of Pakistan, but rejected her account that  she
    was targeted and abused by her husband. It was that decision that  gave
    rise to an appeal before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal.

2.   The First-tier Tribunal  accepted  the  First  Appellant's  account  as
    credible, but dismissed the appeal in a decision dated 26 January 2016.
    At an error of law hearing on 17 August 2016, I decided that the First-
    tier Tribunal erred in law and that its decision should  be  set  aside
    and remade by the Upper Tribunal. At that hearing I directed  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's credibility findings were to be preserved and the
    representatives agreed that the outstanding issues were:

    (i)  Whether there would be any consequential risk to  the  Appellants'
         on return to Pakistan that  would  entitle  them  to  international
         protection;

    (ii)  Whether  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
         Immigration Rules were met, and

    (iii)    Whether there would be an infringement of Article  8  (private
         life) in the event of removal.

3.   The matter thus comes before me and I must now re-make the decision.

4.   Miss Solanki indicated that she did not intend to call  the  Appellants
    to give evidence. Both Appellants are vulnerable witnesses;  the  First
    Appellant's account had been accepted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    the  Second  Appellant  had  been  declared  medically  unfit  to  give
    evidence. She thus relied on the preserved findings and the documentary
    evidence before me. Mr Diwnycz indicated that he was content with  that
    as he had no questions for the Appellants.

Submissions

5.   At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Diwnycz  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that:

    (a)  He relied on the reasons for refusal letter. He  made  no  further
         submissions and invited me to dismiss the appeal.

6.   On behalf of the Appellants Miss Solanki submitted that:

    (a)  She relied on her Skeleton Argument.

    (b)  The First Appellant was repeatedly targeted by her ex-husband over
         a period of 15 to 20 years.

    (c)  The Appellants were subjected to gruesome violence.

    (d)  The authorities in Pakistan were aware of the abuse  and  did  not
         take appropriate action.

    (e)  The First Appellant's family were unable to assist her.

    (f)  The Appellants are at real risk of  serious  harm  in  their  home
         area.

    (g)  The Appellants will not be sufficiently protected by the State.

    (h)  Shelters in Pakistan will not accept the Appellants -  the  Second
         Appellant is now an adult and it would be unduly harsh to  separate
         him from his mother.

    (i)      The Appellants were located  when  they  moved  by  the  First
         Appellant's  ex-husband.  The  Appellants  lived  in   unreasonable
         circumstances. The First Appellant lived  in  self-confinement  and
         did not send the Second Appellant to school.

    (j)  Both Appellants suffer from chronic mental health  conditions  and
         sufficient healthcare would not be available in Pakistan.

    (k)  The Appellants would be traced as they are  required  to  register
         upon relocation.

    (l)  The country expert report accords with the Tribunal's findings  in
         KA and Others (domestic violence -  risk  on  return)  Pakistan  CG
         [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC).

7.   I reserved my decision which I now give with reasons.

The First Appellant's Evidence

8.   There is a lengthy and  detailed  witness  statement  setting  out  the
    historical facts. It is not necessary to set that evidence out in full.
    Therein the First Appellant describes the violence and abuse  that  she
    and her son were subjected to by her estranged ex-husband. A summary of
    the claim is however as follows. The First Appellant's case is that she
    married in 1995 and has been a victim of domestic  violence  throughout
    her married life. The Second Appellant was also a victim  of  abuse  at
    the hands of his father. The nature and extent of the  abuse  was  both
    physical and mental and was of  a  very  serious  nature.  It  included
    sexual abuse against the First Appellant in the presence of the  Second
    Appellant. The evidence reveals that once the Appellants were  excluded
    from the family home in 2002, and the First Appellant initiated divorce
    proceedings in  2004,  that  they  continued  to  receive  serious  and
    persistent  threats  and  were  subjected  to  further   violence   and
    harassment,  despite  seeking  assistance  from  the  authorities   and
    relocating from their home area in Sargodha to Lahore.

Medico-Legal Evidence

9.   Reliance is placed on the reports of Dr Rachel Thomas  dated  6  August
    2015 in respect of the  First  Appellant  and  6  August  2015  and  19
    November 2016, respectively, in respect of  the  Second  Appellant.  Dr
    Thomas is a Consultant Psychologist of many years standing. There is no
    dispute that she is eminently qualified to provide an expert opinion on
    the state of the Appellants' mental health.

10.  Dr Thomas' reports in  respect  of  the  Appellants  are  detailed  and
    thorough and her diagnosis and  prognosis  is  not  challenged  by  the
    Respondent. In respect of the First Appellant, Dr  Thomas  stated  that
    she is suffering from  significant  symptoms  of  psychiatric  disorder
    consequent on the experience of cumulatively traumatic life  events  in
    her country of origin. She was symptomatic for  both  Major  Depressive
    Disorder and Post-traumatic Stress Disorder. Dr Thomas opined  that  it
    was highly likely that she would suffer  deterioration  in  her  mental
    health due to re-traumatisation if returned to Pakistan and  thus  less
    able to support herself and her son. She would be socially  ostracised,
    shunned and subject to gossip which could lead to psychiatric breakdown
    or suicide. Dr Thomas described the Appellant as a  highly  traumatised
    and psychiatrically ill woman who required long-term psychotherapy  for
    12-24 months with an experienced psychotherapist, with a view to making
    a recovery in the UK in 2 years. She concluded by confirming  her  view
    that the Appellant would be unable to  make  any  sort  of  psychiatric
    recovery in Pakistan.

11.  In respect of the Second Appellant,  Dr  Thomas  stated  in  her  first
    report that he also displayed  psychiatric  symptoms  indicative  of  a
    major depressive episode and complex PTSD consequent of  the  traumatic
    life events he experienced in Pakistan. Dr Thomas opined  that  he  was
    significantly unwell physically and psychologically. He would  be  less
    able to study, work and support himself and she  described  his  future
    prospects  as  bleak.  He  required  long  term  secondary   care   and
    psychotherapy for 12-24 months with an experienced psychotherapist.  Dr
    Thomas described the Second Appellant as highly  traumatised  and  said
    that he would be unable to make any sort  of  psychiatric  recovery  in
    Pakistan leading to deterioration in his mental health in the event  of
    a return.

12.  In her updated  and  most  recent  report  Dr  Thomas  opined  that  he
    remained highly traumatised and psychiatrically ill  suffering  from  a
    major depressive disorder with psychotic episodes and complex PTSD. She
    said that his condition had not significantly improved over the last 18
    months despite treatment interventions, and that his condition was  now
    chronic in nature. Dr Thomas remained of the view that returning him to
    Pakistan would result in significant re-traumatisation and  psychiatric
    deterioration. His prospects of recovery were good in the UK within 3-4
    years, and an improvement would have a beneficial impact on his mother.



13.  I was further provided  with  a  letter  from  Ms  Bridget  Tardivel  a
    Psychotherapist from  Solace  dated  14  November  2016.  Solace  is  a
    specialist  mental  health   facility   which   provides   counselling,
    psychotherapy and support to asylum seekers and refugees.  Ms  Tardivel
    writes to confirm that she  has  been  offering  the  Second  Appellant
    weekly  counselling  to  deal  with  trauma  related  issues  including
    depression and anxiety. Treatment is ongoing which she believes will be
    long term.

Expert Report

14.  The Appellants' bundle contains a report dated  23  September  2015  by
    Uzma Moeen an Associate of the Asian Legal Advice Service. There is  no
    dispute about her expertise. She is  an  experienced  academic  with  a
    particular expertise in Pakistani Law.

15.  Ms Moeen sets out the position in respect of  women  in  Pakistan.  She
    refers to the decision in KA (supra) and  notes  that  various  sources
    report an increase in violence against women in urban and  rural  areas
    with laws not being implemented and  little  redress  from  prosecuting
    authorities. She says  that  the  criminal  law  is  not  an  effective
    deterrent against honour killings that are on the rise in Pakistan.  Ms
    Moeen states that approaching the police can lead to  further  violence
    and she refers to cases being registered against the police on  charges
    of corruption. There are no all female police  stations  in  Lahore  or
    Punjab. Her overall conclusion is that the  police  frequently  do  not
    provide adequate protection to vulnerable women.

16.  Ms Moeen considers the position of shelters in Pakistan. She says  that
    State and private shelters have failed to protect women and that living
    conditions in such shelters reinforce subordination and oppression. The
    number of shelters available is  inadequate  and  no  medical  care  is
    available.

17.  Ms Moeen states that the police and authorities must  keep  records  of
    all single and divorced women in their localities. The Appellants would
    require a national ID card to gain access to employment, accommodation;
    bank accounts, passports and the public can verify registered  citizens
    easily. The First Appellant's ex-husband would be able  to  trace  them
    through this system of registration.

18.  She says that it would be very difficult for  the  First  Appellant  to
    live alone as a divorced single woman and economic opportunities  would
    be very limited. Living alone was morally unacceptable  and  she  would
    find it difficult to protect herself within a  male  dominated  society
    making it difficult for her to find a way to survive. The health system
    was not well established and lacked  sufficient  resources  and  mental
    health services were limited and almost non-existent. There  were  150-
    200 qualified psychiatrists in the country which meant that  there  was
    one psychiatrist per one million people. She states that  persons  with
    mental health problems were likely to face cultural and legal  barriers
    in education, skills development and daily life, often facing  multiple
    social,  economic,  physical  and  political  handicaps  as   well   as
    stigmatisation. Family care and support  was  essential  to  those  who
    suffered with mental health difficulties.  Many  children  with  mental
    health difficulties had few educational opportunities available to them
    and that young men were severely disadvantaged. She considered that the
    Appellants situation was likely to deteriorate on return and that  they
    would be shunned and treated as outcasts.

19.  Ms Moeen stated that it was highly unlikely that  the  First  Appellant
    would be able to turn to her family for support. It was likely that she
    would be tracked down and subjected to acts of retribution by  her  ex-
    husband including acts of further abuse and violence.

General Legal Framework

20.  The burden is on the Appellants to show at the  date  of  hearing  that
    there  are  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  they  meet  the
    requirements of the Qualification Regulations or,  alternatively,  that
    they are entitled to be granted humanitarian protection under paragraph
    339C of the Immigration Rules.

21.  The standard of proof applicable in relation to past and future  events
    is lower than the balance of probabilities and is that of  'real  risk'
    or 'reasonable likelihood'.

22.  The Immigration Rules contain among other provisions,  paragraph  339K,
    which deals with the approach to  past  persecution  in  the  following
    terms:

         "339K.  The  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
         persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
         persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication
         of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
         that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated".

23.  Also pertinent to  this  appeal  is  paragraph  339O  headed  "Internal
    Relocation". This states:

         "(i) The Secretary of State will not make:

             (a)  a grant of asylum if in part of the country of  origin  a
             person would not have a well founded fear of being persecuted,
             and the person can reasonably be expected to stay in that part
             of the country; or

             (b)  a grant of humanitarian protection  if  in  part  of  the
             country of return a person would  not  face  a  real  risk  of
             suffering serious harm,  and  the  person  can  reasonably  be
             expected to stay in that part of the country.

         (ii) In examining whether a  part  of  the  country  of  origin  or
             country of return meets the requirements in (i) the  Secretary
             of State, when making his decision on whether to grant  asylum
             or humanitarian protection, will have regard  to  the  general
             circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to
             the personal circumstances of the person.

         (iii)    (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to  return
             to the country of origin or country of return".

24.  In considering the proper approach to the issue of internal  relocation
    I have also applied the principles  set  out  in  the  House  of  Lords
    judgment in Januzi v SSHD [2006] UKHL 5 which adopts the  criteria  now
    contained in paragraph 339O but also contains more detailed guidance.

The Background Material

25.  In deciding whether the Appellants are at real risk upon return I  have
    taken into account all the background information available to  me  and
    the detailed evidence and findings contained in KA (supra) and SM (lone
    women -ostracism) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 00067 (IAC).

26.  In KA the Upper Tribunal considered the  position  of  Pakistani  women
    threatened with violence and /  or  criminal  charges  upon  return  to
    Pakistan.   This  decision  comprehensively  reviews   the   background
    evidence and reached a number of conclusions, inter alia set out below.

          1) The Protection of Women (Criminal Laws Amendment) Act 2006, is
             one of a number of legislative measures undertaken to  improve
             the situation of women in Pakistan in the past decade and  has
             had a significant effect on  the  operation  of  the  Pakistan
             criminal law as it affects women accused of adultery.  It  led
             to the release of 2,500 imprisoned women. However,  the  major
             reports make  clear  that  the  effect  of  these  changes  in
             practice has been limited (para 104) and the general  position
             is summarised in the USSD Reports 2009 and  2010  as  follows:
             although the Pakistan constitution makes  all  citizens  equal
             before the law and prohibits discrimination on the grounds  of
             sex and although Pakistan is a signatory to the UN  Convention
             on the Elimination of  All  Forms  of  Discrimination  against
             Women  (CEDAW),   in   practice   women   continue   to   face
             discrimination in family law, property law  and  the  judicial
             system.

          2) Whether a woman on return faces  a  real  risk  of  an  honour
             killing will depend on the particular circumstances;  however,
             in general such a risk is likely  to  be  confined  to  tribal
             areas such as the North West Frontier Province (NWFP)  and  is
             unlikely to impact on married women.

          3) The guidance given in SN and HM  (Divorced  women  -  risk  on
             return) Pakistan  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00283  and  FS  (Domestic
             violence - SN and HM - OGN) Pakistan CG [2006] 000283  remains
             valid.  The network of women's shelters (comprising government-
             run shelters (Darul Amans) and  private  and  Islamic  women's
             crisis centres) in general affords  effective  protection  for
             women  victims  of  domestic  violence,  although  there   are
             significant  shortcomings  in  the  level  of   services   and
             treatment of inmates in some such  centres.  Women  with  boys
             over 5 face separation from their sons."

27.  In KA the  Upper  Tribunal  issued  a  reminder  that  there  are  many
    differences in the way that family, tribal and cultural (and  sometimes
    religious) patterns of living  impact  on  the  position  of  women  in
    Pakistan and then the following is stated:

         "222.    Against this background it continues  to  make  very  good
         sense  that  country  guidance  should  continue  to  avoid   broad
         generalisations and should emphasise the need  for  examination  of
         the individual's particular circumstances...That is as true whether
         one is examining risk in a person's home area  or  in  a  place  of
         potential relocation.

         223. However, as regards the issue of  internal  relocation  as  it
         affects women who are divorced  or  who  are  victims  of  domestic
         violence or who will return as single women,  it  is  important  to
         examine more closely what services exist for them by way of  crisis
         centres, shelters or refuges and  to  consider  these  taking  into
         account a range of factors such as class, age,  health,  education,
         child responsibilities etc.

         224. We have devoted considerable space to  what  is  said  in  the
         background evidence about  women's  crisis  centres,  shelters  and
         refuges. That is because the evidence  on  which  Mr  Fripp  relies
         includes the expert report of Dr Balzani and on the  2008  Safe  to
         Return? report, both of which appear, at least in some passages, to
         take the position that women's shelters in  general  do  not  offer
         adequate protection  to  women  victims  of  domestic  violence  in
         Pakistan. If that view is accepted, then existing Tribunal  country
         guidance requires major revision.

         ...

         226. Having considered all  the  evidence,  we  find  that  women's
         shelters, whether government or private, are unlikely to turn women
         away if they face charges relating to adultery...

         235. ... Whilst therefore we consider that decision makers need  to
         be vigilant for further evidence that may come to light based on  a
         more comprehensive survey,  we  consider  the  background  evidence
         overall continues to indicate that although there are far  too  few
         centres relative to the underlying need for  them,  women  who  are
         victims of domestic violence are able, through the diverse  network
         of government centres,  women's  NGOs  and  private  charities,  to
         obtain assistance and protection in urban parts  of  Pakistan  away
         from their family networks.

         236. We wish to emphasise, however, that what emerges very strongly
         from the Safe to Return? report is that it is not sufficient simply
         to consider the  issue  of  internal  relocation  by  reference  to
         whether there are available and  adequate  centres/refuges.   Focus
         has to be not only on the provision but the general position  women
         who make use of such centres will find  themselves  in  the  longer
         term...The uncertain state of the evidence makes it  imperative  in
         our view that decision-makers pay particular  regard  to  how  they
         think the individual applicant/appellant will  be  able  to  manage
         getting  on  with  their   lives   after   they   have   left   the
         centres/refuges.  We need to consider further to what extent  other
         factors such as  class,  age,  culture,  tribe,  religion  etc  can
         further modify the position of women victims of domestic violence.

         ...

         239. It is fairly clear that women who  have  their  own  financial
         means or access to financial help from family members or friends or
         who are well-educated or professional women are likely to  be  able
         to secure residential accommodation...

         240. On the other hand, concerning age, it would appear  that  most
         centres/refuges do not adequately cater  for  the  needs  of  young
         girls on their own (Safe to Return?, 6.10) and  young  adult  women
         are likely to find it more difficult to live alone than others  (we
         note that is also the view taken by the Canadian  IRB  in  December
         2007)."

28.  In the most recent case of SM  (supra)  the  Upper  Tribunal  gave  the
    following guidance as set out in the head note which reads:

         "(1) Save as herein set out, the existing country  guidance  in  SN
         and HM (Divorced women - risk on return) Pakistan CG  [2004]  UKIAT
         00283 and in KA and Others (domestic violence  -  risk  on  return)
         Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC) remains valid.

         (2)  Where a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in her home
         area for a single woman or a female head of household, there may be
         an internal relocation option to one of Pakistan's  larger  cities,
         depending on the family, social and educational  situation  of  the
         woman in question.

         (3)  It will not be normally be unduly harsh  to  expect  a  single
         woman or female head of household  to  relocate  internally  within
         Pakistan if she can access support from family members  or  a  male
         guardian in the place of relocation.

         (4)  It will not normally be unduly harsh for educated, better off,
         or older women to seek internal relocation to a city. It helps if a
         woman has qualifications enabling her to get  well-paid  employment
         and pay for accommodation and childcare if required.

         (5)  Where a single woman, with or without children, is  ostracised
         by family members and other  sources  of  possible  social  support
         because she is in an irregular situation, internal relocation  will
         be more difficult and whether it is unduly harsh will be a question
         of fact in each case.

         (6)  A single woman or female head of household  who  has  no  male
         protector or social network may be able to use the  state  domestic
         violence shelters for a short time, but the focus of such  shelters
         is on reconciling people with their family networks, and places are
         in short supply and time limited. Privately  run  shelters  may  be
         more flexible,  providing  longer  term  support  while  the  woman
         regularises her social situation, but again, places are limited.

         (7)  Domestic violence shelters are available for women at risk but
         where they are used by women with children, such  shelters  do  not
         always allow older children to enter and stay with  their  mothers.
         The risk of temporary separation, and the proportionality  of  such
         separation, is likely to differ depending on the age and sex  of  a
         woman's children: male children may be removed from  their  mothers
         at the age of 5 and placed in an orphanage or a madrasa  until  the
         family situation has been regularised (see KA and Others  (domestic
         violence risk on return) Pakistan CG [2010]  UKUT  216  (IAC)).Such
         temporary separation will not always be disproportionate or  unduly
         harsh: that is a question of fact in each case.

         (8)  Women in Pakistan  are  legally  permitted  to  divorce  their
         husbands and may institute divorce proceedings from the country  of
         refuge, via a third party and with the help of lawyers in Pakistan,
         reducing the risk of family reprisals. A  woman  who  does  so  and
         returns with a new partner or husband  will  have  access  to  male
         protection and is unlikely, outside her home area, to be at risk of
         ostracism, still less of persecution or serious harm."

Findings of Fact

Past Persecution

29.  The First-tier Tribunal found the First  Appellant's  account  of  past
    persecution credible. Those findings were not infected by errors of law
    and are preserved. I referred earlier to the nature of  the  abuse  the
    Appellants were subjected to and I have  no  hesitation  in  concluding
    that taken cumulatively, the Appellants  inter-related  experiences  at
    the hands of the First Appellant's estranged ex-husband (and the Second
    Appellant's father) amounted to persecution and serious harm.

Risk upon return

30.  It is not in dispute  that  if  the  First  Appellant  can  succeed  in
    showing a well-founded fear of persecution, it would be for  a  Refugee
    Convention reason, namely membership  of  a  particular  social  group.
    Having accepted that there has been past persecution, I  must  approach
    the Appellants' case so as to examine the question of whether there are
    good reasons to consider that such persecution or serious harm will not
    be repeated. The background evidence clearly points in the direction of
    a repetition of the violent, threatening and insulting behaviour and  I
    find that there is a real risk to the Appellants  of  persecution  upon
    return to their home area. Honour  killings  and  violence  within  the
    family remains a serious issue (paragraphs 122-131 and 221 of KA),  and
    the evidence of Ms  Moeen  makes  it  abundantly  clear  that  violence
    against women and crimes of honour have continued unabated in Pakistan.



31.  The question of whether the Appellants will be  sufficiently  protected
    by the State is a fact sensitive issue.  I have borne in mind  that  in
    AW (sufficiency of protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31(IAC)  the  Upper
    Tribunal held that:

         "2.  Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of  state  protection,  a
         claimant may still have a  well  founded  fear  of  persecution  if
         authorities know or ought to know of  circumstances  particular  to
         his/her case giving rise to the fear, but are unlikely  to  provide
         the additional protection the particular  circumstances  reasonably
         require (per Auld LJ at paragraph 55(vi))."

32.  The First Appellant's accepted evidence is that she  sought  assistance
    from the police and had access to legal representatives, the courts and
    the judicial system through which she reported her ex-husband's  abuse.
    Despite this she was not effectively protected; the abuse continued and
    her husband was not subject to prosecution and  nor  was  he  prevented
    from making physical contact with the Appellant or her son.  The  First
    Appellant's account is aligned with the  background  evidence  and  the
    expert's unchallenged view that vulnerable women in  Pakistan  are  not
    adequately protected by the authorities. I am satisfied that the  First
    Appellant's case falls into that category and that the authorities  are
    unlikely to provide the additional protection that  she  is  reasonably
    likely to require on return.

Internal relocation

33.  I consider that it is inescapable that  the  Appellants  will  have  to
    relocate. I note that the First Appellant has previously relocated with
    her son to and within Lahore on more than one  occasion  and  that  her
    whereabouts was discovered by her  ex-husband.  Again,  the  historical
    facts accord with the view of the expert that the  First  Appellant  is
    likely to be tracked down by her ex-husband on return. I have no reason
    to believe that he would not be able to do  so  now  on  return,  which
    would give rise to a real risk of a repetition of serious harm  to  the
    Appellants in any area of relocation.

34.  In the event that there is only a very remote possibility of the  First
    Appellant's ex-husband being able to  trace  her  through  official  or
    unofficial  channels,  I  am  satisfied  that  internal  relocation  is
    unreasonable and unduly harsh for  the  following  reasons.  The  First
    Appellant is a single divorced woman with mental health  problems.  She
    has a dependent son who is now 18 years old, and who also suffers  from
    severe mental health problems. There are in this case the added factors
    that the First Appellant is without family support in Pakistan and  she
    cannot rely on her son to support and  protect  her.  While  the  First
    Appellant has some modest education it  is  evident  given  her  mental
    health that economic opportunities are unlikely to be available to  her
    or, her son, and that both will have to cope with the  effects  of  re-
    traumatisation in any place of relocation. The First Appellant  has  no
    wealth to  rely  on,  and  these  factors  clearly  indicate  that  the
    Appellants would require a considerable degree  of  assistance  in  re-
    establishing themselves in another area of Pakistan.

35.  The First Appellant does not fall into the category of  women  to  whom
    accommodation is more readily available as  she  is  not  in  a  strong
    financial or social  position  (see  SM  at  [67]),  and  the  evidence
    demonstrates the limited availability  of  shelters,  the  scarcity  of
    places, the lack of resources, and that her son would not  be  admitted
    into such shelters. It is evident given the medical  evidence  that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect them to live separately. I am therefore
    not satisfied that these vulnerable Appellants will be able  to  access
    sufficient support at a shelter in another area of Pakistan.

36.  I  have  therefore  considered  all  the  relevant  individual  factors
    relating to these Appellants by reference to  the  background  evidence
    set out in KA and SM.  I find that there are many aspects of this  case
    (for example, the Appellants' mental health difficulties, and the  fact
    that the First Appellant is a single divorced woman  with  a  dependent
    adult child without any obvious means of financial support), which tend
    to suggest that even in the event of them being  given  refuge  in  the
    short term (which is unlikely) that, upon  departure  from  a  shelter,
    these Appellants would face a number of difficulties such that internal
    relocation would be unduly harsh.

37.  Having considered all of the circumstances in the round I have  reached
    the view that it would not be reasonable to expect  the  Appellants  to
    relocate,  and  that,  it  is  likely  that  given   their   individual
    characteristics and without any stable and secure financial  or  family
    support that they will be unable to support themselves.  When  that  is
    considered alongside the likely societal discrimination they will  face
    and the challenges presented by the Appellants mental state  it  is  my
    view that internal relocation on the  particular  facts  of  this  case
    would be unreasonable.

38.  I conclude therefore that the Appellants have proven to the  applicable
    standard that they are  refugees  and/or  that  they  are  entitled  to
    international protection contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

39.  Given that the Appellants succeed under the  first  issue,  it  is  not
    necessary for me to consider the other issues raised in the appeal.

Decision

40.  I make a fresh decision to allow the appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellants  are  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  them  or  any  member  of
their family. This direction applies both  to  the  Appellants  and  to  the
Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
court proceedings.



Signed : Date :

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral


