
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12502/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24th October 2016                       |On 31st October 2016             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                   S A D S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Ali, Solicitor Advocate of Aden & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born on  10th  October  1997  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Somalia.  He arrived in the United Kingdom  on  9th  October  2013  and
    claimed asylum shortly thereafter.  That claim was refused but  he  was
    granted leave to remain until 10th April 2015.

2.   The appellant then sought leave to remain on the basis  of  asylum  but
    that was refused.  The reasons are set out  in  the  decision  of  18th
    September 2015.  It was proposed to return the appellant to Somalia.

3.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Khan  on  7th  July  2016.   The
    appeal was dismissed in all respects.

4.   The appellant now seeks to appeal against that decision  on  the  basis
    that it was flawed by reason of error of law.  In particular it is said
    that the Judge, in coming to the  various  findings  which  were  made,
    conspicuously failed to engage  with  the  expert  report  prepared  by
    Professor Mario Aguilar  of  27th  January  2016  and  failed  also  to
    properly consider the aspect of return.

5.   There were perhaps three distinct issues which fell  for  consideration
    in this case.  The first issue was whether or not the appellant  was  a
    member of the Ashraaf clan.  It was not accepted by  the  Secretary  of
    State that he was in the reasons for refusal nor indeed at the hearing.

6.   A document from the Somali Humanitarian Aid  (UK)  dated  4th  February
    2015 was initially relied upon by the appellant in establishing that he
    was indeed a member of the Benadiri,  Reer  Hamar  subclan  of  Ashraaf
    Hassan.  At the hearing those  representing  the  appellant  sought  to
    distance themselves somewhat from that letter.  It  is  said  that  the
    methodology adopted by that organisation was questionable.   Mr  Tufan,
    on behalf of the respondent, submits that it  is  perhaps  because  the
    letter seeks to emphasise that that appellant was in Somalia  for  most
    of the material part of the time and not in Ethiopia.

7.   Nevertheless the aspect of the appellant's  clan  membership  was  also
    dealt with by Professor Aguilar in  his  report.   There  had  been  an
    interview which  he  had  conducted  with  the  appellant  and  various
    documents were noted, including the letter of 4th February 2015.

8.   The Judge, at  paragraphs  27  and  28  of  the  determination,  places
    considerable weight upon the letter, holding it to be  adverse  to  the
    credibility of the appellant that he sought to  distance  himself  from
    it.   The  Judge  is  somewhat  dismissive   of   Professor   Aguilar's
    conclusions as to clan membership for reasons as set out  in  paragraph
    32.  The Judge finds  that  the  expert  report  does  not  assist  the
    appellant's case as to his claimed ethnicity but few reasons are  given
    as to why that should be the case.

9.   Of more concern is perhaps the second issue, namely the credibility  of
    the appellant's account that he had lived in Ethiopia since the age  of
    3.  The account is not found to  be  credible  or  consistent  for  the
    reasons as given in paragraph 29 of the determination.  Once again, few
    reasons are given for that finding.  Of more significance, however,  is
    that in his report Professor Aguilar sets out in some detail concerning
    the region around Ndagele Borana and why it was entirely plausible that
    the appellant and his mother could have resided there without documents
    for so long.  No acknowledgement is made in the  Judge's  determination
    as to that evidence as submitted.  Whether or not the Judge  agreed  or
    disagreed with the conclusions it was incumbent upon the Judge to  have
    considered that material in the overall assessment.  I  find  that  the
    omission to do so is significant.  It is also particularly  significant
    given that it was the findings as to where the appellant resided  which
    largely influenced the findings as to credibility.

10.  The third concern was  that  of  return.   The  Judge  found  that  the
    appellant had fabricated his evidence  and  that,  in  any  event,  the
    situation and circumstances have substantially changed  in  Somalia  so
    that he can return without difficulty.  It seems to me that that  is  a
    wholly inadequate approach to the issue of return.  The Upper  Tribunal
    in the case of MOJ, which is the leading case on the issue  of  return,
    in paragraph 407, stressed the need for a careful assessment of all the
    circumstances relating to the return of a person to Mogadishu  after  a
    period of absence.  A number of considerations  are  set  out  in  that
    judgment including the circumstances in Mogadishu before departure; the
    length of length of absence from Mogadishu; family or clan associations
    to call upon in Mogadishu; access to financial resources; prospects  of
    securing a livelihood; availability of remittances from abroad and  why
    the appellant could not secure financial support on return.

11.  Mr Tufan, on behalf of the respondent, invites me to find that to  some
    extent the findings as to clan membership and residence are  immaterial
    to the real issue of return.  He submits that there is  ample  material
    to establish that whether the appellant comes  from  Afgoye,  which  is
    near to Mogadishu, or Mogadishu itself, he could return.  He invites me
    to find that adequate consideration was given to the expert report  but
    in any event even if it were not such omissions would not  be  material
    to the inevitable outcome.

12.  It seems to me, however, that it is a  fundamental  principle  both  of
    fairness and of justice that  a  determination  sets  out  clearly  the
    reasons why a decision has been arrived at.   It  is  fundamental  also
    that all relevant material and evidence be taken into account  in  that
    decision-making process. Clearly, if the appellant  has  resided  since
    the age of 3 in Ethiopia that may be a relevant  factor  under  MOJ  to
    consider his the ability to return or relocate to Mogadishu.  There are
    a number of elements to his claim which merit proper consideration.

13.  I find that no such consideration was given.  In  the  circumstances  I
    find that to be a material error of law such that I set  it  aside  the
    decision to be remade.

14.  Having regard to the Senior President's Practice  Direction  I  note  a
    large volume of evidence to be relied upon and evidence  to  be  given.
    Credibility is live  as  are  a  number  of  other  issues.   In  those
    circumstances I deem that it  is  appropriate  for  the  matter  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for consideration de novo.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the decision is  set  aside  to  be
remade by a Judge of the First tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 31 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered making a fee award  and  have
decided to make no fee award at present as the appeal process has yet to  be
concluded.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 31 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD


