

                                    [pic]
ST
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/12387/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 30 March 2016                              |On 12 April 2016             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                     M E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Wass, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  who  appealed  against  the
    decision to refuse his asylum claim. His appeal  against  that  refusal
    was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Reid  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 19 January 2016.

 2. I maintain the anonymity direction made in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on
    18 February 2016 as follows:

         "2.      This was a very clear and careful decision  by  the  judge
             and I grant  permission  only  with  some  hesitation.   I  do
             however consider it arguable that the judge erred as  set  out
             at paragraph 8 grounds.  The judge finds that the  authorities
             may want to question  the  appellant  further,  but  when  she
             explains at [39] why it is that she considers the  appellant's
             fear of repetition of ill-treatment is not  well  founded  she
             does not return to her findings at [35] and explain why it  is
             that if the authorities questioned the  appellant  further  he
             would not be  at  risk  given  what  GJ  says  about  risk  in
             detention.

         3. I do not limit the grounds which may be argued given the anxious
             scrutiny which should be given to a case  where  a  judge  has
             found that an appellant with serious  mental  health  problems
             was ill-treated in  detention  only  just  over  a  year  ago.
             However paragraph 9, in effect the second part of the grounds,
             does not reflect the judge's findings entirely correctly.  The
             judge explained clearly  that  she  considered  the  appellant
             would not be perceived to be a threat because he had played  a
             role in the past and the information he had to give  was  only
             historic information.  On that basis he would not fall  within
             the risk categories  in  GJ.   It  may  be  that  there  is  a
             contradiction  between   the   judge's   findings   that   the
             authorities want to question the appellant  further  and  that
             they had already perceived him not to have a significant  role
             but even if this is the case it does not follow that the judge
             erred in her finding that the appellant would not be  at  risk
             rather than her  finding  that  the  authorities  retained  an
             interest in the appellant by wanting to question him further."

 4. Thus the appeal has come before me.

 5. Ms Wass, for the appellant, pointed out that the FTTJ,  having  largely
    accepted the appellant's account, had found that  the  authorities  may
    want to question him further on return [35].   She  further  noted  the
    FTTJ found [22] that the  appellant  had  important  information  which
    could still be of interest to the authorities for many years  to  come.
    The FTTJ had also accepted that the appellant's home had  been  visited
    by the authorities after his release from detention.   These  findings,
    she submitted, were at odds with the finding [39] that the  appellant's
    fear of repetition of detention and beatings was not well founded.  She
    submitted that the Judge's findings demonstrated a continuing  interest
    in the appellant on grounds similar to those leading to  his  detention
    and torture in December 2014.

 6. It was submitted that the FTTJ  focuses  [35]  on  the  notion  of  the
    appellant playing a significant role in the diaspora but fails to apply
    her earlier findings in her considerations at paragraph 39.  She  fails
    to set out  the  nature  and  form  of  the  questioning  he  may  face
    (according to her finding at [35]). Would it, for example,  take  place
    in detention?  If it had been the case  that  this  appellant  had  not
    previously been questioned and detained about a  specific  subject,  it
    might be possible that he did not meet any of the risk categories,  but
    the FTTJ had accepted the appellant had been detained  for  a  specific
    reason, questioned about a specific  subject  and  tortured.   Ms  Wass
    submitted, further,  that  the  FTTJ  accepted  that  the  authorities'
    concern over buried weapons had not gone away with the passage of  time
    (paragraph 22). The appellant's case is that the FTTJ  failed  to  take
    into account her background findings when reaching her decision on  the
    risk on return, particularly given her acceptance  that  the  appellant
    had previously been detained and tortured for specific reasons. If  she
    accepted that he may be questioned on return, why did she not also find
    that he would be detained again and mistreated?

 7. I also take into account the ground (albeit no reference  was  made  to
    this in Ms Wass' oral submissions) that an appellant's ability to leave
    Sri Lanka "without difficulty was not probative of a  lack  of  adverse
    interest in the individual" (paragraph 170 of GJ and others (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)).

 8. Ms Wass submitted that, given the FTTJ's findings,  the  appellant  had
    demonstrated he would be perceived  by  the  authorities  as  having  a
    significant role (paragraph (7)(a) of the headnote to GJ).

 9. I invited Ms Wass to clarify the  link  between  being  questioned  and
    detention,  given  that,  according  to  GJ,  all  asylum  seekers  are
    questioned on return, whether at the airport or subsequently  at  their
    home address.  Ms Wass said that the appellant's previous experience of
    questioning in detention suggested  that  he  would  be  questioned  in
    detention on return.  She accepted that not all those who were arrested
    and detained fell within the GJ risk categories but submitted that  the
    appellant, given his background, had demonstrated that his former  role
    as a driver would lead the authorities to  perceive  him  as  having  a
    significant role. She relied on the findings at paragraph 22 to support
    this submission. It is also relevant that, according  to  sub-paragraph
    (4) of the headnote to GJ, detention gives rise a  real  risk  of  harm
    requiring international protection.

10. Mr Duffy relied on the Rule 24 response to the effect that the FTTJ had
    explained clearly that the appellant would not be  at  risk  on  return
    because of his past role or his having given  historic  information  to
    the authorities; he did not fall within the risk categories within  GJ.
    The FTTJ had given adequate reasons for her findings. Read as a  whole,
    he submitted, the decision was clear and  without  material  errors  of
    law. With regard to paragraph 35 and the finding that the appellant may
    be asked questions on return, GJ suggested that  all  forced  returnees
    were questioned on return either at the airport or in their home  area.
    He submitted that this was an attempt by the appellant to re-argue  the
    matter.

11. The nub of this appeal is the  suggestion  that  there  is  a  conflict
    between the FTTJ's finding at paragraph 35 that  the  authorities  "may
    want to question him further" and the finding at paragraph 39 that  the
    appellant has given information to the authorities,  the  lack  of  any
    arrest warrant and his release without charge, and the appellant's fear
    of further  mistreatment  is  not  well  founded.  The  FTTJ  makes  no
    reference in her findings at paragraph 39 to  the  possibility  of  the
    appellant  being  questioned  further.  However,  this  is  a  detailed
    decision and rerasons which should be read as a  whole.   Even  if  the
    FTTJ  had  referred  in  her  findings  [39]  to  the  appellant  being
    questioned further, she would only have reiterated her earlier findings
    [33] to the effect that the "two visits [to the appellant's home] since
    the original detention in December 2014 is [sic] consistent with making
    further enquiries and wanting to speak to the Appellant further, rather
    than the Appellant having got out of custody on payment of a bribe  and
    designated an  escapee  or  being  of  real  interest"  (my  emphasis).
    Furthermore, GJ makes it clear (paragraph 169) that it is  accepted  by
    the respondent that forced returnees are visited by the police  or  CID
    in the days following return.  Such visits do not necessarily  lead  to
    detention (a risk category per GJ).  Similarly, the mere  fact  of  the
    possibility of further questioning, without more, given the lack of  an
    arrest warrant and designation as an escapee and  the  release  of  the
    appellant without charge would not put the appellant in one of  the  GJ
    risk  categories.   Whilst  the  appellant  has  a  history  of   being
    questioned and detained in the past, the FTTJ  gives  adequate  reasons
    for considering similar ill-treatment would not occur again: he was not
    of real interest to the authorities [33].

12. It is submitted that the appellant, being a former driver for the  LTTE
    and a person who has been questioned and seriously beaten in  detention
    in December 2014 would be perceived by  the  authorities  as  having  a
    "significant role in post conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora
    and/or a renewal of hostilities".  I do not accept this submission. The
    reason for interest in the appellant in December 2014  was  related  to
    historical matters.  It is submitted that the findings at paragraph  22
    are that the appellant has "important information which could still  be
    of interest to the authorities for many years  to  some  [sic]  and  in
    particular during 2014 in the light of concerns about the  re-emergence
    of the LTTE ..."   However,  this  finding  was  made  in  relation  to
    consideration of the appellant's claim to have been  a  tractor  driver
    for the LTTE in around January 2007 and of interest to the  authorities
    in December 2014 when he claimed to have been detained  and  questioned
    with regard to the location of arms.  This is not a finding with regard
    to the appellant's claim that he continued to be of adverse interest at
    the date  of  hearing.   Furthermore,  as  the  FTTJ  makes  clear,  on
    reasonable grounds, she finds that the authorities' interest  in  these
    historical matters has been addressed as a result  of  the  appellant's
    interrogation in detention in December 2014.

13. The FTTJ has set out in detail her findings as to why the appellant has
    not demonstrated he falls within any of the risk categories  identified
    in GJ.  She notes [34] that the context for the categories  is  whether
    the individual is a destabilising threat in post conflict Sri Lanka per
    GJ paragraph 311. There is no challenge to this  statement.   The  FTTJ
    has reasoned carefully her  finding  that  the  appellant  is  not,  as
    claimed, perceived to have a significant role  in  post-conflict  Tamil
    separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal  of  hostilities.   She
    has considered carefully the appellant's circumstances,  including  the
    possibility of being questioned by the authorities and her reasoning is
    unassailable, based as it is on her earlier findings.   The  mere  fact
    the appellant has been detained in the past  and  provided  information
    about the location of arms caches is not sufficient  to  demonstrate  a
    current involvement in post-conflict Tamil separatism, even taking into
    account the FTTJ's finding that he may be questioned again  on  return.
    It does not follow that, because he was interrogated  in  detention  in
    the past, he would  be  detained  again  in  connection  with  "further
    enquiries" in circumstances where he is not of "real interest"  to  the
    authorities [33].

14. Whilst the FTTJ does not specifically address the issue of  whether  or
    not questioning would take place in detention (thus putting him at risk
    on return, per GJ), it is implicit that this  would  not  be  the  case
    because the FTTJ finds [33] that the visits to the appellant's home are
    for the purpose of "making further enquiries and wanting  to  speak  to
    the Appellant further, rather than the  appellant  having  got  out  of
    custody on payment of a bribe and designated an  escapee  or  being  of
    real interest." The FTTJ gives  adequate  reasons  for  concluding  the
    appellant is no longer of adverse  interest  to  the  authorities.  The
    FTTJ's findings are not in conflict with paragraph 325 of GJ:

           "It  is  not  established  that  previous  LTTE  connections  or
           sympathies (whether direct or familial), are  perceived  by  the
           GOSL as indicating now that an individual poses a  destabilising
           threat in post-conflict Sri Lanka; as  indicated  in  the  UNCHR
           Guidelines and in the evidence before us, the  extent  to  which
           past links predict future adverse interest will always  be  fact
           specific."

15. The FTTJ's findings with regard to the risk on  return  are  adequately
    reasoned and set out in paragraph  39.   She  takes  into  account  the
    appellant's previous  adverse  involvement  with  the  authorities  and
    whilst she does not specifically mention that they may want to question
    him, given her earlier findings [33] that this would be in relation  to
    general enquiries and not on account of his "being of  real  interest",
    her failure to mention this in paragraph 39 is  nto a material error.

16. I give due regard to the guidance in GJ with regard to the ability of a
    person of adverse interest to leave Sri Lanka  without  coming  to  the
    attention of the authorities. However, the FTTJ has made  it  clear  in
    her decision that she does not find  the  appellant's  evidence  to  be
    wholly credible (paragraphs 30 and 32, for example). It was  thus  open
    to her to draw the conclusions she did about  his  departure  from  Sri
    Lanka.

17. For these reasons, I find there is no material  error  of  law  in  the
    FTTJ's decision.

Decision

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

19. I do not set aside the decision.



Signed           A M Black                   Date 1 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed           A M Black                   Date 1 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

