
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12593/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 06 October 2016                       |On 10 October 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                     MOHAMMED ABDULAI aka MADI QUEDRAOGO
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Tampuri, Counsel, instructed by Tamsons Legal
                    Services
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Clarke  whose  promulgated  decision  of  11  August  2016
        dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision
        of 07 September 2015 refusing his protection (asylum) claim.


     2. The  Appellant  claims  to  be  a  national  of  Bukina  Faso.  The
        Respondent did not accept this claim and believed the Appellant  to
        be a national of Ghana. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  concluded
        that the Appellant was a national of Ghana despite the  Appellant's
        production of  an  expired  Burkina  Faso  passport  and  ID  card.
        Permission was granted to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis
        that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  failed  to  make  findings  on
        whether the original Burkina Faso passport was a genuine  document,
        by finding that the Appellant  failed  to  produce  any  linguistic
        evidence to support his claim to be from Burkina Faso when he  gave
        his evidence in the Mossi language, in finding that  the  Appellant
        could have tried to renew  his  passport  through  a  Burkina  Faso
        embassy  in  London  when  there  was  no  such  embassy,  and   by
        misunderstanding the evidence given by the Appellant as to who sent
        him the Burkina Faso passport (whether it was the  agent  who  sent
        the passport or the Appellant's family).


     3. The following is not in dispute. The Appellant (in the identity  of
        Mohammed Abdulai) applied for a six-month visit visa at the British
        High Commission in Ghana on 24  April  2012.  In  support  of  this
        application the  Appellant  offered  a  Ghanaian  passport  in  the
        identity of Mohammed Abdulai.  The  Appellant  entered  the  United
        Kingdom on 1 August 2012. The visa that  had  been  issued  to  him
        expired on  2  November  2012.  The  Appellant  overstayed.  On  14
        February  2015  the  Appellant  was  encountered  by  police.   The
        following day he was served with papers notifying him of his status
        as an overstayer. On 20 March 2015 the Appellant  formally  claimed
        asylum. In  a  decision  dated  7  September  2015  the  Respondent
        rejected the Appellant's asylum claim.  The  Respondent  noted  the
        Appellant's claim to be Madi Ouedraogo, a national of Burkina Faso,
        and that he had provided a copy of a Burkina Faso passport in  this
        identity. The Respondent however attached significant weight to the
        application for entry clearance as a visitor made by the  Appellant
        using the Ghanaian passport and the evidence that was  produced  in
        support of this application which  included  bank  statements,  his
        birth  certificate,  his  daughter's  birth  certificate,  and  his
        marriage certificate, all in the identity of  Mohammed  Abdulai,  a
        Ghanaian national. The Respondent retained a copy of  the  Ghanaian
        passport and noted that the Appellant had managed to exit  Ghanaian
        passport control and cleared  UK  immigration  control  using  this
        document. The Respondent went on to reject  the  substance  of  the
        Appellant's asylum claim on the basis that it contained a number of
        inconsistencies.

     4. The First-tier Tribunal comprehensively disbelieved the Appellant's
        account. The judge drew an adverse inference under section 8 of the
        Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act  2004  due
        to the Appellant's delay in claiming asylum. The judge noted  that,
        at the hearing, the Appellant produced  an  original  Burkina  Faso
        passport which was issued on 23 January 2003 and which  expired  on
        22 January 2008.


     5. At [55] and  [57]  the  judge  recorded  the  Appellant  as  having
        initially stated that he obtained the Burkina  Faso  passport  from
        the agent, Burger Osei, who had brought him to the United  Kingdom.
        The Appellant stated that he had asked Burger to send him back  the
        passport so that he would have proof of his  identity  if  he  were
        ever stopped on the streets  of  Britain.  Having  noted  that  the
        sender's name on the envelope in which the  Appellant  claimed  the
        passport was sent was not that of the agent, the judge stated  that
        the Appellant changed his evidence claiming that the agent told him
        he would speak to the Appellant's family and get them to  send  him
        proof of identity. The Appellant's evidence  was  that  his  mother
        sent him the passport and an accompanying letter. However the  name
        on the envelope was not that of the Appellant's mother.  The  judge
        records that the  Appellant  was  unable  to  give  a  satisfactory
        explanation as to the identity of the sender. The judge found  that
        the Appellant's inability to give a satisfactory explanation as  to
        the identity of the sender and the inconsistency  in  his  evidence
        undermined his credibility.

     6. The grounds contend that the Appellant never  asked  the  agent  to
        send him back his  Burkina  Faso  passport.  This  however  is  not
        reflected in the judge's record of proceedings. On the basis of the
        oral evidence initially given by the Appellant at his  hearing  the
        judge was rationally entitled to conclude that  the  Appellant  had
        given contradictory evidence. Moreover, the  judge  was  rationally
        entitled to hold against the Appellant his  inability  to  offer  a
        satisfactory explanation as to the identity of the  sender  of  the
        passport.


     7. At [58] the judge noted that the Appellant failed  to  produce  any
        linguistic evidence to support his claim that he was  from  Burkina
        Faso. The grounds, as expanded upon by  Mr  Tampuri  at  the  Upper
        Tribunal hearing, asserted that the Appellant gave his evidence  in
        the Mossi language and that Mossi was a language spoken in  Burkina
        Faso but not in Ghana. The difficulty with this submission is  that
        there was no evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  that
        Mossi was a language not  spoken  in  Ghana,  and  only  spoken  in
        Burkina Faso. Nor does it appear that any submissions were made  to
        this effect. In the circumstances the First-tier Tribunal judge was
        undoubtedly entitled to comment on  the  absence  of  any  specific
        linguistic evidence.


     8. At [60] the judge drew an adverse inference  from  the  Appellant's
        admission that he had not tried to renew the Burkina Faso  passport
        through the embassy in London given that it had  expired  in  2008.
        The judge stated, "If the  Appellant  was  genuinely  from  Burkina
        Faso, I find that he would have gone to the embassy and renewed his
        passport to prove that his fellow  citizens  accepted  his  claimed
        nationality. I do not find the Appellant's evidence that he had  no
        plans to travel and did not know where the  embassy  was  to  be  a
        persuasive answer. The Appellant is living at the mosque and  could
        have asked someone at the mosque to tell him where the embassy  was
        located. Alternatively, having secured himself  representation  for
        the hearing, he could have asked his representatives to assist  him
        in renewing his passport or getting proof from his embassy that  he
        was a national of Burkina Faso. The fact that the Appellant  failed
        to do so significantly undermines the credibility of his claim that
        he is a national of Burkina Faso. I also attach weight to the  fact
        that the Appellant has not gone to the Ghanaian embassy. If he  was
        not Ghanaian he could have asked the Ghanaian  embassy  to  confirm
        such a claim."


     9. The grounds contend  that  the  judge  fell  into  legal  error  by
        assuming that there was a  Burkina  Faso  embassy  in  London.  The
        grounds assert that the nearest Burkina Faso embassy is in fact  in
        Brussels. I am prepared to accept that  the  nearest  Burkina  Faso
        embassy is in Brussels and that judge wrongly  assumed  that  there
        was an embassy in London. This mistake however fails  to  undermine
        the principle reasoning  behind  the  judge's  adverse  credibility
        finding. The judge found it incredible that the Appellant failed to
        take reasonable steps to substantiate  his  claim  that  he  was  a
        national of Burkina Faso. It was reasonably open to  the  Appellant
        to have either sought to renew the  Burkina  Faso  passport,  which
        would have gone some way to supporting his claimed nationality,  or
        to have  approached  the  relevant  Burkina  Faso  authorities  and
        requested confirmation that he was a national of that  country.  Mr
        Tampuri submitted that the Appellant only received the Burkino Faso
        passport a short time before the appeal hearing but he  was  unable
        to  provide  any  specific  dates.  In  any  event,  there  was  no
        application before the First-tier Tribunal to adjourn  the  hearing
        to enable this evidence to be obtained. The Appellant  was  legally
        represented and, as the judge noted, his representatives would have
        been in a position to assist  the  Appellant  in  his  attempts  to
        either  renew  his  passport  or  obtain  other  confirmation.  The
        evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  indicated   that   the
        Appellant had no idea as to the location  of  the  nearest  Burkina
        Faso embassy indicated that he failed to take any reasonable  steps
        to confirm the authenticity of the Burkina Faso  passport.  In  the
        circumstances it was open to the judge to find  that  such  failure
        undermined the Appellant's credibility and the reliance  the  judge
        was able to place on the proffered passport.


    10. Mr Tampuri submitted that the  judge  failed  to  make  a  specific
        finding as to the authenticity of the  Burkina  Faso  passport  and
        identity card. In so doing it was submitted that the  judge  failed
        to apply the principles enunciated in the  case  of  Tanveer  Ahmed
        [2002] Imm AR 318. Having holistic regard to the judge's  decision,
        read as a whole, I cannot accept the submission. At [62] the  judge
        noted that the Appellant had travelled to the United Kingdom  on  a
        Ghanaian  passport.  The  judge  stated,  "Given   my   credibility
        findings,  I'm  not  persuaded  to  the  lower  standard  that  the
        Appellant, despite providing an expired Burkina Faso passport is  a
        national of Burkina Faso. Taking the evidence in the round, I  come
        to the conclusion  that  the  weight  of  evidence  points  to  the
        Appellant being a Ghanaian national and I reject his claim that  he
        is a national of Burkina Faso." It  is  necessarily  implicit  from
        this paragraph that the judge found the Burkina Faso passport to be
        an unreliable document. It was for the Appellant to prove,  on  the
        lower standard of proof, that he was a national  of  Burkina  Faso.
        The adverse credibility findings referred to by the judge  included
        the Appellant's delay  in  claiming  asylum,  the  failure  by  the
        Appellant to confirm his asserted nationality  by  approaching  the
        Burkina Faso  authorities,  the  inconsistencies  in  his  evidence
        relating to how the passport was sent to him, the finding that  the
        Appellant had  been  evasive  and  vague  concerning  the  Ghanaian
        passport he used (at [57]), and the fact  that  the  Appellant  had
        been able to obtain entry clearance by providing various  forms  of
        ID suggesting he was from Ghana and by  being  able  to  enter  the
        United Kingdom using a Ghanaian passport. I am not  persuaded  that
        the judge was not rationally entitled to attach  little  weight  to
        the Burkina Faso passport provided by the Appellant for the reasons
        given.


    11. In any event, from [62] to [70] and [72] to [74] the judge gives  a
        number  of  unchallenged  reasons  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's
        account of what allegedly happened to  him  in  Burkina  Faso.  The
        judge gave clear reasons for concluding that the  Appellant's  core
        account contained a number of significant  consistencies  and  that
        other aspects of his core account were simply not plausible.

    12.   For  these  reasons  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the  First-tier
        Tribunal's decision contains any material errors of law.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make a  material  error  of  law.  The
Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum               07 October 2016


