
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12732/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 November 2017                           |On 8 December 2017            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                    N A K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Smyth, Counsel, instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors (Dover)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Zahed to dismiss  his  appeal  against  refusal  to
    grant him asylum and leave to remain on Article 3 grounds.   The  judge
    also dismissed the humanitarian protection appeal.

2.   The judge allowed the appellant's appeal under Article 8 of  the  ECHR.
    The respondent has not appealed this decision.  Indeed, I was  told  by
    Mr Smyth that the appellant has been  granted  discretionary  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom until 2020.

3.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Afghanistan  born  on  [  ]  1997.   He
    arrived in the UK on 25 March 2011 as an illegal entrant.   He  claimed
    asylum on 6 April 2011.  This was refused on 22 June 2011  and  he  was
    granted discretionary leave as an  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  child
    until 20 June 2014.  He made an in time application for  further  leave
    on 16 June 2014.  This was refused on 28 September 2015.

4.   The judge found the appellant to be an  honest  and  credible  witness.
    The appellant stated in evidence that he could not return to  his  home
    village in Baghlan Province because there was always fighting going on.
     Being returned to Afghanistan from Europe would put him at great risk.
     They would want him to attend the mosque five times a day and he would
    not do that and that would put him at risk.

5.   The appellant stated that his brother does not want him  to  live  with
    them because he has become too westernised.  His brother does not  like
    the way he looks and will not let the appellant see his children as  he
    thinks the appellant will corrupt them.

6.   The judge said that he  had  seen  the  Social  Services'  record  that
    unfortunately shows that the appellant had been trying to live with his
    brother from the start of being under the care of Social  Services  but
    for various reasons Social Services could  not  make  it  happen.   The
    judge found that this led to the  appellant  adopting  his  westernised
    culture and having a different attitude  towards  the  Muslim  religion
    from his brother.  The judge said he had  read  the  brother's  witness
    statement, which corroborated the appellant's evidence, as well as  the
    Social Services' record.  In light of the evidence the  judge  accepted
    that the appellant has been westernised where he  does  not  pray  five
    times a day and in  fact  rarely  goes  to  the  mosque  and  where  he
    associates with women his age.

7.   The judge considered the background evidence of  the  appellant's  home
    village in Baghlan Province.  The evidence showed that the Taliban  are
    in control in the appellant's home area and enforce their beliefs.  The
    judge found that the appellant  would  be  targeted  with  his  western
    values and he found that there was a real possibility that the  Taliban
    would forcibly recruit the appellant, who was just 20 years of age.  He
    found, taking all the evidence into account, that the appellant  has  a
    well-founded fear of persecution in his home village.

8.    The   judge   then   considered   whether,   given   the   appellant's
    characteristics and  his  circumstances,  he  could  avail  himself  of
    internal relocation and in particular live in Kabul.  The judge  stated
    that the Taliban does not control Kabul.  The appellant is  a  20  year
    old, intelligent, healthy male.  The judge accepted that the  appellant
    has no family in Kabul or any other part  of  Afghanistan  and  he  was
    prepared to accept to the lower standard that his uncle was missing and
    could not be traced.  Thus the appellant would be a healthy single male
    with no family support, who is able to speak English but is  also  able
    to speak in Dari, would be returning from  Europe  and  has  a  western
    attitude.

9.   The judge found as follows:

         "24. In applying the case of AK and taking into  account  the  fact
             that the UNHCR considers  exceptions  to  the  requirement  of
             external support are single able-bodied men without identified
             specific vulnerabilities.  I find that  the  appellant  is  an
             able-bodied intelligent young man.  I note that he has  picked
             up English quite quickly and find that the appellant  will  be
             able to find work in Kabul.


         25.  I find that the appellant has not changed his religion  or  is
             agnostic.  I find that the appellant still is a Muslim but  is
             not a devout practising Muslim.  It is not that the  appellant
             never goes to the mosque his evidence was that he  goes  every
             three to four months.  I do not find that would cause  him  to
             have difficulties in Kabul.  I find that the appellant will be
             able to avail himself of internal relocation and will be  able
             to live and work in Kabul.  I dismiss the  appellant's  asylum
             claim."

10.  In allowing the appellant's appeal under  article  8  ECHR,  the  judge
    found as follows:

         "29. I find that the appellant has made a life for himself here and
             find that he has just for  the  very  first  time  found  some
             stability in his life.  I find, given that I have  found  that
             he does have a well-founded fear of  persecution  in  his  own
             home village and thus a genuine asylum seeker, that  it  would
             be a disproportionate interference to the  legitimate  aim  of
             the public  interest  of  immigration  control  in  this  fact
             specific appellant's case.  I find that taking the appellant's
             whole history into account that removing him to Kabul to start
             life again without any family or community support  where  the
             appellant has finally obtained  some  stability  in  his  life
             would be a breach of the  United  Kingdom's  obligation  under
             Article 8.  I allow his Article 8 private life appeal."

11.  Mr Smyth submitted that the judge allowed  the  appellant's  Article  8
    appeal for reasons that included the fact that  he  has  no  family  in
    Kabul and that it would be disproportionate for him to begin life again
    in Kabul.  Yet, the judge dismissed the appellant's  asylum  appeal  on
    internal relocation grounds.  He submitted that internal relocation has
    a lower test.  It is possible that the  judge  misunderstood  that  the
    appellant does not have to be at risk of persecution in  the  whole  of
    Afghanistan.  In the light of the unchallenged findings in  respect  of
    the Article 8 appeal, the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds  can  be
    granted on the basis that he cannot internally relocate to Kabul.

12.  Mr Smyth submitted that having accepted that the appellant was at  risk
    in his home area because he has  adopted  a  western  culture  and  has
    different values, in particular towards  women  and  religion,  it  was
    irrational for the judge to find that there was no such risk in  Kabul.
    Mr Smyth referred to a UNHCR report on the Protection Needs  of  Asylum
    Seekers from Afghanistan.  At page 104  of  the  report  is  a  section
    entitled j) Individuals perceived as "westernised".  The report states:

         "AGEs [Anti-Government Elements] reportedly target individuals  who
         are perceived to have adopted values and/or appearances  associated
         with western countries,  due  to  their  imputed  support  for  the
         government and the international community.  There are  reports  of
         individuals  who  returned  from  western  countries  having   been
         tortured or killed by AGEs on the  grounds  that  they  had  become
         'foreigners' or that they were spies for a western country.  ..."

13.  Mr Smyth submitted that there is nothing  to  say  that  such  risk  is
    confined to Taliban-controlled areas.  He  said  the  test  is  whether
    there is a durable internal flight alternative.  The judge should  have
    considered whether the Taliban have a presence in Kabul and in light of
    the number of incidents that have been widely reported,  he  would  say
    that the Taliban have a presence in Kabul.

14.  Mr Smyth submitted that the judge accepted that the  appellant  has  no
    family  or  connections  in  Afghanistan.   The  After  Return   Report
    highlights the fact that the most successful approach to  finding  work
    for young returnees has been through personal connections.  He referred
    to the report by the Bureau of  Investigative  Journalism,  which  says
    that failed asylum seekers who are returned to Afghanistan  are  viewed
    with suspicion with no family connections or resources to fall back on.
     In the light of this evidence Mr  Smyth  submitted  that  the  judge's
    findings on internal flight relocation are unsustainable.   Given  that
    the judge found that the appellant's human rights would be breached  if
    he were returned to Kabul, the judge's conclusion that it would not  be
    unduly harsh to internally  relocate  to  Kabul  was  irrational.   The
    logical conclusion is that the appeal must be allowed.

15.  Mr Kotas submitted in respect of the "westernisation"  point  that  the
    grounds are a disagreement with the judge's findings that the appellant
    could relocate to Kabul, which is not controlled by  the  Taliban.   He
    submitted that the evidence from the UNHCR report relied on by Mr Smyth
    comes nowhere near to stating that anyone returned to Afghanistan/Kabul
    is at risk of persecution because they have become westernised.

16.  Mr Kotas submitted that there are different tests for consideration  of
    the appellant's  appeal  under  Article  8  and  the  consideration  of
    internal flight relocation.  He relied on paragraph 7 of Januzi v. SSHD
    & Ors [2006] UKHL 5 where the House of Lords as it  then  was  held  as
    follows:

         "47. The question where the issue of internal relocation is  raised
             can, then, be defined quite simply.  As Linden JA  put  it  in
             Thirunavukkarasu  v  Canada  (Minister   of   Employment   and
             Immigration) (1993) 109 DLR (4th) 682, 687, it is  whether  it
             would be unduly harsh  to  expect  a  claimant  who  is  being
             persecuted for a Convention reason in one part of his  country
             to move to a less hostile part before seeking  refugee  status
             abroad. The words 'unduly harsh' set the standard that must be
             met for this to be regarded as unreasonable.  If the  claimant
             can  live  a  relatively  normal  life  there  judged  by  the
             standards  that  prevail  in  his   country   of   nationality
             generally, and if he can reach the less hostile  part  without
             undue  hardship  or  undue  difficulty,   it   will   not   be
             unreasonable to expect him to move there."

17.  Mr Kotas submitted that the appellant has made a  comparative  analysis
    of his circumstances in the UK with his circumstances  in  Afghanistan.
    In the Article 8 appeal the judge allowed it because the appellant  has
    been in the UK for a number of years.  That does not mean that he is  a
    refugee.  The judge found that there would be a breach of  his  private
    life if he were to return to Afghanistan and that meant that  it  would
    be unduly harsh for him to be returned there.

18.  Mr Kotas submitted that Mr Smyth was seeking to  relitigate  the  issue
    concerning the appellant's lack of connections in Afghanistan.  He said
    the appellant can obtain employment on his return to Kabul.

Findings

19.  I find that having conducted a holistic  analysis  of  the  appellant's
    evidence, the judge erred in law in hiving off the appellant's  Article
    8  claim  as  separate  from  his  consideration  of  internal   flight
    relocation.  I accept that the test for Article 8 is different from the
    test in internal relocation.   The  test  for  internal  relocation  is
    whether it would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant to relocate to
    another part of Afghanistan, in this case Kabul.  It  is  not  disputed
    that the Taliban does not control Kabul. The Taliban does however  have
    a presence in Kabul. Nevertheless,  from  the  evidence  in  the  UNHCR
    report and the Bureau of Investigative Journalism, for the appellant to
    be able to settle within Kabul he will need to draw on the  connections
    and resources that would be available to him in Kabul.

20.  The judge found at paragraph 29 in respect  of  the  Article  8  appeal
    that it would be  a  breach  of  the  UK's  obligation  to  remove  the
    appellant to Kabul to start life again without any family or  community
    support.  The objective evidence indicates that to find  employment  in
    Kabul, the appellant will need  the  support  of  the  family  and  the
    community.  The judge clearly found that the appellant  does  not  have
    any family in Afghanistan. Consequently, I find  that  the  appellant's
    health, youthfulness and ability to speak English will not  assist  him
    to find employment.

21.  I accept Mr. Kotas' submission that  the  grounds  in  respect  of  the
    "westernisation" point are a disagreement with  the  judge's  findings.
    However, in the light of Januzi, the appellant should be able to live a
    relatively normal life in Kabul without undue hardship and in light  of
    other relevant case law, internal relocation has to be durable.  I find
    that without the support of family and connections, the appellant  will
    not be able to find employment and accommodation which he will need  to
    assist him to settle down to a relatively normal life in Kabul.

22.  I find that  the  judge  failed  to  apply  the  correct  test  to  his
    assessment of internal relocation. I find that his decision on internal
    relocation was irrational in the light of the  findings  he  made  when
    allowing the appellant's appeal under Article 8.  I accept  Mr  Smyth's
    submission that the only conclusion is that the appellant's  appeal  in
    respect of the internal relocation issue must be allowed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date:  8 December 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

