
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12849/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd November 2016                          |On 22nd December 2016         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                             Mr SHEIRA MOHAMMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharif, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq  born  on  1st  January  1996.   The
    Appellant left Iraq during 2014, travelled  through  France  and  other
    unknown countries before arriving in the UK on 1st January  2015.   The
    Appellant's claim for asylum  was  based  on  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Iraq on the basis of his fearing ISIS  and  the  country
    situation in Iraq.  His application was refused  by  the  Secretary  of
    State by Notice of Refusal dated 9th October 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Gribble sitting at Birmingham on 3rd  June  2016.   In  a
    decision and reasons dated 29th June 2016 the  Appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 13th July 2016 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal.
    Those grounds contended that there was a material misdirection  in  law
    due to the failure of the judge to apply the country guidance authority
    of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT  00544  (IAC)  and  that  the
    judge had failed to consider paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.



 4. On 25th July 2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Froom  granted
    permission to appeal.  In very short grounds  in  granting  permission,
    Judge Froom granted permission on the basis that there was a  potential
    failure to apply the country  guidance  authority  of  AA  but  refused
    permission on the argument of failure to consider paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The judge found it was arguable that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge did not apply the detail of the country guidance in
    deciding the Appellant had a viable internal flight alternative to  the
    Independent Kurdistan Region  and  that  there  was,  for  example,  no
    consideration of the safety of return there from Baghdad.

 5. On 3rd August 2016 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  Those grounds noted that  in  his  consideration
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  made  findings  on  the  background
    information and the Appellant's own evidence between paragraphs 24  and
    29 and had given reasons for finding that the Appellant does not have a
    well-founded fear of persecution.  Further, at paragraph 28, the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge gave specific reasons  for  finding  the  Appellant
    would be able to gain entry to the IKR.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    solicitor, Mr Sharif.   The  Respondent  appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr McVeety.  I noted that the Appellant  personally
    had failed to attend.  The Appellant lived locally to the Tribunal.   I
    enquired of Mr Sharif as to why the Appellant was  not  in  attendance.
    Mr Sharif indicated that he had expected  him  and  had  contacted  the
    Appellant but that the Appellant advised him that he had  other  things
    to do.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr Sharif relies on the Grounds of Appeal.  He points out that when the
    determination is looked at it is  brief  and  that  there  are  limited
    findings of fact.  He submits  that  the  judge  failed  to  apply  the
    country guidance authority of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT
    00544 (IAC) and the factual matrix when assessing the persecutory  risk
    the Appellant would face on return.  He points out the judge notes  and
    accepts that the Appellant is Kurdish from Jalawla, that he  fled  that
    area when ISIS took over the town, and that the  Appellant  spent  some
    time in a refugee camp run by the Kurdish authorities and lost  contact
    with his family.  He submits that Jalawla is found  within  the  Diyala
    governorate and, as such, is part of the contested  area  of  Iraq  and
    that the judge had failed to make an assessment whether  the  Appellant
    was at risk of persecution in  his  home  area  and  to  make  findings
    regarding this.  Further, he submits that removal would be  to  Baghdad
    and that the judge failed to consider the risk that the Appellant would
    be exposed to on such removal and the difficulty of travelling back  to
    the Kurdish Region from Baghdad.

 8. In response Mr McVeety takes me to the decision.  He acknowledges  that
    the decision is relatively brief but that does not  mean  it  discloses
    any material errors of law.  He points out  that  the  judge  has  made
    extensive reference to the lead authority of AA and at paragraph 26 has
    noted  the  current  country  guidance  relating  to  people  from  the
    contested area of Iraq.  Consequently he points out the judge starts on
    the correct basis and that whilst Grounds 1  and  2  submitted  by  the
    Appellant overlap, he emphasises that the country guidance authority is
    fact sensitive and that the judge has looked in detail at paragraph  27
    as to whether the Appellant could relocate to the IKR  and  then  given
    reasons at paragraph 28 as to why he would be able to gain entry to the
    IKR.  Mr McVeety even reminds me that at paragraph  21  the  judge  had
    specifically   invited   the   Appellant's   representative   to   make
    representations relating to the Appellant's ability to relocate to  the
    IKR.

 9. He further indicates that the judge noted there  was  no  evidence  put
    forward as to why the Appellant could not relocate.  He reminds me that
    the burden of proof, albeit on a lower standard, is  on  the  Appellant
    and that the judge decided the evidence on that  that  was  put  before
    him.  He submits there was no evidence  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    unable to travel to Irbil or would be unable to survive on his  own  in
    Baghdad.  He contends there is no material error of law in the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and asked me to dismiss the appeal.

10. In brief response Mr Sharif  points  out  that  there  was  a  detailed
    skeleton argument available before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  I
    am referred to this and have considered it.  He submits the  judge  was
    duty bound to consider all the evidence including the skeleton argument
    and that the judge had simply bypassed some of the Appellant's account.



The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

13. The thrust of the Grounds of Appeal and the submissions  of  Mr  Sharif
    are that the judge failed to apply the country guidance authority of AA
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544  (IAC)  in  assessing  the
    persecutory risk the Appellant faced  on  return  to  Iraq.   With  the
    greatest of  respect  to  the  legal  representatives  acting  for  the
    Respondent that just is  not  the  case.   The  starting  point  is  an
    analysis of the judge's decision.  At paragraph 21 he had  specifically
    asked, and gleaned a response from the Appellant's representative  with
    regard to the issue of relocation to the IKR.  The judge has gone on at
    paragraph 22 to  note  the  authorities  and  the  country  information
    guidance and has then gone on to consider them in his findings of fact.
     He has noted the Appellant's position and on the non-disputed facts at
    paragraph 27 found that relocation to  the  IKR  would  not  be  unduly
    harsh.  He has made further  findings  of  fact  at  paragraph  28  and
    concluded that there  are  no  Article  15(c)  risks  in  the  IKR  and
    therefore the Appellant cannot qualify for humanitarian  protection  on
    that ground further to AA.

14. It is not necessary for a decision to be lengthy providing it addresses
    the salient issues.  This is a judge who has identified immediately the
    issues outstanding in this case and has addressed them.   Full  reasons
    for his findings have been set out and it is clear  that  he  has  been
    aware of, and applied, country guidance.   In  such  circumstances  the
    appeal amounts to little more than an argument of disagreement with the
    findings and application by the judge.  For all the above reasons  this
    is a decision that discloses no material  error  of  law  and  in  such
    circumstances the Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law.  The  appeal  is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 22/12/2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
