
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12717/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On : 11 August 2016                       |On : 15 August 2016              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    [h m]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Chirico, instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Iran born on [ ]  1987.  He  arrived  in  the
United Kingdom on 31 July 2014 and was detained by the  police  getting  out
of the back of a lorry. He  was  served  with  removal  papers  and  claimed
asylum. His claim was refused on 24  September  2015.  He  appealed  against
that decision and his appeal was heard before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
was dismissed in a determination promulgated on 25 May 2016.  Permission  to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 11 July 2016.

The appellant claims to have been arrested, imprisoned  and  ill-treated  in
Iran after attending an anti-government demonstration in December  2009,  on
the Ashura holy day, and to have been released after six months.  He  claims
to be wanted by the authorities following his failure  to  attend  court  on
two occasions after his release. He claims to have left  Iran  in  2011  (or
2012) and to have travelled to Iraq and then  Turkey,  where  he  spent  two
years,  before  travelling  to  Italy,  France  and  then  the  UK.  He  was
interviewed about his claim twice, the second time after admitting  to  have
been issued with a passport and obtaining a Schengen Visa from  the  Italian
Embassy in Tehran in  July  2014,  after  the  Home  Office  discovered  his
passport, and after initially failing to mention  having  returned  to  Iran
and claiming that his passport had expired.

The respondent, in refusing  the  appellant's  claim,  considered  that  the
appellant had deliberately withheld information and that the information  he
had  provided  contained  inconsistencies,  all  of  which  undermined   his
credibility. The respondent did not  accept  that  the  appellant  had  been
detained and considered that he had created  that  account  to  bolster  his
claim for asylum. It was not accepted that he had left  Iran  illegally  and
neither was it accepted that he was politically involved  in  Iran.  It  was
considered that he would be at no risk on return to Iran.

The appellant appealed that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  his
appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge R Hussain  on  20  January
2016 and dismissed in a decision promulgated on 25 May 2016.

Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant on  the  grounds  that  the
judge had failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his  adverse  credibility
findings and made confusing and contradictory  findings  in  regard  to  the
appellant's account of his detention and release on bail.

Permission to appeal was initially refused, but was subsequently granted  on
11 July 2015.

At the hearing I heard submissions from both parties on the  error  of  law.
Mr Chirico sought, and was granted,  permission  to  amend  the  appellant's
grounds to  include  a  challenge  to  the  sustainability  of  the  judge's
credibility findings in light of the substantial delay between  hearing  the
appeal and making the  decision.  Mr  Chirico  submitted  that  the  judge's
findings were focussed on the appellant's travel  arrangements  rather  than
the core issue and that his adverse credibility  findings  were  problematic
and lacked adequate reasoning. Mr Tufan submitted that there  was  no  nexus
between the delay in deciding the appeal and the decision made and that  the
judge was entitled to make the findings that he did, given  the  appellant's
failure to tell the truth about his passport and journey.


I advised the parties that in my view the judge had erred in law  such  that
his decision could not stand and had to be set  aside.  My  reasons  for  so
concluding are as follows.

Whilst it is the case that there were significant credibility issues in  the
appellant's claim, in particular in regard to his  account  of  his  journey
from Iran and his passport, that was not a sufficient  basis  in  itself  to
reject the appellant's entire account without findings being  made  on  core
issues. At no point did the judge  make  any  findings  on  the  appellant's
account of his detention.  It  is  not  clear  from  his  brief  and  rather
confused findings at [17] to [19]  whether  or  not  he  accepted  that  the
appellant had been detained and bailed.  At  [18]  he  considered  that  any
further interest in the appellant was  as  a  result  of  having  failed  to
attend court, but did not explain why the conclusion arising from  that  was
that he was at no risk on return  to  Iran.  Accordingly  his  findings  are
simply unsustainable. The issue of delay in making a decision in the  appeal
is therefore immaterial.

It may well be that on a detailed assessment of all the  evidence,  properly
considered and weighed up, the same adverse conclusion  is  reached  on  the
appellant's claim. However that is not necessarily the case and it seems  to
me that such an assessment has yet to be made.

Accordingly, the decision has to be set aside in its entirety for  full  and
properly reasoned findings to be  made  on  the  evidence.  The  appropriate
course is for the case to be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
heard de novo, with none of the findings made by the judge being preserved.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with  afresh,  pursuant  to
section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge R Hussain.


Signed                                           Date: 15/08/2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
