
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/12987/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5th October 2016                       |On 19th October 2016              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                                     S L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes, Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan whose appeal  was  dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Manyarara in  a  decision  promulgated  on
    22nd June 2016.  In essence the Appellant's claim that he could not  be
    returned to Afghanistan centred on the proposition that he was gay  and
    the judge found that he was not.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged on the  basis  that  the  judge  had
    ignored material evidence all as set out in the grounds.  In particular
    there was a letter from the Appellant's  counsellor  Jill  Power  which
    evidence was material to the Appellant's sexuality  and  there  was  no
    mention of any of her evidence in the decision.  As such  it  was  said
    that the judge in the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law.  Permission
    to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor.

 3. Before me Mr Jarvis for the Home Office conceded  that  the  judge  had
    indeed  erred  in  law  and  the  parties  agreed  that  there  was  no
    alternative but to set the decision aside and remit it  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be re-made is such that it is appropriate to remit the case
    to the First-tier  Tribunal.  In  the  circumstances  I  will  make  an
    anonymity direction.

Decision

 5. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

 6. I set aside the decision.

 7. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald        19th October 2016


