
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/12731/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 November 2016                  |On 29 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                     MB
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Burrett of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Staunton a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  for  asylum  or
       ancillary protection on 25 September 2015. Her appeal  against  this
       was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hamilton  ("the  Judge")
       following a hearing on 29 April 2016.

    2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly  identify  the  Appellant.  This  direction  applies  to,
       amongst others,  all  parties.  Any  failure  to  comply  with  this
       direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings. I do  so
       given the Appellant's learning disability, and  as  she  has  had  a
       child as a result of being raped whilst a child.

The grant of permission


    3. Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan granted permission to appeal (25 October
       2016) stating it is arguable that, given the issues  referred  above
       ([2] final sentence);
       1) there was inadequate consideration to the assertion that she  had
          no family in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), but even  if
          she had family there, the support may be inadequate, and
       2) her learning disability has been wrongly identified as a learning
          difficulty.


Respondent's position

    4. The Respondent asserted in her reply (17  November  2016)  that  the
       Judge directed himself appropriately.  He  properly  considered  the
       background material and  adequately  considered  whether  she  could
       return to the DRC. It was submitted orally that he plainly  had  her
       disability at the front of his mind.

Appellant's position

    5. The use of "difficulty" as opposed to  "disability"  indicates  that
       the Judge did  not  appreciate  the  extent  of  the  disability  or
       vulnerability. It indicates he gave inadequate care  to  the  facts.
       She should have been assessed as being a truthful witness and  given
       the benefit of the doubt.

Discussion

    6. I am not satisfied that there was a material error  of  law  in  any
       respect for the following reasons.


    7. The Judge considered the Appellant's claim to have lost contact with
       her family in extensive  detail.  He  noted  she  was  a  vulnerable
       witness and identified the Joint Presidential Guidance Note Number 2
       2010 [58-60], explained how he ensured she was able  to  understand,
       follow,  and  participate  fairly  in  the  proceedings  [38,   61],
       considered how the impact of her special needs may have confused her
       or affected her memory [83, 88], and took all that into account when
       considering the evidence given about having lost  contact  with  her
       family [80-87, 89].  The  Judge  noted  the  psychological  evidence
       identified [34 (4)] that she had a learning disability,  noted  that
       the Respondent accepted she had learning difficulties [57], reminded
       himself that she had special needs [83,  87],  and  noted  that  the
       psychologist does not suggest that her learning difficulty  affected
       her memory [88].


    8. I am satisfied that the identified  special  need  incorporates  the
       diagnosis of learning disability and that when  referring  initially
       to learning difficulty, he was merely reporting what the  Respondent
       conceded. When referring later to the memory issues, he  did  so  in
       the context of the psychologist's  view  that  she  had  a  learning
       difficulty. It has not been  established  how  changing  the  phrase
       there from learning difficulty to  learning  disability  could  have
       materially affected  his  assessment  of  that  evidence.  In  those
       circumstances I am not satisfied that the Judge materially erred and
       he was entitled to make the  adverse  credibility  findings  he  did
       having fully taken into account all her personal circumstances.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
29 November 2016
