
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12451/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 14 - 21 October 2013              |On 13 January 2014                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     PN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Howard, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. This is one of seven appellants whose appeals were remitted by  the
         Court of Appeal in its decision SS &  Ors  (Zimbabwe)  SSHD  [2013]
         EWCA Civ 237.  One of the six  appellants  (SC)  has  been  granted
         leave to remain by the Secretary of State.  We heard the appeals by
         the remaining appellants on dates between  14  and  21  October  as
         directed by the Court  of  Appeal.  Ms  Isherwood  represented  the
         respondent and Mr Howard the appellants in  each  case.   We  heard
         generic  submissions  from  the  representatives  on  the   current
         situation in Zimbabwe in the light of the further country  guidance
         decision  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  CM  (EM  country  guidance,
         disclosure) Zimbabwe CG  [2013]  UKUT  00059  (IAC)  approving  the
         earlier country guidance decision in EM (Zimbabwe)  &  Ors  v  SSHD
         [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC) and specific submissions in each case  at  the
         conclusion of all the evidence.

      2. We have  made  separate  determinations  for  each  appellant.  Our
         analysis of the case law is of application to all six  appeals  and
         is therefore reproduced without amendment  in  each  determination,
         save where the  specific  circumstances  of  an  appellant  require
         additional consideration.

The appellant's claim

      3. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born on  [  ]  1986.
         The appellant was born in Bulawayo and, during the period she lived
         in Zimbabwe, never lived anywhere  else.  In  accordance  with  the
         answer she gave in her asylum interview, she  was  not  politically
         active in Zimbabwe and had never been arrested or  detained  there.
         She claimed, however, that her grandfather was involved in politics
         and she thought he was a member of the MDC. He  died  in  1996,  17
         years ago when the appellant was 10 years old. She was not sure  in
         what way her grandfather was involved politically.  She thought  he
         had been attacked but could not be certain that either he or  other
         members of the family were members of the MDC. She spoke  generally
         of the violence in her home area, attributing the cause to  members
         of the ZANU-PF; however, in the answers she provided in  interview,
         there could be no viable claim that the appellant  herself  was  at
         risk from targeted political violence because the appellant was too
         imprecise in describing events in Zimbabwe. Indeed it is,  perhaps,
         a  mark  of  her  own  inability  to  distinguish   between   those
         responsible for the violence that, in answer to question 87 of  her
         interview, when asked whom she feared in Zimbabwe, she replied:

             "The MDC  people.  You  cannot  see  who  is  an  MDC  person.
             Everyone, even the police are involved. Nothing is done if you
             go to the police about attacks."

      4. The appellant attributes this answer to simple mistake. It  may  be
         that she was confused but such confusion cannot have arisen in  the
         mind of a  person  who  was  intimately  related  or  committed  to
         politics in Zimbabwe. At worst, it was the answer  of  someone  who
         had forgotten her account. At best, it was the answer of  a  person
         whose understanding of politics was so limited as  to  confuse  the
         ZANU-PF with the MDC.

      5. The appellant claimed that her mother left Zimbabwe  travelling  to
         the United Kingdom in 2000. She claimed that some months  later,  a
         group of men came to the house, beat her grandmother and raped  her
         aunt and the appellant herself. Shortly thereafter,  the  appellant
         left Zimbabwe in 2003.  It appears  that  she  entered  the  United
         Kingdom on 20 June 2003 using a South African passport although the
         appellant herself apparently disputed that stating that she used an
         emergency travel document obtained on her behalf  by  her  aunt  in
         Zimbabwe. The appellant's grandmother came to the United Kingdom to
         receive treatment  for  cancer  in  2001  but,  on  her  return  to
         Zimbabwe, she passed away.

      6. The appellant claimed that, as a result of the attack upon her, she
         became pregnant.

      7. On arrival in the United Kingdom,  the  appellant  lived  with  her
         mother and with her aunt, [P], and her two  children,  P1  and  P2.
         Both her aunt and her sons, she claimed, had been granted asylum in
         the United Kingdom. Unfortunately, the appellant's mother  died  in
         2012.

      8. The appellant was arrested in the United Kingdom arising from steps
         taken by her to  obtain  employment  using  false  particulars  and
         documents. No earlier efforts had been made to regularise her  stay
         and, even on her own account, her  original  entry  had  only  been
         secured as a visitor. She was arrested on 15 February 2010  at  her
         place of work and was served with an IS151A as  an  overstayer.  It
         was only at this point, nearly 7 years after her arrival, that  she
         claimed asylum. In due course, she appeared before the Crown  Court
         where she was  convicted  and  sentenced  to  100  hours  community
         service.

The determination of Judge Iqbal

      9. The decision was made on 24 August 2010 refusing to vary her  leave
         to remain in the United Kingdom, following the refusal of her claim
         for asylum. Her appeal came before Judge Iqbal whose  determination
         was promulgated on 21 October 2010. In it, the Secretary  of  State
         conceded the appellant's nationality as Zimbabwean.  At the time of
         the hearing, the appellant was in a relationship with T, a  son  of
         one of the other appellants in this series of appeals, SM.  It  was
         this son whom we described as being a member of the  British  Armed
         Forces. Although the relationship had broken down  sometime  before
         the hearing before us, SM accompanied the appellant at the  hearing
         in October 2013, although his  own  appeal  had  been  heard  on  a
         different occasion.

     10. Judge Iqbal had before her  the  determination  promulgated  on  25
         January 2005 in relation to the appellant's aunt, [P], and her  two
         sons, P1 and P2.

     11. The Judge did not  find  the  appellant  to  be  credible.  It  was
         noteworthy that the determination in  the  aunt's  appeal  made  no
         reference to the appellant and the appellant's aunt did not  attend
         to  provide  evidence   which   could   have   been   material   in
         substantiating the appellant's own claim. The Judge considered that
         there were discrepancies as to the accounts of  events  upon  which
         the appellant relied in support of her claim and concluded that the
         appellant had "been completely inconsistent, unclear and has sought
         to manufacture claim on the back of the facts put  forward  by  her
         aunt in her asylum claim in order to remain in the United Kingdom."
         He did not accept her  account  of  her  family  being  politically
         involved as she had claimed.

     12. Notwithstanding these findings of fact, the Judge was  required  to
         consider whether the appellant would face a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution on her return to Zimbabwe. In assessing this claim, the
         Judge relied upon the findings in RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008]
         UKAIT  00083.  He  considered  that  there  was  no  compelling  or
         comprehensive evidence  to  justify  departing  from  the  guidance
         provided and the issue before him was whether the  appellant  would
         be able to show loyalty to  the  present  regime  in  Zimbabwe  and
         thereby avoid the risk from local militia. He repeated his findings
         that the appellant did not have any MDC connections  or  none  that
         would be discovered on arrival  in  Zimbabwe.  He  noted  that  the
         appellant had no political involvement in the United  Kingdom.  The
         appellant had made use  of  her  time  in  the  United  Kingdom  by
         studying and would, accordingly, be able to state  truthfully  that
         she had spent her time in the United Kingdom as a student. However,
         in paragraph 35 of his determination, he stated  that  he  was  not
         prepared to accept that she would be unable to demonstrate  support
         for the present regime. The implication is that  she  would  do  so
         but, in approaching the appeal in  this  way,  the  Judge  made  no
         express finding whether the appellant, in demonstrating loyalty  to
         the regime was doing  so  from  political  conviction  or  fear  of
         adverse consequences if she did not do so.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

     13. Her appeal  came  before  Senior  Immigration  Judge  Hanson  whose
         determination was promulgated on 11 November 2011. The findings  of
         fact made by Judge Iqbal in relation to the appellant's  case  were
         not challenged, see paragraph 26  of  the  determination  of  Judge
         Hanson. In the appeal before him, however, the focus was  upon  the
         determination  made  in  the  aunt's  appeal   resulting   in   the
         recognition by the Canadian authorities that she was a refugee  and
         the appeal of the appellant's mother. In the course of that appeal,
         the appellant gave evidence which Judge Dove  QC  found  less  than
         impressive, describing it as being vague and inconsistent  and,  in
         relation to her claim that she  has  never  worked  in  the  United
         Kingdom, to  be  untruthful.   Judge  Dove,  however,  allowed  the
         mother's appeal  on  the  basis  that  she  had  been  involved  in
         political activities and had been persecuted in Zimbabwe.

     14. Judge Hanson found the claim that Judge Iqbal  had  failed  to  pay
         adequate attention to the  determination  in  the  aunt's  case  as
         without merit.  He noted the fact that Judges Iqbal  and  Dove  had
         both found the appellant to lack credibility.  He distinguished the
         position of the appellant's  mother  from  that  of  the  appellant
         herself against whom unchallengeable adverse  credibility  findings
         had been made from which there was no basis for him to depart.   He
         endorsed the prior findings that there was no credible evidence  of
         risk on return because the appellant had 'no adverse profile' [89].
          Judge Iqbal had made no error on a point of law.  He  went  on  to
         consider current guidance and concluded that of all the  places  in
         Zimbabwe where an appellant was not likely to be at risk from ZANU-
         PF, Bulawayo was that place, referring to paragraph 224 of EM.

     15. We should, however, point out the history of the  Article  8  claim
         brought forward by the appellant. The Secretary of State, in making
         her decision, noted that the appellant was living with her  mother,
         aunt and her  two  cousins.  However,  she  did  not  consider,  in
         accordance with the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  Kugathas
         [2002] EWCA Civ 31, that the fact that an adult  child  was  living
         with a surviving parent and other family members  was,  in  itself,
         sufficient to render removal  unlawful.  While  such  close  family
         relationships were part of an  individual's  private  life,  absent
         factors that  went  beyond  normal  emotional  ties  between  adult
         members of the  same  family,  a  protected  family  life  was  not
         established. The Secretary of State also considered the evidence of
         the relationship the appellant  with  T,  concluding  that  he  was
         serving in the British Army, that the couple did not live together,
         and  that  the  relationship  only   commenced   in   April   2008.
         Accordingly, there was no viable  Article  8  claim  sufficient  to
         engage consideration of whether removal was proportionate. However,
         even if it were to have been  so,  there  was  nothing  exceptional
         within that the appellant's private and  family  life  such  as  to
         render removal disproportionate. The Secretary of State's  approach
         was challenged to the extent that the appellant  claimed  that  her
         Article 8 rights would be violated but Judge Iqbal agreed with  the
         respondent's approach, finding that whilst the appellant  had  been
         in the United Kingdom since 2000, she had no settled status and the
         qualifications that she had gained  in  the  United  Kingdom  would
         enable her to better her circumstances in Zimbabwe. Accordingly, it
         was proportionate to remove her.

     16. On appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Judge  Hanson  described  the
         dismissal of her Article 8 claim as a "preserved finding".

Country Guidance

     17. In CM (EM country guidance; disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT
         00059, the Tribunal reviewed  the  authorities  of  RN  (Returnees)
         Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083; RT (Zimbabwe) [2010] EWCA Civ 1285:
         RS and Others (Zimbabwe - AIDS) Zimbabwe CG  [2010]  UKUT  363;  HS
         (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094   and  in
         particular, the Country Guidance given by the Tribunal  in  EM  and
         Others  (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2011]  UKUT  98   (IAC).    The
         assessment in EM as to the position  in  Zimbabwe  at  the  end  of
         January 2011 had not been vitiated by the  Tribunal's  reliance  on
         anonymous evidence from certain sources in the Secretary of State's
         Fact Finding Mission report of 2010. The Tribunal was  entitled  to
         find that there had been a  durable  change  since  RN  (Returnees)
         Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083. The only change to the  EM  Country
         Guidance relating to the position as at the  end  of  January  2011
         arose from the judgments of member  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  RT
         (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38.

     18. The guidance as re-stated, with  the  appropriate  amendments,  was
         that, as a general matter, there was significantly less politically
         motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe,  compared  with  the   situation
         considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the evidence  did  not
         establish that, in general, the return of a  failed  asylum  seeker
         from the United Kingdom, having no significant MDC  profile,  would
         result in that person facing a real risk of having  to  demonstrate
         loyalty to the ZANU-PF.

     19. The position was, however, likely to be otherwise in the case of  a
         person without  ZANU-PF  connections,  returning  from  the  United
         Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural  area  of  Zimbabwe,
         other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South. Such a  person
         might well find it difficult to avoid adverse attention,  amounting
         to serious ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF figures  in  a  position  of
         authority or those whom they controlled.   Such  adverse  attention
         might well involve  demonstrating  loyalty  to  ZANU-PF,  with  the
         prospect of serious harm in the event of failure.

     20. In accordance with RT, persons not favourably disposed  to  ZANU-PF
         were and remain entitled to international  protection,  whether  or
         not they  could  and  would  do  whatever  might  be  necessary  to
         demonstrate such loyalty.  However, the situation was  not  uniform
         across the relevant rural areas. For example,  the  evidence  might
         disclose that, in the home village,  ZANU-PF  power  structures  or
         other means of coercion were weak  or  absent.   That  said,  as  a
         general  rule,  a  returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom  to   rural
         Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South  was  highly  unlikely  to
         face significant difficulty from ZANU-PF  elements,  including  the
         security forces,  even  if  the  returnee  were  a  MDC  member  or
         supporter. (So, too, with a returnee to  Bulawayo,  who  would  not
         generally suffer any such adverse attention even if he or she had a
         significant MDC profile.) There might be exceptions: an  individual
         might be able to show that his or her village or area was one  that
         was, unusually, under the sway of a ZANU-PF chief or the like.

     21.  A  returnee  to  Harare  would  in  general  face  no  significant
         difficulties, if going to a  low-density  or  medium-density  area.
         Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas was  more
         challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF connections  would
         not face significant problems there (including  a  'loyalty  test')
         unless he or she had a significant MDC profile, which  might  cause
         him or her to feature on a list of those targeted  for  harassment,
         or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract
         the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely  to
         engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF.

     22. In relation  to  internal  relocation,  a  person's  home  for  the
         purposes  of  internal  relocation  is  a  matter  of   fact,   not
         necessarily determined by a person's rural homeland. In most cases,
         it  was  unlikely  that  a  person  with  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in a major urban centre such as  Harare  would  have  a
         viable internal relocation alternative  to  a  rural  area  in  the
         Eastern  provinces.  For  example,   relocation   to   Matabeleland
         (including Bulawayo) might be negated by discrimination, where  the
         returnee is Shona.  However, internal relocation from a rural  area
         to Harare or Bulawayo was, in general, more realistic but,  as  the
         test was whether it was reasonable/not unduly harsh,  consideration
         had  to  be  given  to  the  individual's   social   and   economic
         circumstances.

     23. So much was stated to be Country Guidance.  In the course of CM (EM
         country guidance; disclosure), the Tribunal (as  at  October  2012)
         made an assessment - albeit not in an authoritative capacity  -  of
         other evidence about Zimbabwe.   The picture then presented by  the
         evidence as  to  the  general  position  of  politically  motivated
         violence in Zimbabwe did not materially differ from the position in
         EM and others (Returnees) decided  on  14  March  2011.  The  fresh
         evidence regarding the position at the  point  of  return  did  not
         indicate  any  increase  in  risk  since  HS  (returning     asylum
         seekers); the evidence as to the treatment of those  who  had  been
         returned  to  Harare  Airport  since  2007  meant  there   was   no
         justification for  extending  the  scope  of  those  who  might  be
         adversely regarded by the CIO.

     24.  For  our  purposes,  this  summary  of  the  Country  Guidance  is
         sufficient.

The appeal in the Court of Appeal

     25. In SS (Zimbabwe), the appellants submitted that in the light of the
         Supreme Court decision in RT (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] UKSC  38  the
         findings of lack of credibility were  irrelevant  and  the  appeals
         should be allowed outright. This required the Court  of  Appeal  to
         consider  the  ambit  and  implications  of  the  decision  in   RT
         (Zimbabwe). The core finding in the  Supreme  Court,  applying  the
         principles laid down in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC  31  was  that
         there was no basis for treating differently a  person  who  had  no
         political beliefs but who, in order to avoid persecution, would  be
         obliged to pretend that he did, from a person who did  have  active
         political beliefs and who, in order to avoid persecution, would  be
         obliged to conceal them.  There was, therefore, was  no  principled
         basis for treating differently the right to hold and  not  to  hold
         political beliefs: that applied as much to the committed  political
         neutral  as  to  one  to  whom  political  neutrality  was  one  of
         indifference.  Lord Dyson had noted at paragraph 55 of his judgment
         that a claim for asylum might succeed if it were shown  that  there
         was a real and substantial risk that, despite  the  fact  that  the
         asylum seeker (if returned) would assert support for the regime, he
         would be disbelieved and his political neutrality exposed.

     26. The best evidence  as  to  the  likelihood  of  being  stopped  and
         interrogated at a road block was provided by the  relevant  Country
         Guidance, then set out in RN. It was only if an applicant  returned
         to a milieu where loyalty to the regime was assumed that his  claim
         was likely to fail at the first hurdle.  If stopped  a  politically
         neutral  claimant  would  almost  certainly  be  at  a   real   and
         substantial  risk  that  as  his  political  neutrality  would   be
         discovered.  Lord Dyson concluded in paragraph 59 of RT (Zimbabwe):

             "To summarise, in the light of RN, it is difficult to see  how
             an asylum claim advanced on the  basis  of  imputed  political
             opinion could be rejected, unless the judge was able  to  find
             that the claimant would return to  a  milieu  where  political
             loyalty would be assumed and where, if he was interrogated  at
             all, he would not face the difficulties  faced  by  those  who
             were not loyal to the regime in other parts of the country. If
             the claimant would return to any other parts of  the  country,
             the judge would be likely to conclude that there  was  a  real
             and substantial risk that a  politically  neutral  person  who
             pretended  that  he  was  loyal  to  the   regime   would   be
             disbelieved."

     27. From this starting point, Davis LJ with  whom  the  others  agreed,
         concluded in paragraph 96 of  SS (Zimbabwe):

             "In my view, a fair reading of RN (Zimbabwe) connotes  that  a
             person lacking in credibility on the important aspects of  his
             account  of  events   may,   depending   on   the   particular
             circumstances of the case, be found not to have shown that  he
             is not in  fact  aligned  to  Zanu-PF  or  that  he  would  be
             returning  to  a  milieu  where  he  is  at   real   risk   of
             interrogation whereby he cannot demonstrate loyalty. "

     28. In SS and others (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 237,  the  Court
         of Appeal in remitting the appeal  to  be  re-heard  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal said, amongst other things, in relation to PN:

         "79. PN was born on [ ] 1986. She arrived in the United Kingdom  on
             20 June 2003, apparently  on  an  emergency  travel  document.
             Thereafter she remained unlawfully in the United Kingdom until
             arrested on 15 February 2010 for identity card  offences.  She
             then applied for asylum, which was refused by the Secretary of
             State.

          1. Her appeal was the subject of a determination  in  the  First-
             tier Tribunal by Immigration  Judge  Iqbal  dated  16  October
             2010. Wholesale adverse credibility findings were made. Having
             considered the evidence, he concluded that PN had not given  a
             credible account of events in Zimbabwe.  He  found,  rejecting
             her evidence, that she had not been politically active in  the
             way asserted (whether in Zimbabwe or the United Kingdom),  had
             no MDC connection,  had  not  suffered  any  ill-treatment  or
             persecution  and  that  she  was  of  no   interest   to   the
             authorities. Having considered RN (Zimbabwe),  the  judge  did
             not accept that she would be unable to demonstrate support for
             the present regime and concluded she would not be at real risk
             of persecution if returned. He also rejected Article 8 grounds
             relied on.

          1. There was evidence that PN's  aunt  had  successfully  claimed
             asylum in the United Kingdom and that her mother had a pending
             application (subsequently granted). Permission to  appeal  was
             granted on the basis that it was arguable that  those  factors
             bore on the potential risk to her, if returned, and she  would
             be unable to show  loyalty  to  the  regime  thereby.  It  was
             subsequently held that there was  an  error  of  law  in  this
             regard and a further, second-stage, hearing was directed.

          1. By  determination  promulgated  on  11  November  2011  Senior
             Immigration Judge Hanson, in the Upper Tribunal, dismissed the
             appeal. In a detailed decision, he found that it was not shown
             that there was any credible risk to PN on return as she had no
             adverse profile, actual or imputed, and it was not  shown  her
             family name would be on any list. The dismissal of the Article
             8 grounds was preserved.  In  reaching  his  conclusions,  the
             Upper  Tribunal  Judge  relied  extensively  on  the   country
             guidance decision in EM (Zimbabwe).

          1. Permission to appeal was refused by the Upper Tribunal and  by
             Maurice Kay LJ on the papers. It was granted by  Sullivan  LJ,
             after an oral hearing on 30 November 2012 in the aftermath  of
             the Supreme Court decision in RT (Zimbabwe).

          1. Mr Thomann submitted that PN's case was not bound to  succeed.
             Indeed, in the light of EM (Zimbabwe), as now endorsed  by  CM
             (Zimbabwe) it was, he has since said, bound to fail. There had
             been no finding that the aunt's activities had put PN at risk;
             PN's  evidence  of  persecution  had  been  rejected  as   not
             credible; and there was a lack  of  evidence  of  any  adverse
             interest in family members. He further pointed out that  there
             was no finding as to her actual political convictions. That is
             true. But, in this particular case, given  the  position  with
             regard to the aunt and mother, and whilst acknowledging PN was
             not found to be an active supporter of  the  MDC,  it  may  be
             queried whether it is likely that it would be  found  that  PN
             herself was a supporter of Zanu-PF.  Rather  stronger,  in  my
             view, was Mr Thomann's submission with regard to the safety of
             the milieu to which she potentially  would  return  (Bulawayo)
             and the need for appropriate findings in  that  regard:  which
             would bear on the risk of her being stopped and interrogated.

          1. One can see some force in Mr  Mahmood's  arguments  in  saying
             that the appeal  should  be  allowed,  at  all  events  if  RN
             (Zimbabwe) were the applicable  country  guidance:  especially
             when PN's mother has since been held to have been  politically
             active for the MDC in Zimbabwe and has  become  known  to  the
             authorities. But in my view, where PN's own  evidence  in  all
             material respects was disbelieved and where (in the  light  of
             RT (Zimbabwe)) it can  be  said  that  further  findings  were
             needed, including on the issue of milieu, one cannot say  that
             the appeal would be bound  to  succeed.  Mr  Mahmood's  points
             would, of course, be much less persuasive on the footing  that
             EM  (Zimbabwe),  as  restated  in  CM  (Zimbabwe),   was   the
             applicable country guidance.

          1. Mr Mahmood did place emphasis on the treatment of the KM  case
             in RT (Zimbabwe), stressing that the  Supreme  Court  had  not
             thought it just to remit in the light of the successful asylum
             claim  of  KM's  son.  But  that  was  in  the  light  of  the
             concessions made in that case, which are not made before us in
             the present case.

          2. Accordingly, I think that this case should be remitted:  there
             is no injustice in so ordering, in all the circumstances."

The remitted appeal to the Upper Tribunal

     29. Given these findings, it is not altogether apparent on  what  basis
         the appellant might advance a claim that she was at risk  although,
         in her evidence to us, she repeated her claim that she was at  risk
         because of her family's political involvement  with  the  MDC.  She
         repeated, however, that she herself was not  involved  in  politics
         and gave the reason as:

             "I wanted to get on with my life."

     30. Dealing first with the circumstances in which other family  members
         have been granted asylum, we note what was said in KM (Zimbabwe)  v
         SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 275 (17 March 2011) in which Pill  LJ  recited
         in paragraph 6 of his judgment the factual concession made  by  the
         Secretary of State in the case of KM:

             "6.  On behalf of the Secretary of State, it is accepted  that
             the appeal should be allowed to the extent of the  case  being
             remitted to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  Secretary  of  State's
             reason was that "it is arguable that the [Tribunal] failed  to
             give adequate consideration  to  the  assessment  of  risk  on
             return in light of the country guidance case of RN  (Zimbabwe)
             and HS (Zimbabwe) and any risk that may arise if the appellant
             were to be questioned on return  regarding  his  son's  asylum
             grant". I would add that, in the light of the paragraphs  from
             RN already cited, the absence of a 'profile'  in  Zimbabwe  is
             insufficient protection. Support for or loyalty to the  regime
             must be 'demonstrated'. At the hearing before this court, Miss
             Grange, for the Secretary of State, accepted that there  is  a
             real risk that the  appellant's  son  having  obtained  asylum
             because  of  his  MDC's  sympathies  would  come  out  on  the
             appellant's return."

         This was repeated by Lord Dyson when the  matter  came  before  the
         Supreme Court:

             "13. The Court of Appeal allowed his appeal and  remitted  the
             case to the Upper Tribunal. The leading judgment was given  by
             Pill LJ: [2011] EWCA Civ 275. The Secretary of State  accepted
             that the appeal should be  allowed  by  the  Court  of  Appeal
             because it was arguable that the Tribunal had failed  to  give
             adequate consideration to the assessment of risk in the  light
             of the guidance in RN. ... It was conceded by the Secretary of
             State that there was a real risk  that  'the  appellant's  son
             having obtained asylum because of his MDC's  sympathies  would
             come out on the appellant's  return'  (para  6  of  Pill  LJ's
             judgment); and that the fact that KM's son  had  been  granted
             asylum 'may place the appellant in an enhanced  risk  category
             by making it more difficult for him to demonstrate his loyalty
             to the regime' (para 12). "

     31. Hence, the fact that KM was  at  risk  because  his  son  had  been
         granted asylum was conceded by the Secretary  of  State.   No  such
         concession was made by Ms Isherwood and rightly so because there is
         no evidence that this information will emerge.  First,  the  grants
         appear to have taken place some time ago.  The  appellant's  mother
         arrived in the United Kingdom in about 2000 and claimed asylum  and
         was granted asylum following a successful appeal.  Her aunt  sought
         asylum in 2003 and was also granted asylum following  a  successful
         appeal.  Second,  the  process  of  recognition  is  essentially  a
         confidential one.  Third, the outcome of recognition is  the  grant
         of leave to remain, endorsed in a  vignette  in  a  passport  which
         makes no reference to the grantee being a refugee from the  country
         that has issued the passport.  The issue of  leave  to  remain  may
         have happened for a number of reasons; marriage,  length  of  stay,
         student presence, work related reasons, avoiding the inference that
         the grant of leave to remain  is  short-hand  for  refugee  status.
         Most  importantly,  there  is  no  evidence   that   the   Zimbabwe
         authorities are able to maintain a record of those  granted  asylum
         by the United Kingdom authorities and then relate the grant back to
         family members, all the more so family members  by  marriage.   The
         logistics of such a process would be formidable.

     32. The appellant went on to say  that  she  did  not  know  anyone  in
         Bulawayo and that there were problems everywhere in  Zimbabwe.  She
         spoke of the forces that were against her as  'they'  but  was  not
         able to identify any particular individuals who might target her on
         return.

Article 8 - current circumstances

     33. The appellant spoke of a relationship she  now  enjoys  with  [BM].
         She told us that she hoped to get married but they had not yet done
         so. She described how in or about January or February 2013 she went
         to  the  Registry  Office  in  Birmingham  and  produced  her   "R"
         (registration) card but was told she needed  an  identity  card  or
         passport from her own country which she did not have. She  repeated
         the exercise in the Registry Offices in Walsall and  Stoke-on-Trent
         and received similarly dismissive responses. She described how [BM]
         was not present at the hearing because he went away in July and had
         used up all his available holiday.    We  are  satisfied  that  the
         Registrars are not entitled to prevent the appellant  marrying  but
         have  to  be  supplied  with  sufficient  information  to   satisfy
         themselves that the marriages are genuine  and  that  the  proposed
         parties to the marriage have to provide sufficient  information  of
         their identity.  Hence, we do not accept that the  failure  of  the
         appellant and [BM] to marry is as a result of  the  United  Kingdom
         authorities' wrongful refusal to permit the marriage to take place.
           Rather,  it  is  the  appellant's  failure  to  provide  adequate
         material.  (We note that in the appeal of BC,  heard  on  the  same
         day, she faced  an  initial  negative  response  but  overcome  the
         problem  by  providing  material  of  identity   to   satisfy   the
         Registrar.)

     34. As we have previously set out, the appellant's Article 8 claim  has
         already been dismissed but for the sake of a comprehensive disposal
         of the issues in this appeal,  we  will  consider  the  appellant's
         Article 8 claims in so far as they have developed since  the  early
         determinations.

     35. The appellant continues to live with her aunt  [P].  Prior  to  her
         death, the appellant's mother wrote a letter  [Bundle  A  C362]  in
         which she claimed that the appellant faced a  real  risk  of  being
         killed because of her  (the  mother's)  political  activities.  She
         repeated the claim of violence  meted  out  to  her  daughter.  She
         described how she, the appellant's mother, had been living with her
         sister, [P], and her two sons P1,  aged  20  and  P2  aged  9.  The
         appellant completed  the  household.    The  appellant  provided  a
         statement dated 25  August  2013  in  which  she  spoke  of  having
         commenced a relationship with [BM] shortly after her mother's death
         in February 2012. She described how [BM], aged 35, has  3  children
         from two previous relationships. B is aged 11,  the  child  of  one
         relationship and R1, aged 8 and R2, aged 5, who are the children of
         another relationship. In her evidence to us she described  how  she
         has little contact with B, the 11-year old.  She also said she  has
         not spoken to B's mother.  There  is,  therefore,  no  private  and
         family life enjoyed between the appellant and [BM]'s eldest child.

     36. The appellant maintains she has a close relationship  with  R1  and
         R2. The children visit [BM] pursuant to a court order  for  contact
         which takes place fortnightly at [BM]'s home. The children call her
         "Auntie [P]". [BM] collects them on a  Friday  evening  from  their
         mother and calls on the appellant after the child known  as  P  has
         returned from school and the five of them spend a weekend together.

     37. [BM] visited South Africa where his mother lives.  In July 2013  he
         took his children, R1 and R2, to  South  Africa.  She  avoided  any
         mention of [BM] visiting Zimbabwe saying that  he  avoided  talking
         about such things because it upset her. We reject her  explanation:
         if the relationship between [BM] and her is as strong as she  makes
         out,  there  would  be  no  credible  reason  not  to  discuss  his
         activities.  We are not prepared to make  any  findings  that  [BM]
         currently has links with Zimbabwe, although there is a  possibility
         that he does. He has a sister  who  lives  in  Birmingham  and  his
         mother spends her time between Zimbabwe and  South  Africa.  [BM]'s
         younger brother lives with her. The appellant  was,  however,  only
         prepared to  concede  that  "I  think  she  visits  Zimbabwe".   We
         consider this to be disingenuous. The appellant  can  only  'think'
         this if she  has  been  told  it  by  [BM]  himself.   If  so,  the
         appellant's evidence should have been that [BM] has  told  her  his
         mother spends time in Zimbabwe.

Current links with Zimbabwe

     38. There is, however, another element of the appellant's  claim  which
         we do not find credible. Unfortunately, the appellant's mother died
         and it had been her wish to be buried in  Zimbabwe.  In  accordance
         with those wishes, her body was, according to the appellant,  taken
         to South Africa accompanied by the appellant's aunt, the sister  of
         the deceased. The appellant told us that her sister [P]  could  not
         go to Zimbabwe and so left her sister's body in South Africa in the
         hands of those who were able to  arrange  for  her  remains  to  be
         returned to Zimbabwe. The appellant went on to  say  that  she  was
         unable to visit her mother's grave and indeed  did  not  even  know
         where it was. We reject this evidence. We do not  accept  that  the
         appellant's aunt travelled to South  Africa  with  the  purpose  of
         burying her sister in Zimbabwe and was unable to travel to Bulawayo
         for burial. We do not consider it credible that the aunt would have
         been prepared to  leave  her  sister's  remains  in  the  hands  of
         strangers or that there was any credible reason why she  needed  to
         do so, given the position in Bulawayo. Nor do we accept there could
         be any reasonable explanation for the appellant to  be  unaware  of
         the location of  her  mother's  grave  which  would  have  rendered
         pointless the repatriation of her remains.

     39. It is a matter of some concern to us  that  the  appellant,  having
         been the subject  of  adverse  credibility  findings  made  by  two
         previous judges of the Tribunal continues to  be  less  than  frank
         with us in relation to what are, potentially, key elements  of  her
         claim. We have no doubt that it was an  understandable  social  and
         cultural imperative felt by the appellant's mother to be buried  in
         Zimbabwe as a recognition that the country was her home and not the
         United Kingdom. It indicates the  existence  of  compelling  forces
         still linking this family with Zimbabwe. Whilst the decision of the
         mother cannot, of course, be equated with the state of mind of this
         appellant, the fact that the appellant is not prepared to  tell  us
         the truth  about  the  circumstances  of  her  mother's  burial  in
         Bulawayo is an attempt to conceal from us both the physical ability
         of members of this family to return to Bulawayo but also  the  ties
         which continue to exist with it.

     40. We do not need to re-open the findings that were made  in  relation
         to family life as it exists between the  appellant  and  her  aunt,
         [P], and her two children. This has already been made  the  subject
         of sustainable findings of fact.

Our assessment

     41. We are not prepared to find that there is family life  between  the
         appellant and [BM]. They do not live together. We do not accept the
         appellant's evidence that they have been unable to marry because of
         the intransigence of the UK authorities and,  in  particular,  that
         the Registrars in the area have improperly refused  to  permit  the
         couple to marry in circumstances where the appellant and  [BM]  are
         powerless to require them to do so. We are satisfied that  if  they
         wish to do so, the couple could have complied with  the  reasonable
         requirements of the Registries. Nor are we prepared  to  find  that
         there is family life between the appellant and [BM]'s two children,
         R1 and R2, notwithstanding the fact that the appellant  is  present
         at least on some occasions when [BM] has contact with his children.



     42. [BM] did not give evidence, although he provided us with a  written
         statement. If the relationship between the appellant and  [BM]  was
         so important to  [BM],  we  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that,
         irrespective of the fact that he had no available holiday to  take,
         he would have supported the appellant in her appeal  by  attending.
         It hardly needs to be stated  that  if  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship is to be established, it requires evidence  from  both
         sides of the partnership, not as a legal requirement but simply  as
         a matter of common sense.

     43. We are satisfied that the appellant can safely return to  Bulawayo.
         We are also satisfied that the  family  maintains  somewhat  closer
         links they are than the appellant is prepared  to  admit.  However,
         even if we are wrong on that  score,  we  are  satisfied  that  the
         appellant can return to Bulawayo  where,  in  accordance  with  the
         background material, she is  not  at  risk  of  being  required  to
         undergo a loyalty test by supporters of  ZANU-PF  in  circumstances
         where a failure would result in the reasonable likelihood of  harm.
         We do not accept that the  appellant  is  in  any  way  politically
         motivated but as is clear from the authority of  RT  (Zimbabwe)  an
         individual with no political interest or allegiance  may  face  the
         same difficulties as a politically motivated member of the  MDC  if
         faced  with  a  violent  mob  of  ZANU-PF  supporters   intent   on
         intimidating those who do not espouse that own political  views  in
         support of the regime and who cannot prove  their  loyalty  to  the
         mob's satisfaction.  We  accept  the  findings  of  the  background
         material that the risk varies from area to  area  but,  as  far  as
         Bulawayo is concerned, the risk is not  sufficient  to  engage  the
         refugee Convention.

     44. It was not argued  before  us  that  the  appellant  herself  faces
         difficulty at the point of return  at  Harare  airport.  Consistent
         with country guidance, there is no credible evidence this continues
         to represent a risk.

DECISION

    The Judge made an  error  on  a  point  of  law  and  we  substitute  a
    determination dismissing the appeal on all the grounds advanced.


                                    [pic]
                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                            28 December 2013
