
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12830/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 17 May 2017                        |On 24 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                         nedumaran sithamparappillai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, instructed by Jeya & Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Nedumaran Sithamparappillai, was born on 27 October 1988
    and is a male citizen of Sri Lanka.  The appellant applied  for  asylum
    in the United Kingdom but his application was refused  and  a  decision
    was also taken to remove him on 9 October 2015.  The appellant appealed
    to  the  First-  tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Fox)  which,  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 20 June 2016, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. After receiving the very helpful oral submissions of both Ms Jegarajah,
    for the appellant, and Mr Diwnycz, for the respondent, I  indicated  in
    open court that I intended to set aside Judge  Fox's  decision  and  to
    return the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for  the  decision  to  be
    remade.  I shall now briefly give my reasons for doing so.

 3. This appellant has a lengthy history of involvement with the LTTE.   In
    her refusal letter  dated  9  October  2015,  the  Secretary  of  State
    indicated that she accepted certain aspects of the appellant's  account
    of past events in Sri Lanka.  Those aspects  claimed  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State are helpfully summarised  by  Ms  Jegarajah  in  her
    grounds of appeal at [6] (i-xii).  In general, the Secretary  of  State
    accepted the appellant's claimed involvement with  the  LTTE  prior  to
    2011. At [38] she notes that,

         "You [the appellant] claim that you were  released  from  detention
         [by the Sri Lankan authorities] on 16 June 2011 after  your  father
         bribed a man named Suranga who worked in the jail to  release  you.
         On  the  basis  of  the  information  previously  cited   regarding
         corruption in Sri Lanka, this aspect of your  claim  is  considered
         reasonably likely."

    It is true to say that in the  subsequent  paragraphs  [39  -  42]  the
    Secretary of State's acceptance of the appellant's claim  is  qualified
    to the extent of being withdrawn;  at [42], the respondent  writes, "it
    is not accepted you were arrested  and  detained  in  March  2011  this
    aspect of your claim is therefore rejected".  The  appellant's  claimed
    arrest  and  detention  in  March  2011  and  subsequent  release   are
    therefore, disputed.  However, at [33], the refusal letter states,  "on
    the basis of this information and  in  light  of  all  other  available
    evidence, your claim that you were arrested and  detained  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities from May 2009 to September 2010 is accepted".

 4. Judge Fox appears to have misunderstood the  contents  of  the  refusal
    letter.  In his decision at [30], he states,

         "The appellant has failed to  discharge  the  burden  on  him.   My
         starting point is that the respondent accepts the appellant's claim
         till 2009.  I therefore focus upon events of 2011 which  give  rise
         to the appellant's current fear  of  the  authorities  due  to  his
         alleged release from detention with the investigations which remain
         outstanding."

 5. Judge Fox was correct to indicate that  the  2011  arrest/release  from
    detention were disputed by the Secretary of State but he  is  incorrect
    in stating that the chronological starting  point  for  his  assessment
    credibility should be 2009; as indicated above, the Secretary of  State
    accepted the appellant's account  of  events  up  to  and  including  4
    September 2010.

 6. Furthermore, looking at the appellant's  account  of  past  events,  it
    appears that on 4 September 2010 the appellant claims that  his  father
    bribed an army commander who placed the appellant on an  MOD  clearance
    list which he was not entitled to do.   The  conditions  were  that  he
    remain at a particular address and register with the army and report.

 7. The fact that the Secretary of State accepts that part of  the  account
    is of some significance.  In the grounds at [9], the  appellant  states
    as follows:

         "The A was interviewed three times.  He declared himself  to  be  a
         member [of the LTTE] but downplayed his role in medical assistance.
          It was suspected that he was a combatant he made no admissions  to
         that effect.  He was not meant to be released and had not  received
         any formal clearance by the MOD to be placed on the list  of  those
         who could take their exams because they were  of  lesser  interest.
         He  has  a  prominent  entrance  and  exit  bullet  wound.   It  is
         impossible to see how the FTTJ could determine the question of risk
         by considering the events of 2011 onwards  in  isolation  from  the
         highly significant pre-history.  In addition it is unlawful for the
         FTTJ to deem the claims of  2011  lacking  in  credibility  without
         placing it in the context of the entirety of the claim."

 8. I consider that to be a fair  criticism  of  Judge  Fox's  methodology.
    There is nothing in Judge Fox's analysis to indicate that he took  into
    account, when assessing credibility of events after 2011, the fact that
    the appellant had been involved with the LTTE and had been arrested and
    detained by the authorities, claims accepted as fact by  the  Secretary
    of State.  I agree with Ms Jegarajah's submission that the analysis  of
    the judge at [31] et seq appears to have been conducted in something of
    an evidential vacuum; the analysis is isolated from and  has  not  been
    analysed in the context of  the  previous  (accepted)  account  of  the
    appellant.  This raises a number of problems.  First, the judge has not
    considered whether the appellant's circumstances  now,  conditioned  by
    events occurring in Sri Lanka prior to 2010, is such that he is  likely
    to face the real risk of persecution and ill-treatment upon  return  to
    Sri Lanka.  Secondly, before concluding at [75] that the  appellant  is
    not a witness of truth, the judge has failed to grapple with  the  fact
    that, in his account of events prior to September 2010,  the  appellant
    has been accepted by the Secretary of State as having told  the  truth.
    The judge was, of course, not bound to find  the  later  parts  of  the
    account which the Secretary of State disputes to  be  truthful  but  he
    should at least have conducted his analysis against the  background  of
    the appellant's known involvement with the LTTE and  detention  by  the
    Sri Lanka authorities. Instead, he ignored the  accepted  part  of  the
    evidence and has considered the credibility of the later part  only.  I
    am not satisfied that the  judge  has  considered  the  evidence  as  a
    totality before reaching his findings.

 9. In the circumstances, I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  None of the findings of fact shall stand for  the  avoidance
    of any  doubt,  those  parts  of  the  appellant's  account  which  the
    Secretary of State accepts which she details in her letter of 9 October
    2015 are not in dispute.  A fact-finding exercise will be required  and
    that is best conducted by the First-tier Tribunal to which this  appeal
    is now returned.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 20 June 2015  is  set
aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The  appeal  is  returned
to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Fox) for that Tribunal to  remake  the
decision.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 23 May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.








Signed                              Date 23 May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

