
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/12621/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 27 July 2016                               |On 17 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     P M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Prof. W.M. Rees, Counsel instructed by David Benson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to  refuse  a
    protection  claim.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moxon  ("the   judge")
    dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 10 May 2016.

2.    The appellant appeals against the First-tier Tribunal decision on  the
    following grounds:

       i) The judge's decision to refuse to  adjourn  the  hearing  on  the
          ground that the appellant's wife  had  only  just  disclosed  the
          possibility of sexual abuse was procedurally  unfair.  The  judge
          failed to take into account the guidance on vulnerable witnesses.

      ii) The judge failed to engage adequately with the evidence given  by
          the appellant in relation to his wife's mental illness.

Decision and reasons

3.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law.

4.    The appellant entered the UK on 21 February 2011 with entry  clearance
    as a Tier 4 student dependent. He was granted an extension of leave  on
    the same basis. On 24 February 2015 the  appellant's  wife  was  served
    with a notice of liability to removal as  a  person  who  had  obtained
    leave to remain by deception following allegations that  she  submitted
    false documents in an earlier application.  It is not  clear  from  the
    Home Office chronology whether leave to remain was curtailed.

5.    On 13 March 2015 the appellant applied for asylum because of  problems
    with a man who harassed his wife and her family.  The  application  was
    refused in a decision dated 18 September 2015. The  appellant  appealed
    against the respondent's decision to refuse his protection claim  in  a
    notice of appeal dated 5 October 2015, which was  lodged  by  his  then
    legal representatives, HK Solicitors.

6.     The  appellant's  new  representatives,  David   Benson   Solicitors,
    informed the Tribunal that they were acting on his behalf in  a  letter
    dated 11 April 2016. The accompanying letter of authority was signed on
    04 April 2016. In the same letter they returned  the  Reply  Notice  in
    response to a pre-hearing review that was due to take place on 15 April
    2016. The notice stated the appellant's intention to  produce  "medical
    evidence and psychiatric report" in support of the appeal.  When  asked
    if there was any further information he wished to provide in  regarding
    the appeal the form stated: "my wife's  asylum  claim  and  psychiatric
    report".

7.    His representatives made a written adjournment  request  on  15  April
    2016 in the following terms:


         "First, we wrote to the respondent on 22 March 2016  informing  you
         of the fact that it had transpired during our preparation for  this
         case that the second appellant (wife of the  first  appellant)  has
         suffered gender-based persecution that has not  been  disclosed  to
         her husband. The facts of her claim are  therefore  highly  complex
         and require strict confidentiality  and  sensitivity.  Accordingly,
         the second appellant sought to make her own application for  asylum
         so that information provided by her  or  on  her  behalf  could  be
         considered in the absence of her husband and members of the public.
         We are yet to receive a response to that letter.


         Second, the second appellant requires a psychiatric assessment.  We
         are in the  process  of  making  an  appointment  with  a  suitable
         psychiatrist.  For  this  reason  we  require  more  time  to   the
         assessment take place and for a report to be served."


8.    The written adjournment application was refused by the Tribunal on  19
    April 2016 on the ground that it had no power to direct the  respondent
    to decide an asylum application. The adjournment sought was open ended.
    The  second  appellant  could  give  evidence  separately   "to   avoid
    embarrassment". No consideration appears to  have  been  given  to  the
    second reason for requesting an adjournment, which was the request  for
    a three-week delay in order to obtain a psychiatric report.

9.    On 26 April 2016 the appellant's representatives faxed  the  court  to
    inform that they were still waiting  for  the  psychiatric  report  and
    would serve the appellant's bundle on receipt. The bundle was served by
    fax the day before  the  hearing.  It  included  a  psychiatric  report
    prepared by Dr  Raj  Persaud  as  well  a  brief  statements  from  the
    appellant and his wife dated 22 April  2016.  The  statement  from  the
    appellant's wife was fairly anodyne and did not  contain  any  specific
    allegations  of  sexual  abuse.  Professor  Rees  told  me   that   his
    instructions were that the statement was taken while her husband was in
    the room so she was reluctant to disclose any details of sexual abuse.

10.   The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  asserted  that  during  a
    conference with female counsel prior to the hearing (no date is  given)
    the appellant's wife appeared to be distressed and  emotional  and  was
    found crying  in  the  corridor.  When  counsel  sought  to  offer  her
    reassurance she disclosed that she had been subjected to  sexual  abuse
    and harassment but it was difficult to obtain any  further  information
    because of her emotional state and her plea that her husband should not
    be informed. The evidence should have been set out in a brief statement
    from the counsel concerned but it seems that it may have been the event
    that prompted the adjournment request made on 15 April 2016.

11.   Given the pressing need to prepare a report within a  short  timescale
    Dr Persaud was only able to make a fairly preliminary assessment of her
    mental state. He made the following observation in his report:


         "My clinical intuition  tells  me  that  she  has  suffered  sexual
         assault on more than one occasion but has not  been  able  to  seek
         proper help because doing so would disclose this - in her mind - to
         her partner - so she is trapped in being very unwell but unable  to
         get help. This sense of  being  trapped  also  contributes  to  her
         psychiatric problems. In this context,  one  has  to  consider  the
         cultural context within which the  sexual  assault  and  harassment
         occurred. There is a stigma  associated  with  being  a  victim  of
         sexual assault and this explains why the client has been unable  to
         inform her husband. This also explains  her  reluctance  to  inform
         medical practitioners and to  seek  the  support  she  requires.  I
         believe that the client's avoidance and  reluctance  to  visit  the
         memories of her past is highly consistent with symptoms of PTSD.


12.   At the hearing on 29 April 2016 counsel applied for an adjournment  on
    the ground that  further  time  was  needed  to  take  a  full  witness
    statement from the appellant's wife,  and  that  it  was  necessary  to
    obtain expert evidence to address the particular circumstances of  this
    case, which were not covered in the publicly available material.

13.   The judge refused the  adjournment  application  on  the  ground  that
    there was a "plethora of country guidance available about  Sri  Lanka".
    In relation to the statement from the appellant's wife he noted that  a
    statement should have been prepared before the hearing, and if she  did
    not wish to make disclosures to a male solicitor, this was insufficient
    explanation as to why she couldn't have asked  to  speak  to  a  female
    "some time ago". The judge gave counsel  additional  time  to  draft  a
    statement at court before the hearing started.

14.   Having set out the background to the  relevant  issues  regarding  the
    adjournment request it should become clear why I consider that  refusal
    of an adjournment in the circumstances outlined above  did  not  comply
    with the overriding objective and the need for procedural fairness.

15.   There is evidence to show that the  appellant's  representatives  were
    instructed only a few weeks before the hearing. From what I  have  been
    told it seems that the appellant's representatives did not  assist  the
    situation by seeking to take such a brief statement from the  appellant
    in the presence of her husband. Anyone working in this  field  will  be
    familiar with the fact that late disclosure of sexual abuse  is  common
    and that it may take some time, skill and sensitivity on  the  part  of
    the person taking a statement to elicit the full nature of  a  person's
    past history of abuse. Other relatives should be absent from  the  room
    precisely because it might inhibit disclosure.

16.   The appellant's wife was able to begin this process when she spoke  to
    counsel and to Dr Persaud. There was  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to support the possibility that her mental health problems may
    have  arisen  from  such  abuse.  However,  it  seems  clear  that  the
    circumstances  in  which  counsel  was  expected  to   elicit   further
    information, outside a courtroom on the day of a hearing, when she  was
    also extremely worried about her husband finding out about  the  abuse,
    was insensitive  and  inappropriate.  Counsel  was  unable  to  take  a
    detailed statement providing information about each incident of  abuse,
    which if done properly, may take several hours, and possibly more  than
    one meeting, to  elicit.  Even  if  the  judge  had  doubts  about  the
    credibility of the claim he should have proceeded  on  a  precautionary
    basis given the need for anxious scrutiny of asylum claims.

17.   The judge made no special arrangements to respect  the  wife's  desire
    to prevent disclosure to her husband [5]. I am told that the  appellant
    is now aware of the general nature of his  wife's  evidence,  no  doubt
    because  the  judge  chose  to  include  it  in  his  decision  without
    consideration of whether special measures might be possible.

18.   It is not necessary for me to deal with the second  ground  of  appeal
    because it is sufficient for me to find that, in the  circumstances  of
    this case, fairness required an adjournment in order  to  provide  time
    for the appellant's wife to  give  a  more  detailed  statement  in  an
    environment that was  appropriate  to  disclosure  of  possible  sexual
    abuse, especially in view of the fact that Dr Persaud had assessed  her
    to be too unwell to give evidence in a court environment. To refuse  to
    adjourn in such circumstances was procedurally unfair and  amounted  to
    an error of law.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I set aside the decision and remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 16 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








