
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12659/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 4 November 2016                 |On 24 November 2016                |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                        CHANDRAMOHAD KATHIRGAMAMUTHIM
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wood of Rochdale Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as  they  were
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pickup promulgated on 5 July 2016  which  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to remove the
    Appellant from the UK following the decision to refuse the  Appellant's
    claim for asylum.

Background

 4. The Appellant was born on 12 January 1971 and  is  a  national  of  Sri
    Lanka.

 5. 30 May 2002 the Appellant applied for asylum on the basis that  he  was
    at risk of ill treatment on return to Sri Lanka at the hands of the Sri
    Lankan authorities by reason of actual or  perceived  involvement  with
    and support for the LTTE.

 6.  31  July  2003  the  Secretary  of  State  refused   the   Appellant's
    application.  The Appellant appealed that decision and his  appeal  was
    dismissed on 5 November 2003 and his application to appeal the decision
    was dismissed and he was appeal rights exhausted on 6 February 2004.

 7. The Appellants application for discretionary leave was  refused  on  22
    March 2005.

 8. 18 May 2009 the Appellant lodged a claim for asylum in Northern Ireland
    in a false name. He  was  interviewed  and  his  correct  identity  was
    discovered.

 9. 17 September 2009 his claim for asylum in N Ireland was dismissed.

10. 7  March  2013,  23  February  2014  the  Appellant  submitted  further
    submissions which were both refused.

11. 12 August 2012 the Appellant was detained pending removal.

12. 11 August 2015 the Appellant sought, and was granted, further  time  to
    provide a medico legal report  that  asserted  he  was  suffering  from
    Moderate Depression and PTSD and was at medium risk of suicide

13. The refusal letter rejecting this fresh claim gave a number of reasons:

    (a)  The starting point for any decision  was  the  decision  of  Judge
    Axtell of 5 November 2003 in which the Judge made a number  of  adverse
    credibility findings concluding that the Appellant was of  no  interest
    to the authorities

    (b)  The MLR of Dr Janine Bonnet dated 19 June 2015 was considered  but
    the scars and lesions could have been caused in ways other  than  those
    claimed by the Appellant.

    (c)  While it was conceded that the Appellant had  been  mistreated  it
    was not accepted that this was at the hands  of  those  the  Appellants
    claims.

    (d)  The presence of scars on the Appellants body would not put him  at
    risk.

The Judge's Decision

14. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Pickup  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision.

15. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that:

    (a)  The Judge materially erred in his consideration of the MLR failing
    to consider it alongside all of the other evidence.

    (b)  The scars were highly consistent with being burned with cigarettes
    which was consistent with the background material as  to  a  method  of
    torture used by  the  authorities  in  Sr  Lanka.  The  Judge  was  not
    justified in concluding the scars could have been  the  result  of  the
    shelling experience in 1998.

    (c)  The Judge compartmentalised his assessment of the MLR and did  not
    consider it alongside the other evidence before him.

    (d)  The Judge failed to properly direct himself  in  relation  to  the
    overall assessment of the lesions as required by  KV  (scarring-medical
    evidence) [2014] UKUT 230 (IAC)

16. The Judge failed to take account of a material  matter:  the  MLR.  The
    Judge was not entitled to give limited weight to the MLR  as  this  was
    not in accordance with Home Office Policy.

17. The Judge allowed a procedural unfairness in that:

      a) he failed to consider whether  the  discrepancies  in  his  account
         could have been attributable  to  the  depressive  episode  he  was
         suffering from.

      b) The Judge failed to treat the Appellant as a vulnerable witness.

18. On 29 July 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Mc Carthy gave permission  to
    appeal.

19. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Wood  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that

    (i)  The Judge failed to take into account the concession made  by  the
    Respondent that the Appellant had been mistreated.

    (ii) The Judge should have taken into account the  background  evidence
    relating to the modes of  mistreatment  and  this  material  was  never
    directly referred to.

    (iii)    The Judge had compartmentalised the medical evidence from  the
    documents and not considered it in the round.

    (iv) The Doctor considered the possibility of SIBP at paragraph 115  pf
    the report and said it was unlikely.  The  Judge  gave  no  reason  for
    rejecting her view and no suggestion of SIBP was put to  the  Appellant
    in the hearing.

    (v)  Paragraph 28 of the decision failed to demonstrate that the  Judge
    understood that the Istanbul Protocol required the Doctor  to  look  at
    the totality of the injuries and come to  an  overall  conclusion.  The
    Judge strayed from appraisal of the MLR to criticism.

    (vi) In relation to ground 2 he argued that the Respondents own  policy
    was to accord special status to reports by the medical foundation.  The
    Respondent accepts that the reports cannot be accorded'  little  or  no
    weight' and that while they are not determinative they  must  be  given
    appropriate weight.

    (vii)    In relation to the claim of procedural  unfairness  the  Judge
    failed to aply the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No  2  of  2013  in
    relation to Vulnerable witnesses and decide whether  the  discrepancies
    could be satisfactorily explained by his psychological history.

20. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Mc Vitie submitted that:

      a) He refers to the fact that this is a Devaseelan case  in  that  the
         Appellant had a previous appeal dismissed which  was  the  starting
         point of any decision

      b) The Judge nevertheless dealt with the  new  evidence,  the  medical
         report,  at  some  length.  He  relied  on  JL  (medical   reports-
         credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC)

      c)  The Doctor rejected the possibility of someone else inflicting the
         injuries, or self infliction simply because the Appellant said they
         did not .

      d) It cannot be suggested that a medical report is  beyond  criticism,
         they are not necessarily determinative or infallible.

      e) In this case the Appellants  appalling  immigration  history  which
         included making a claim in Northern Ireland in a false name was all
         relevant.

      f) The Judge considered the claim that the  Appellant  was  vulnerable
         but concluded that he was not as vulnerable as he claimed.

21. In reply Mr Wood on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

      a) The previous decision of Judge Axtell could not be ignored  but  he
         had no medical  evidence  before  him  and  made  no  reference  to
         background material.

      b) The Respondent considered that the Appellants  case  was  at  least
         arguable.

      c) The Doctor did consider whether the other injuries could have  been
         casued by a shelling attack and found that much less likely.

The Law

22.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

23. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. Unless an Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have  taken  no  account  of  evidence  that  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration judge concludes that the story told is untrue. If  a  point
    of evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is
    a failure to take into account a material consideration.

24. In relation to challenging  credibility  findings  in  Mibanga  v  SSHD
    [2005] EWCA Civ 367 Buxton LJ said this:

         "Where, as in this case, complaint is made of the reasoning  of  an
         adjudicator in respect of a  question  of  fact  (that  is  to  say
         credibility), particular care  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the
         criticism is as to the fundamental approach of the adjudicator, and
         does not merely reflect a feeling on  the  part  of  the  appellate
         tribunal that it might itself have taken a different  view  of  the
         matter from that that appealed to the adjudicator."

25. I have taken account of the case of KV (scarring  -  medical  evidence)
    Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC) the headnote of which states:

          1. When preparing medico-legal reports doctors should not  -  and
             should not feel obliged to - reach conclusions about causation
             of scarring which go beyond their own clinical expertise.

          2. Doctors preparing medico-legal reports for asylum seekers must
             consider all possible causes of scarring.

          3. Where there is a presenting feature of the  case  that  raises
             self-infliction by  proxy  (SIBP)  as  a  more  than  fanciful
             possibility of the explanation for scarring:-

               i) a medical report adduced on behalf of a claimant  will  be
                  expected to engage with that issue; it cannot eliminate  a
                  priori or routinely the possibility of SIBP; and

             (ii) a judicial fact-finder will be expected  to  address  the
                  matter, compatibly with procedural fairness,  in  deciding
                  whether, on all the evidence, the claimant has  discharged
                  the burden of proving that he or she was reasonably likely
                  to have been scarred  by  torturers  against  his  or  her
                  will.

          4. A lack of correlation between a claimant's account and what is
             revealed by a medical examination of the scarring may enable a
             medico-legal report to shed some clinical light on  the  issue
             of whether SIBP is a real possibility.

          5. Whilst the  medical  literature  continues  to  consider  that
             scarring cannot be dated beyond 6  months  from  when  it  was
             inflicted, there is some  medical  basis  for  considering  in
             relation to certain  types  of  cases  that  its  age  can  be
             determined up to 2 years.

          6. Whilst if best practice is followed medico-legal reports  will
             make a critical evaluation of a claimant's account of scarring
             said to have been caused by torture, such  reports  cannot  be
             equated with an assessment to be undertaken by decision-makers
             in a legal context in which the burden of proof rests  on  the
             claimant and when one of the purposes  of  questioning  is  to
             test a claimant's evidence so as to  decide  whether  (to  the
             lower standard) it is credible.

26. Both parties referred to the case of Devaseelan  *[2002]  UKIAT  000702
    where at paragraph 39 it is stated:

         "(1) The first Adjudicator's determination  should  always  be  the
         starting-point.  It  is  the  authoritative   assessment   of   the
         Appellant's status at the time it was  made.  In  principle  issues
         such as whether the Appellant was properly represented, or  whether
         he gave evidence, are irrelevant to this."

Finding on Material Error

27. Having heard those submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

28. While placed under a number of headings the thrust  of  the  Appellants
    grounds in relation to the Judge's decision was that  his  approach  to
    the medical evidence was fundamentally flawed  and  I  have  considered
    this argument very carefully. This was a fresh claim based on a medical
    report by Dr Janine Bonnet in  which  was  relied  on  to  suggest,  in
    essence, that the Appellant had injuries consistent with his claim  and
    that his physical injuries in particular a blow to the head could  have
    been  the  cause   of   the   many   identifiable   discrepancies   and
    inconsistencies in his account.

29. Ground I argues that the Judge  failed  to  consider  the  MLR  in  the
    context of the background material. I do  not  accept  that  the  Judge
    compartmentalised the medical evidence in this way. I am satisfied that
    the decision must be read as a whole no matter what  order  the  issues
    are addressed. Indeed the Judge repeatedly  makes  very  clear  in  his
    decision that he has considered all of the evidence  in  the  round  at
    paragraphs 17-19, paragraph 36 and he specifically states at  paragraph
    22 that:

         "I confirm that  I  have  carefully  considered  all  the  evidence
         together, in the round, in an overall  assessment  before  reaching
         any of my findings of fact and notwithstanding the order  in  which
         issues are addressed below."

30. The Judge chose to address the MLR first and starts by clearly  setting
    out at paragraph 25 that he took into  account  as  supportive  of  the
    Appellants factual claim the report which found he met  the  diagnostic
    criteria of PTSD and moderate  depression,  claimed  he  had  a  memory
    disorder as a result of a rifle but injury to his head in 2001 and  had
    a scar that was highly consistent with that blow and had 3  scars  that
    were highly consistent with being burnt by a cigarette which  was  part
    of his claim of how he had been tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities.
    There can be no suggestion that the assessment that  followed  both  in
    relation to the medical evidence but also  the  Appellants  immigration
    history was not underpinned by this analysis of what the Appellant  was
    claiming.

31. I am satisfied that the Judge was not required to find that the  report
    was determinative of the outcome of the decision  as  of  course  PTSD,
    depression, a head wound and cigarette burns even if all were  accepted
    could have been as a result of a different history than that  given  by
    the Appellant.  'Special  status'  does  not  mean  infallible.   I  am
    satisfied that the Judge's assessment  of  the  medical  evidence  both
    physical and mental that followed at paragraphs 26-36 demonstrates that
    he approached the evidence with care and set out  the  reasons  why  he
    ultimately gave limited weight to the conclusions of the report.

32. Thus he was entitled to find that the although  the  Appellant  had  67
    lesions on his body and  only  4  of  them  were  attributable  to  the
    treatment he described as either consistent (the head injury) or highly
    consistent (the cigarette burns) but the Doctor did not explain why she
    concluded the Appellants account was , overall highly consistent  :  he
    does not suggest that she was not entitled to reach that conclusion but
    notes the lack of explanation for the conclusion which he was  entitled
    to do.

33. It was open to him to  assess  the  Appellants  claimed  confusion  and
    memory problems against a lengthy  immigration  history  in  which  the
    Appellant showed a dogged determination in pursuing his claim  and  the
    requirement to give instructions to various differing  representatives,
    provide statements, attend a CMR on his own as set out in  the  lengthy
    chronology(paragraph 32). The Doctor was required  in  accordance  with
    caselaw to consider the material provided in respect of the  Appellants
    history and the Judge was entitled to note that there appears  to  have
    been little analysis of the possibility of  deliberate  fabrication  by
    him in the face of witness statements where he claimed not  to  have  a
    good memory and yet challenged the accounts recorded  and  gone  on  to
    describe in detail demonstrations he attended in the UK  between  2003-
    2011 and such obviously deceptive behaviour such  as  the  claim  in  N
    Ireland in the false name . It would have been open  to  the  Judge  to
    additionally note that while the Doctor in the report at paragraph  133
    remarks on  'admissions,  omissions  and  inconsistencies'  she  rather
    ingenuously states 'I can also see no gain to his asylum  case  by  him
    doing so' which does suggest a  rather  uncritical  acceptance  of  the
    Appellants claimed memory problems rather than a measured consideration
    of the possibility of fabrication.  I am satisfied it was open  to  the
    Judge to find that taken in context of  the  other  evidence  which  he
    later sets out that the Doctor was 'rather too willing to overlook  and
    attribute the many inconsistencies  in  the  appellants  account  to  a
    mental health impairment and/or memory problems.'

34. It was argued in the grounds that the Judge fell into error because  he
    was not entitled in accordance with the Respondents own policy document
    from giving little  or  no  weight  to  the  reports  support  for  the
    Appellant's account but I am satisfied that this is not what he did: he
    made clear at paragraph 36 after a detailed and well-reasoned  analysis
    of the report against the background of all the other evidence:

         "When I come to assess the evidence as a whole, taking into account
         this medical evidence with all other strands of  evidence,  I  find
         that the weight I can give as supportive of the Appellant's account
         is limited , but I do take it into account overall'

35. I can see nothing in the Judge's decision to  suggest  that  there  has
    been any procedural unfairness  in  his  treatment  of  the  Appellants
    evidence and that he has not treated  the  Appellant  as  a  vulnerable
    witness. I am satisfied that he  carefully  considered  the  Appellants
    claim that his 'memory problems' could be as a result of the rifle butt
    injury but was entitled to conclude that his  memory  issues  were  not
    made out on the evidence both medical and other evidence before him

36. Thus he was also entitled to find that the Appellants  'Belfast  Claim'
    was 'entirely inconsistent  with  the  presentation  he  made  for  the
    purpose of the MLF report 'in  that the Appellant had  lied  to  the  N
    Ireland authorities about never having previously claiming asylum until
    faced with a fingerprint match and claimed, falsely,  in  an  elaborate
    and very detailed account to have  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  since  his
    initial claim and how he funded it by selling  his  home,  the  journey
    ,the agent used but before the Judge claimed  this  was  a  mistake  by
    interpreters.

37. I am satisfied that the Judge properly took into  account  the  medical
    evidence in the context of the previous decision as he was required  to
    by Devaseelan setting out the correct approach at paragraph 48

38. In assessing whether the Judges approach to the  medical  evidence  was
    flawed I have also taken into account what was  said  by  Lord  Justice
    Stanley Burnton in SS Sri Lanka [2012] EWCA Civ 155

         "Generally speaking, the weight, if any, to be given to expert  (or
         indeed any) evidence is a matter for the trial judge  (here  Senior
         Immigration Judge Spencer). A judge's decision not to accept expert
         evidence does not involve an error of law on his part, provided  he
         approaches that evidence  with  appropriate  care  and  gives  good
         reasons for his decision. Ultimately, therefore, there are only two
         issues as to  the  Senior  Immigration  Judge's  treatment  of  the
         medical evidence: did he address  that  evidence  with  appropriate
         care and did he give good reasons for  his  conclusion?  Those  two
         questions are interrelated. It is difficult to conceive of  a  case
         in which a judge gives adequate  reasons  for  his  conclusions  on
         expert evidence yet he is held to have exercised insufficient care.
         His reasons demonstrate his care."

39. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning both in relation to the medical  evidence
    but the evidence as a whole.

CONCLUSION

40. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.



DECISION

41. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed   Date 23.11.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
