
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12700/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 September 2016                          |On 17 November 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                  S--- A---
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, Counsel, instructed by Migrant Legal
Action
For the Respondent:    Mr J Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       respondent. Breach of this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of
       court. I make this order because this is a protection case and there
       is invariably a risk in cases  of  this  kind  that  publicity  will
       itself create a risk.

    2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Afghanistan against  the  decision
       of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
       decision of the Secretary of  State  refusing  leave  to  remain  on
       asylum and human rights grounds.

    3. Permission to appeal was given by the First-tier Tribunal by  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Robertson on four of the five grounds argued but
       deliberately not on ground 1 which was a complaint that the decision
       was unreliable because the determination was promulgated  more  than
       three months after the hearing.

    4. The appellant's solicitors were not satisfied with that  ruling  and
       correctly in accordance with their dissatisfaction, asked permission
       of the Upper Tribunal to argue that additional ground.  It  happened
       that the papers came before me and I gave permission in what I  hope
       might be described as rather grudging terms.  I say that because the
       point really adds little. We have certainly moved on from  the  days
       where a Determination was necessarily wrong  because  it  had  taken
       more than three months to be promulgated.

    5. I do not accept that any fault is established on ground 1.

    6. Similarly I am not impressed with ground 5,  not because it is wrong
       but because I do not think it adds anything. It is a complaint  that
       the Article 8 analysis was not done properly but the real problem is
       that it is a complaint about the factual  basis  of  the  Article  8
       assessment and, as I indicated to Counsel, if he wins on that  point
       he probably does not need ground 5 and if he loses on that point  it
       probably does not add anything.

    7. However grounds 2, 3 and 4 which I lump together although  they  are
       different, I find do  identify  clear  errors  of  law.   The  first
       contention  is that although it is accepted that it is  clearly  the
       case that established country guidance  is  the  necessary  starting
       point, it was the appellant's case that the situation in Afghanistan
       has  deteriorated   significantly   since   country   guidance   was
       promulgated and evidence was produced that it is, on the face of it,
       serious and credible, supporting  the  appellant's  contention  that
       whatever the Tribunal said in AK the current  situation  is  now  so
       different that the appeal should have been allowed.

    8. I am very far from saying that that is right but  the  principle  is
       perfectly clear.  Country guidance ought to be right  in  the  sense
       that it describes correctly the  situation  when  the  guidance  was
       given but in the nature of things country conditions do  not  remain
       static. Sadly they often  get  worse  and  here  the  appellant  was
       entitled to know  whether  the  Tribunal  took  the  view  that  the
       evidence about deteriorating country conditions is unbelievable,  or
       whether  it  was  believable  but   not   evidence   of   sufficient
       deterioration to make a difference.  This point has  not  just  been
       answered  in  the  determination  and  I   find   that   makes   the
       determination unsound.

    9. The related point is that the appellant has produced  evidence  that
       he subjectively would find it particularly  difficult  to  establish
       himself in Kabul.  He complains of  severe  back  ache.   I  do  not
       minimise that because I know it can be a very  disabling  condition.
       The point has been addressed to some extent but  other  points  have
       not been  addressed, particularly the contention, supported by one K-
       -- C--- a former foster mother, that his mental health is in a  very
       poor state and he  would  find  it  particularly  difficult  to  re-
       establish himself.

   10. Mrs C---'s evidence does not have the advantage of  coming  from  an
       expert with appropriate medical qualifications but it does appear to
       come from somebody in a position to  have  an  informed  commonsense
       view and a person  who  was  telling  the  truth,  albeit  from  the
       perspective of someone favourably disposed towards the appellant.

   11. Again I do not know what the judge made of that  evidence.   He  may
       have been of the view that Mrs C--- was unduly pessimistic.  He  may
       have been of the view that Mrs C---  was  right  but  the  appellant
       could still reasonable to expected to cope. I  do  not  know  and  I
       ought to know and the Decision should tell me and it does not.

   12. It is for those two  reasons  that  I  find  that  the  Decision  is
       unsatisfactory in law because two significant  strands  of  evidence
       have not been explained away lawfully.

   13. I accept that having found this error it is a case that needs to  go
       back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  because  the  decision  that  is
       defective goes to the root of  the  decision  in  the  appeal.   The
       appellant  has  not  really  had  a  fair  hearing  and  the  proper
       determination  of  these  issues  requires  a  considered   analysis
       probably of quite a wide range of oral evidence and it is  not  work
       that is normally particularly suitable to be decided  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal.

   14. I make it plain that I set aside the determination in its  entirety.
       At paragraph 23 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal  finds  that
       the appellant can have contact with his mother.   That  might  be  a
       perfectly correct decision but I intend that and all the rest to  be
       set aside because the evidence to support that was not  particularly
       strong and might be infected by the other points that I find have to
       be resolved.

   15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has given reasons for finding contrary
       arguments unreliable but there does not seem very clear evidence  on
       the point to show that it is wrong and it is my intention that  this
       is considered with all  the  other  points  when  the  case  is  re-
       determined.  I do not intend to give  any  indication  about  how  I
       think it should be resolved.

Notice of Decision

   16. For all these reasons I set aside the decision and direct  that  the
       appeal be determined against in the First-tier Tribunal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 15 November 2016               |





