
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12216/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 January 2017                   |On 06 February 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                              HF (AFGHANISTAN)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, Counsel, instructed by Times PBS Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is a remade decision following the identification by the Upper
        Tribunal of a material error of law in the decision of Judge of the
        First-tier Tribunal Bartlett promulgated as  long  ago  as  15  May
        2013.





Procedural background

     2. This appeal has a somewhat convoluted  history.  The  Appellant,  a
        national of Afghanistan whose date of birth was  determined  to  be
        9th of June 1990, arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  29  December
        2008. Having attended a screening interview on 8 January  2009  the
        Appellant discovered, around mid-March 2009, that the  Home  Office
        had requested Greece to take responsibility for  his  asylum  claim
        pursuant to the relevant Dublin regulation. Having been informed by
        other Afghans in the community  that  he  would  be  sent  back  to
        Greece, and afraid that he would be beaten by the Greek police, the
        Appellant failed to report to the Home Office  as  required  on  18
        April 2009 and was subsequently considered to be an absconder.

     3. It was not until sometime in June 2011 that he  decided  to  pursue
        his asylum claim and underwent as asylum interview on 12 July 2011.
        The Appellant believed, in brief summary  of  his  claim,  that  he
        would be targeted by the Taliban if returned to  Afghanistan  as  a
        result of his family's involvement in the Afghan government and the
        activities they undertook in opposition to the Taliban.

     4. In a decision dated 5  October  2011  the  Respondent  refused  the
        asylum claim. The Respondent did not  find  the  Appellant's  claim
        credible and considered, in any event, that the Afghan  authorities
        could provide him with a sufficiency of protection and that, in the
        alternative,  he  was  able  to  internally  relocate.  Whilst  the
        Respondent accepted that the Appellant had developed a family  life
        in the UK with his brother there was said  to  be  no  evidence  of
        dependency over and above the normal emotional ties  between  adult
        siblings.

     5. The Appellant appealed this decision but a Judge of the  First-tier
        Tribunal dismissed his appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  12
        January 2012. Both the Appellant and  the  Respondent  agreed  that
        this decision was marred by an error of law and that it had  to  be
        set aside. The matter was therefore transferred back to the  First-
        tier Tribunal and a de novo hearing  took  place  on  15  May  2013
        before Judge Bartlett.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

     6. The Judge did not accept the Appellant's claimed age (which was  09
        June 1993) and concluded that he was born in the year  1990.  There
        has been no subsequent challenge to this  finding.  The  Judge  did
        however find the Appellant to be generally  credible  and  accepted
        most of the core assertions of the Appellant's account. The Judge's
        factual findings will be considered later in this decision. At this
        stage however it is necessary to note that,  despite  finding  that
        the Appellant had been kidnapped by the Taliban  in  January  2008,
        and that he had survived an attack by the Taliban whilst travelling
        in his uncle's car in April 2008, the  Judge  considered  that  the
        Appellant had been used as a pawn in order to obtain the release of
        Taliban members detained by the authorities and that he was not the
        principle target of the car attack. The Judge  was  not  satisfied,
        having applied the country guidance decision in AK (Article  15(c))
        Afghanistan CG [2002] UKUT 00163  (AK)  and  the  decision  of  the
        ECrtHR in H  and  B  v  The  United  Kingdom  (application  numbers
        70073/10 and 44539/11)  (H  &  B),  that  the  Appellant  would  be
        targeted by the Taliban  if  returned  to  Afghanistan.  The  Judge
        appears to have regarded the Appellant as being equivalent to a low-
        level collaborator and that the  Taliban  would  have  neither  the
        motivation nor the ability to pursue him in Kabul, the  city  where
        he  had  resided  for  18  months  prior  to  his  departure   from
        Afghanistan.

     7. Noting that the Taliban killed the Appellant's father in 2006,  and
        that his uncle, who had been  employed  by  the  Afghan  Government
        Security Department, left Afghanistan in 2009, and noting that  the
        Appellant had been out of Afghanistan since  about  May  2008,  the
        Judge concluded that there was no reasonable degree  of  likelihood
        that the Taliban would  seek  to  target  the  Appellant  where  he
        returned to Kabul. In reaching this conclusion the Judge  indicated
        that he took account of the expert report by Dr  Antonio  Giustozzi
        but that the report was dated 13 December 2011  and  preceded  both
        the detailed analysis in AK and H & B. In considering  whether  the
        Appellant could safely return or relocate to Kabul the  Judge  also
        took into account oral evidence given by  the  Appellant's  brother
        that the Appellant had  distant  relatives  living  in  Kabul,  and
        concluded that the Appellant would be  able  to  receive  financial
        support either from his brother or  his  relatives  now  living  in
        Iran.

The decision of the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

     8. The decision by the First-tier Judge was challenged, into alia,  on
        the basis that he failed to consider key aspects of AG's report and
        that the cases upon which the Judge relied did not consider whether
        family members would be at risk because of their relationship  with
        those treated as traitors by the Taliban. At  the  'Error  of  Law'
        hearing before Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Monson  reliance  was
        placed  on  the  unreported   Upper   Tribunal   decision   of   SM
        (AA/05787/2012) in which the First-tier Tribunal was held  to  have
        erred in  law  by  failing  to  address  the  question  of  whether
        individuals would be at greater risk as a result of being perceived
        by the Taliban as a likely aggressor in a blood feud.

     9. The Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge noted that the First-tier  Tribunal
        had not addressed the 'blood feud' theme canvassed  in  the  expert
        report and had not asked himself whether the Appellant would  be  a
        high-profile target as a consequence of being perceived as a likely
        aggressor in a blood feud against the  Taliban.  The  Deputy  Judge
        concluded that the question of risk on  return  would  have  to  be
        reassessed and that this may, in turn, require  a  reassessment  of
        the First-tier Tribunal Judge's finding that the Appellant was  not
        the main target of the April 2008 car attack. Significantly however
        the Deputy Judge made no actual finding in respect of the  argument
        advanced on behalf of the Appellant that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        had separately erred in law in the way it addressed this question.

    10. It was agreed by the parties at the Error of Law hearing  that  the
        appeal should be linked with that of SM, which had been  identified
        as being a prospective country guidance case. It is unclear whether
        this appeal was ever subsequently and formally linked with that  of
        SM. What is apparent is that SM was heard, on  its  own,  on  dates
        throughout 2014 and 2015, and was not  promulgated  until  16  June
        2016. Nor was SM  designated  as  a  country  guidance  case  or  a
        reported decision of the Upper Tribunal. Mr Bramble provided a copy
        of SM, not because it was said to be of particular relevance to the
        issues under consideration in  this  appeal,  but  because  of  its
        relevance in the identification of an error of law in the  decision
        of the First-tier Tribunal.

The Upper Tribunal hearing to remake the decision

    11. On the basis of the decision of the Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge,
        and in the absence of any dissent  from  either  representative,  I
        satisfied myself that I must remake the decision in  light  of  the
        First-tier Tribunal's unchallenged factual findings and in light of
        the new evidence provided, which includes  a  supplementary  expert
        report from Dr Giustozzi, further generic  background  reports  and
        media articles relating  to  the  conditions  in  Afghanistan,  and
        medical evidence, including a psychological report, relating to the
        Appellant's mental  health.  To  this  end  I  heard  further  oral
        evidence from the Appellant, who adopted a supplementary  statement
        dated 17 May 2016, and evidence from his brother, who  adopted  his
        supplementary statement dated 19 May 2016.

    12. In his oral evidence the Appellant said that he had never worked in
        Afghanistan or the UK and that he had not ventured out on  his  own
        when living  in  Kabul.  He  gave  evidence,  which  reflected  the
        assertions in his supplementary statement and the medical  evidence
        and medical notes provided in a new  Bundle  C  (Bundles  A  and  B
        having been prepared for an earlier hearing in May  2016  that  was
        adjourned), relating to his prescribed medication and the diagnosis
        of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder that had  been  made  by  an  NHS
        Counselling Psychologist. He was not allowed to work  and  did  not
        study and spent most of his time at his brother's home.

    13. In his oral evidence the Appellant's  brother  indicated  that  the
        distant relatives who lived in Kabul were his paternal uncle's  in-
        laws. The brother had not had any contact  with  these  individuals
        for at least 10 to 15 years. The Appellant's brother was  not  able
        to financially support the Appellant if he returned to  Afghanistan
        because the brother had to support  his  own  wife  and  child  and
        mother and paternal uncle, all of whom  were  living  illegally  in
        Iran. After hearing submissions from  both  representatives  are  I
        indicated that I would reserve my decision.

Further assessment  of  the  lawfulness  of  an  aspect  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal's decision; further findings of fact  and  assessment  of  risk  on
return

    14. The principal  facts  of  this  appeal  are  not  in  dispute.  The
        following is a summary of the accepted factual matrix.

    15. The Appellant was born and lived for most of his  life  in  Baghlan
        province of Afghanistan. Around February 1999 the Taliban asked the
        Appellant's brothers, J and F,  to  join  them  but  they  refused.
        Around March 1999 the  Taliban  arrested  the  Appellant's  father,
        paternal uncle (Y) and brothers and  detained  them  for  around  6
        months. During this time the  family  shop  was  destroyed  by  the
        Taliban. The family members were released around September 1999  on
        payment of a bribe but the  Appellant's  two  brothers  were  again
        arrested later that month and interrogated for a week.

    16. Around mid-March 2001 the Appellant's brother, J, and his uncle, Y,
        were arrested by the Taliban. Fearing that the Taliban  would  also
        target the Appellant's other brother,  F,  he  was  sent  by  their
        father to a distant relative's  house.  In  May  2001  the  Taliban
        returned the bodies of J and Y. There were signs of torture on  the
        bodies. F subsequently fled Afghanistan fearing that his  life  was
        in danger and came to the UK around August 2001. He claimed  asylum
        but was granted exceptional leave to remain for  4  years.  He  was
        subsequently granted indefinite leave to remain and naturalised  as
        a British citizen on 12 February 2008.

    17. Soon after the deaths of J and  Y  the  Appellant's  father  joined
        Jamiat-e-Islami, a party associated  with  the  Northern  Alliance.
        Following  the  defeat  of  the  Taliban  in  November   2001   the
        Appellant's father commenced work for the government as an official
        member of the  National  Security  Department  (the  Afghan  secret
        services). As a result of this employment  the  Appellant's  father
        gained enemies in the Taliban.

    18. Around mid-November 2006 the Appellant's father  was  killed  by  a
        Taliban rocket whilst in a car in Baghlan City. Following this  the
        Appellant and his mother went  to  Kabul  City  to  stay  with  his
        maternal uncle who also worked for the Afghan secret  service.  The
        Appellant began to attend a  school  in  Kabul  together  with  his
        cousin. One of his maternal uncle's drivers  would  drive  them  to
        school accompanied by a bodyguard.

    19. Around January 2008 the Taliban  raided  the  Appellant's  maternal
        uncle's home and kidnapped the Appellant. After being  captured  he
        was informed that his  father  was  responsible  for  the  loss  of
        hundreds of Taliban men but that the Taliban had  managed  to  send
        his father 'to hell'. The Taliban then began to hit the  Appellant.
        Some days later the Appellant was made to speak to his uncle  on  a
        mobile phone to confirm he was still alive. Several days after that
        around 60 Afghan soldiers, led by the Appellant's  maternal  uncle,
        attacked and rescued the Appellant having used  their  intelligence
        network to locate the Taliban base. The Appellant's uncle  informed
        him that the Taliban were demanding the release of their  prisoners
        in exchange  for  the  Appellant.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        concluded that the Appellant was effectively  used  as  a  pawn  in
        order to seek to achieve the release of Taliban prisoners  held  by
        the Appellant's uncle.

    20. The Appellant returned to school, and, together  with  his  cousin,
        continued to be driven in a car whose  windows  were  blackened  or
        tinted, driven  by  his  uncle's  driver  and  accompanied  by  one
        bodyguard. Sometime in April 2008, on the way to  school,  the  car
        came under attack from gunfire. The  driver  was  killed  instantly
        and, although taken to hospital, the Appellant's cousin later  died
        as a result of his injuries. Following this incident it was decided
        that the Appellant should leave Afghanistan  as  his  life  was  in
        serious danger. His mother and maternal uncle found  an  agent  and
        arranged for him to be taken to a safe place.

    21. Around the middle of 2009 the Appellant's maternal uncle, with  his
        wife and daughter and the Appellant's mother, fled to Iran.

    22. There remains an outstanding issue as  to  whether  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge fell into legal error in his analysis supporting his
        conclusion that the Appellant had not been specifically targeted by
        the Taliban  the  April  2008  car  attack.  This  issue  was  left
        undecided by the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge. It therefore falls to
        me to determine whether the Judge committed a legal error  in  this
        assessment. In evaluating this aspect of the First-tier  Tribunal's
        decision I have  been  greatly  assisted  by  Mr  Bramble  who,  in
        submissions that were both fair and  measured,  accepted  that  the
        First-tier Tribunal Judge did not take  into  account  all  of  the
        relevant circumstances surrounding the attack.

    23. At [93] the Judge concluded that the Appellant  had  not  been  the
        primary target of the car attack because, when  kidnapped,  he  had
        been used as a pawn by the Taliban in order to force his  uncle  to
        release Taliban prisoners. The Judge concluded that the real target
        of the car attack was likely to be the Appellant's uncle. The Judge
        noted that the car windows were black or tinted and that  it  would
        not have been possible to see who was travelling  in  the  car.  At
        [123]  the  Judge  stated  that  the  Appellant's  cousin  and  the
        Appellant may have been secondary targets, but concluded  that  the
        main target would always have been the Appellant's uncle as he  had
        caused a great deal of harm to the Taliban and was an  official  in
        the Afghan government security department.

    24. This assessment however fails to take into account  the  clear  and
        unchallenged  evidence  that  the  car  was   travelling   to   the
        Appellant's school, and that  the  Appellant  and  his  cousin  had
        always travelled by car in order to reach their  school.  As  such,
        the Appellant's uncle is unlikely to have been  travelling  in  the
        car and, given that it was  a  targeted  attack,  the  Taliban  are
        likely to have been aware of this. I am satisfied that the  Judge's
        failure to take the full circumstances  of  the  car  journey  into
        account constituted a material error of law and that, had he  fully
        considered the circumstances surrounding the attack, the Judge  may
        have concluded that the Appellant was the primary target.

    25. Having considered  the  submissions  from  both  representatives  I
        proceed to remake this particular and isolated aspect of the First-
        tier Tribunal's decision. I am satisfied, to the lower standard  of
        proof, that the Taliban knew that the  Appellant's  maternal  uncle
        was a member of the security services whose position was such as to
        enable him to grant the release of Taliban prisoners. The very fact
        that the Appellant was kidnapped in order to attain the release  of
        prisoners reinforces this view. It is therefore highly likely  that
        the Taliban  would  have  reliable  and  accurate  intelligence  in
        relation to the car that was attacked and where it was heading. The
        Appellant's unchallenged and consistent evidence was  that  he  and
        his cousin were driven to school daily  with  a  bodyguard  escort.
        Given the frequency of this journey I find that the Taliban  would,
        on the lower standard of proof, have been aware of  where  the  car
        was going and who was travelling in the car. In the circumstances I
        am satisfied that the Taliban were targeting the  Appellant  and/or
        his cousin, most likely in retribution for the activities of  their
        fathers.

    26. Having concluded  that  the  Appellant  is  likely,  on  the  lower
        standard of proof, to have been a principal  target  in  the  April
        2008 attack, it is appropriate to partially remind  myself  of  the
        circumstances of the Appellant's kidnap in January 2008.  Whilst  I
        fully accept the  finding  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
        kidnapping was designed to secure the release of Taliban prisoners,
        it is also apparent from the Appellant's unchallenged evidence that
        the Taliban were acutely aware of his parentage  and  that  he  was
        physically assaulted as a direct result of his  father's  hostility
        towards the Taliban. I am therefore satisfied  that  the  Appellant
        was, at least partially, targeted by the Taliban in this kidnapping
        as a result of his familial relationship with his father.

    27. I  now  consider  whether,  in  light  of  the  factual  matrix  as
        determined above, the Appellant, on the lower standard of proof, is
        likely to face a real risk of persecution (being  targeted  by  the
        Taliban) if returned to Afghanistan. It is not in dispute that,  if
        he is returned, it will be to Kabul.

    28. Of particular relevance to any risk faced by the Appellant in Kabul
        is the fact that he has already been targeted twice by the  Taliban
        in that  city.  It  is  not  in  dispute  that  the  Appellant  was
        specifically targeted for kidnapping in January 2008.  Whilst  this
        kidnapping was ostensibly to coerce the Appellant's maternal  uncle
        to release Taliban prisoners, it  is  clear  from  the  Appellant's
        accepted evidence that, even at this stage, he was known to be  the
        son of a National Security Department official who had  caused  the
        incarceration and death of a large number of Taliban members.  This
        familial relationship was clearly significant to  the  Taliban  who
        assaulted the Appellant as a result.

    29. Given my analysis of  the  circumstances  of  the  April  2008  car
        attack, I am additionally satisfied that the Appellant was, on  the
        lower standard of proof, likely to have been specifically  targeted
        by the Taliban, again because of his strong familial  relationships
        with his father and  his  maternal  uncle.  The  accepted  evidence
        demonstrates that the Taliban were sufficiently able and willing to
        target the Appellant despite his residence in Kabul.

    30. I take into account that some 8 years has now  passed  since  these
        attacks. I additionally take  into  account  that  the  Appellant's
        maternal uncle and his mother fled Afghanistan in 2009. I also take
        into account the  absence  of  any  involvement  by  the  Appellant
        himself, whilst he lived in Afghanistan, of any activities  against
        the  Taliban.  I  do  however  attach  significant  weight  to  the
        Appellant's strong familial relationship with both his  father  and
        his maternal uncle, and the considerable and demonstrable animosity
        that exists between the Taliban and the Appellant's family.

    31. In his addendum expert report, dated  19  May  2016,  Dr  Giustozzi
        indicated,  with  supporting   references,   that   the   Taliban's
        intelligence operations have grown increasingly  sophisticated  and
        their ability to track down individuals is also very sophisticated.
        He indicated, again with supporting references, that even in  areas
        of weak Taliban presence the Taliban have informers and  spies.  In
        Kabul the main group of Taliban operating in the city  claimed,  in
        an off-the-record interview, to have 1000 paid intelligence  agents
        and a large but undisclosed number of informers. This was  said  to
        be a substantial intelligence  apparatus.  The  expert  noted  that
        forms of police cooperation with the  Taliban  continue.  He  noted
        that the  situation  in  Kabul  had  worsened  and  supported  this
        assertion by reference to a  number  of  attacks  on  the  security
        forces and civilians. In general violence had reached a new high in
        2014. As of 2014 Taliban targeting of  collaborators  and  elements
        they considered hostile continued on a larger scale than ever.  The
        expert stated, "relatives  are  targeted  particularly  when  their
        family members collaborating with the government are out of reach."
        The expert gave examples of the continued  reporting  about  police
        corruption and police ineffectiveness  during  2011  to  2015.  The
        content of the expert report was not challenged by  the  presenting
        officer and my attention was not drawn to any evidence  tending  to
        undermine the particular factual assertions made in the report.

    32. Based on the  unchallenged  content  of  the  expert  report  I  am
        satisfied, on the  lower  standard  of  proof,  that,  despite  the
        Appellant's father having been killed and his maternal uncle having
        left Afghanistan in 2009, there remains a real risk, as a result of
        the very close familial relationship and the particular  activities
        undertaken by the Appellant's father and  uncle  in  combating  the
        Taliban, that the Appellant would be targeted  by  the  Taliban.  I
        note that, although his father  was  dead,  the  appellant's  uncle
        remains 'out of reach'. I  am  satisfied  that  the  Taliban  would
        actively seek to take revenge on the  Appellant  for  his  family's
        very significant involvement in anti-Taliban activities.

    33. I have carefully considered the decision in AK, which  remains  the
        principal and  most  recent  country  guidance  case,  despite  its
        vintage. AK was a case primarily dealing with Article 15(c) of  the
        Refugee Qualification Directive.  The  appellant  in  AK  had  been
        disbelieved and had not been specifically targeted by the  Taliban.
        The Upper Tribunal  concluded  that  the  level  of  indiscriminate
        violence in Afghanistan, taken as a whole, was not at such  a  high
        level as to mean that, within  the  meaning  of  Article  15(c),  a
        civilian, solely by being present in Afghanistan, faced a real risk
        which threatened his life or person. It has not been argued  by  Mr
        Bazini that the Appellant in the present appeal would face any risk
        on return to Afghanistan on the basis of Article 15(c).

    34. I have additionally considered H & B, which considered the position
        of two persons, one who had worked as an  interpreter  for  the  US
        armed forces, and the other as a driver for the UN, who would  both
        be  returned  to  Kabul.  The  ECtHR  accepted   that   individuals
        associated with or perceived as supportive of the Afghan Government
        fell within a potential risk category  and  that  this  required  a
        particularly careful examination of the risks to them  upon  return
        to Afghanistan. The ECtHR found that  "...  there  is  insufficient
        evidence before [the court] at the present time to suggest that the
        Taliban have the motivation or  the  ability  to  pursue  low-level
        collaborators in  Kabul  or  other  areas  outside  their  control"
        (paragraph 97). The ECtHR did however emphasize that each case must
        revolve on its own particular facts  and  individual  circumstances
        (e.g. paragraph 100). H & B  did  not  involve  family  members  of
        individuals holding positions of responsibility or influence in the
        Afghan secret service. Nor did it involve individuals who had  been
        targeted anywhere near the extent to which the Appellant  has  been
        targeted. Neither case dealt with an individual  who  had  actually
        been detained by the  Taliban  and  against  whom  there  had  been
        specific attempts on his life.

    35. Given the very specific targeting of the Appellant by the  Taliban,
        and in light of  the  unchallenged  information  contained  in  the
        supplementary expert report, I am satisfied, on the lower  standard
        of proof, that the Appellant is at a real risk of being  identified
        and targeted by the Taliban if removed to Kabul or indeed  Baghlan.
        Given his father's involvement with the Jamiat-e-Islami and  as  an
        operative for the Afghan secret service there must be a  real  risk
        that the Appellant's return would become known to Taliban.  In  his
        2011 report Dr Giustozzi described Baghlan as one of the  provinces
        of Afghanistan worst affected by  factional  infighting  in  recent
        history. The security situation had deteriorated and that there was
        a resurgence by the Taliban. In his report of May 2016  the  expert
        noted that insurgent attacks in Baghlan  had  increased  each  year
        since 2009 and that in 2014 the Taliban recovered ground previously
        lost in 2009 and were pushing towards the district centres  of  the
        north. In late January 2016 the Taliban  in  Baghlan  cut  off  the
        power line supplying Kabul with electricity  and  the  Afghan  army
        has, since then, struggled to reclaim the area  despite  a  massive
        operation.

    36. It was not suggested by Mr  Bramble  that,  if  the  Appellant  was
        likely to be specifically and actively  targeted  by  the  Taliban,
        that the Afghan authorities were capable of providing a sufficiency
        of protection. The relevant, if aged, authorities  make  clear,  as
        does the most recent CIG report, that if an individual has been  or
        is likely to  be  specifically  targeted  by  the  Taliban  then  a
        sufficiency of protection is unlikely to be available.  Mr  Bramble
        did not submit that the Appellant would be able to relocate to  any
        other part of Afghanistan and the Respondent has not identified any
        other region of the country to which the Appellant could reasonably
        be expected to relocate. In these circumstances I am satisfied that
        the Appellant would face a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
        Afghanistan of removed there.



Notice of Decision

The asylum/Article 3 appeal is allowed



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               02 February 2017

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


