
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/12250/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                   |         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 21 September 2017                  |         On 25 September 2017         |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                 Musa Ndlovu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Masih, instructed by Braitch RB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Musa Ndlovu, was born on 26 October 1981 and is  a  male
    citizen of Zimbabwe.  He entered the United Kingdom in March  2015  and
    claimed asylum.  His wife and son had entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
    2013. Another child (a daughter) had been born in the  United  Kingdom.
    The appellant's wife has since died. The appellant's son  and  daughter
    claim as his  dependants  in  this  appeal.   By  a  decision  dated  4
    September 2015, the appellant's application for asylum was refused  and
    a decision was made to make directions for his removal from the  United
    Kingdom.  An appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Grimmett)  was
    dismissed by a decision promulgated on 6 June 2017.  The appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge found that  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  switched  from
    support for ZANU-PF to MDC (Movement for Democratic Change)  was  true.
    The appellant had claimed that he had been arrested in October 2013  by
    two officers who had detained him for three days and asked him  why  he
    had changed from ZANU-PF to MDC.  He was released without  charge.   He
    was arrested again in January 2014 and  asked  the  same  questions  as
    before. Again, he was released without charge.  .  In January 2015, the
    same two police officers arrested the appellant and questioned him  for
    five days.  They threatened him and took him "to an area where  he  was
    told that MDC supporters  were  shot  and  thrown  into  a  lake".   He
    insisted that the appellant pay  a  bribe  (US  dollars  4,000)  before
    releasing him.  The appellant paid the bribe.  At [22] the judge  found
    that the appellant's account of his detention, ill-treatment and  being
    forced to pay a ransom was true and accurate.  However, the  judge  was
    not satisfied the appellant would be at risk on return.  She noted that
    the appellant had not been charged  at  any  time  during  any  of  the
    arrests/detentions and that he had, in any event, been released on each
    occasion, albeit on the third occasion by the payment of a bribe.   The
    judge found that it was "far more likely that the reasons for detaining
    him were to obtain a bribe rather than to prosecute him because he  was
    never charged despite the detention".  The judge found that  there  was
    no evidence to show that any family member had been approached  by  the
    police after  the  appellant  left  Zimbabwe  in  2015.   No  paperwork
    appeared to have been generated by any of his arrests  and  so  it  was
    unlikely that there would be any written record at  the  airport  which
    might  alert  the  authorities  to  his  history  of  detentions.   The
    appellant could return safely to live in his home area of Bulawayo.

 3. In essence, there are two challenges to the judge's  analysis.   First,
    it is asserted that the judge applied the wrong standard of proof  (the
    balance of probabilities) at [22] when  she  should  have  applied  the
    lower standard of reasonable likelihood.

 4. At [11], the judge correctly sets out  the  standard  of  proof  to  be
    applied in an asylum/Article 2 and 3 ECHR appeal.  She  noted  that  it
    was "for the appellant to establish substantial grounds  for  believing
    that returning him would result in a real risk of being persecuted  ...
    or suffering serious harm".  The question then, is whether the  judge's
    use of the words "it seems to be far more likely" at  [22]  shows  that
    she has applied the incorrect  standard  of  proof.   Having  read  the
    entire decision very carefully, I conclude that, whilst possibly guilty
    of an unfortunate use of words, the judge did not err in law such  that
    her decision falls to be set aside.   I  say  that  for  the  following
    reasons.  The judge had before her two possible  explanations  for  the
    third detention  of  the  appellant  by  the  police  officers.   These
    officers may have wished to detain the  appellant  on  account  of  his
    political opinions and, secondly, they may have wished to detain him in
    order to extract a bribe.  It was the appellant's  contention  that  he
    had been detained on account of his political opinion.  The  judge  did
    not accept that explanation but, having found as a  fact  that  he  had
    been detained, explained his release  on  the  basis  that  the  police
    officers had wished to obtain a bribe.  There is no suggestion at [22],
    notwithstanding the use of the expression "far more likely",  that  the
    judge is here weighing up two possible explanations for  a  past  event
    and preferring one to the other on  a  balance  of  probabilities.   It
    would have been enough for the judge simply  to  have  found  that  the
    appellant  was  released  for  reasons  wholly  unconnected  with   his
    political opinions.  Indeed, that is  in  effect  what  she  has  said.
    Having found that the appellant had been detained and released,  as  he
    claimed, it was open to the judge to say why she thought  he  had  been
    released.  I find nothing inconsistent in the analysis at [22] with the
    judge's accurate statement of the relevant standard of proof at [11].

 5. The second challenge is, in effect, one of perversity.   The  appellant
    asserts that, having found that the police officers  had  arrested  the
    appellant on two occasions, questioned him about his political opinions
    but then released him (without the payment of  a  bribe)  that  it  was
    perverse to find that, on the third occasion, the police  officers  had
    not been concerned at all with the appellant's political  opinions  but
    sought only to obtain a bribe from him. I disagree with that  argument.
    The judge has made clear findings of fact; she has found that,  on  the
    third occasion, the police officers took the opportunity to  extract  a
    bribe from the appellant.  There is nothing illogical or perverse about
    that finding any more that it is arguably  illogical  to  insist  that,
    because they had shown interest in the appellant's political  views  on
    two previous occasions, the officers must have had a  similar  interest
    at the time of the third  arrest.  By  the  same  token,  it  would  be
    illogical for the officers to release the appellant without payment  of
    a bribe on  two  occasions  yet  to  demand  one  on  the  third.   The
    appellant's challenge is nothing more than a disagreement with findings
    which was available to the judge on the evidence.

 6. None of the arrests led to the appellant  being  charged  and  on  each
    occasion he was released.  As the judge noted, there is no evidence  of
    paper trail  resulting  from  the  arrests.   In  the  light  of  those
    findings, it was open to the judge to find  that,  on  arrival  at  the
    airport in Zimbabwe, there would be nothing to  alert  the  authorities
    which  might  lead  them  to  detain  and  ill-treat   the   appellant.
    Thereafter, the appellant would be free to return to his home  area  of
    Bulawayo and  to  live  there  in  safety.   I  agree  with  Mr  Mills'
    submission that, if he was able to get beyond the  airport,  there  was
    nothing to suggest that the appellant would  be  at  risk  in  Bulawayo
    where it is possible openly to support the MDC and where the  influence
    of ZANU-PF is much weaker than elsewhere in Zimbabwe.

 7. For the reasons I have given, the appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 22 September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 22 September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




