
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: aa/12885/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 August 2016                    | On 29 September 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                     SL
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, of Counsel, instructed by Malik and Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

Anonymity

1.    This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made by the First-tier
    Tribunal. Neither party invited me to rescind the order. I continue it
    pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).



Background

2.    The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of the  First-tier
      Tribunal M B Hussain promulgated on 9 May 2016, dismissing her  appeal
      against a decision taken on 8  October  2015  refusing  to  grant  her
      international protection.

3.     The  Appellant  is  a  national  of  Albania  born  on  2  May  1993.
      Essentially the core of the Appellant's claim is that she engaged in a
      relationship with an  older  man  against  her  father's  wishes.  Her
      boyfriend is a British citizen of Kosovan descent. Her  father  was  a
      violent man and would beat her and her mother. She  decided  to  leave
      Albania in October 2012 to live with her boyfriend in the UK following
      a violent incident between her mother and father.  Save  for  a  short
      period of separation she has lived with her boyfriend in the  UK.  She
      telephoned her father to inform him of her whereabouts and he disowned
      her. She subsequently fell pregnant and telephoned her father  in  the
      hope that he would have a change of heart but he  threatened  to  kill
      her for dishonouring the family. The Appellant's daughter was born  on
      29 May 2015.

The Appeal

4.    The Appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  attended  an
      oral hearing on 26 February 2016. She was not legally represented. The
      Judge heard evidence from the Appellant. Whilst the Judge accepted the
      Appellant's father "may be an unpleasant man with violent traits",  he
      considered that informing him of her pregnancy  knowing  that  he  was
      likely to disapprove undermined the basis  of  her  fear  [38].  As  a
      consequence the Judge did not accept the  Appellant  fled  Albania  to
      save herself from her father. He thus concluded that she would not  be
      harmed on return to Albania. The Judge further noted that there was no
      objective basis for the Appellant's  fear  [39].  Further  still,  the
      Judge found that the Appellant could  not  bring  herself  within  the
      protection of the Refugee Convention for lack of a  Convention  reason
      [41]. Having dismissed the protection claim  the  Judge  proceeded  to
      adopt a two-stage analysis  and  found  that  the  Appellant  did  not
      qualify for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules or outside the
      Rules on human rights grounds. He took into  account  the  Appellant's
      relationship and the health concerns relevant to her daughter, but  he
      was not satisfied that there were any exceptional  circumstances  that
      would warrant a grant of leave outside of the Rules [46].

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

5.    The Appellant sought permission to appeal from the Upper  Tribunal  on
      8 July 2016 contending that the Judge  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
      assess risk on the basis that the Appellant would  be  returned  as  a
      single mother with an illegitimate child and failed to apply  relevant
      Country Guidance.

6.    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  on
      18 July 2016. She observed that it was "unclear whether the judge  did
      or didn't accept the  appellant's  account"  and  found  that  it  was
      arguable that his assessment failed to take into account the  cultural
      stigma/dishonour that may be attached to an illegitimate  child  of  a
      single mother on return to Albania.

7.    In a rule 24 response dated 29 July 2016,  the  Respondent  sought  to
      uphold the Judge's decision on the  basis  that  he  directed  himself
      appropriately and that in light of his findings  the  Appellant  could
      return to her family.

8.          Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

9.    During the course of the Appellant's pursuit for permission to  appeal
      to this Tribunal, there has been a difference of opinion as to whether
      or not the Judge did or did not accept the  Appellant's  account.  The
      First-tier Tribunal in refusing permission  to  appeal  in  the  first
      instance considered the Judge had rejected  the  Appellant's  account,
      whereas Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan considered that  it  was  unclear
      whether the Judge had or had not done so. It  seems  to  me  that  the
      source of this confusion stems from what the Judge  found  at  [38]  -
      [39]. Therein the Judge accepted the Appellant's  father  "may  be  an
      unpleasant person with violent traits", which  suggests  that  he  may
      have accepted some aspects of the Appellant's historic account. In  my
      judgement the variance in opinion is down to a  lack  of  clarity  and
      detail  in  the  Judge's  analysis  of  the  facts  which  is   brief.
      Nevertheless, on a holistic reading of the decision, in my view, it is
      apparent that the Judge did not accept the Appellant fled Albania  "to
      save herself from a violent father" [39] on the basis that if she  had
      done so she would not  have  telephoned  him  to  inform  him  of  her
      pregnancy. That, in essence, in addition to the  lack  of  "objective"
      evidence led  the  Judge  to  dismiss  the  appeal  for  international
      protection. I say all of this, however, by way of general  comment  as
      the Judge's  findings  in  this  regard  are  not  challenged  by  the
      Appellant, but they are relevant because they provide the framework in
      which this appeal is to be assessed.

10.   The Appellant's pleaded case seeks to challenge the  Judge's  decision
      in respect of his assessment of risk on return, in that, he failed  to
      factor into his assessment whether there was a real  risk  of  serious
      harm to the Appellant as a single mother of an illegitimate child with
      reference to the country guidance  cases  of  AM  and  BM  (Trafficked
      women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80  (IAC)  and  TD  and  AD  (Trafficked
      women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC). I note that the latter decision was
      reported a few days before the date of hearing before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal but was in existence for two months' before the decision  was
      in fact promulgated.

11.   Having considered the  submissions  of  the  representatives,  I  have
      reached the conclusion that the Judge's decision involved  the  making
      of an error on a point of law such that it has to be set aside and re-
      made.

12.   There is no dispute that the  Appellant  is  a  single  mother  of  an
      illegitimate child. As there is no challenge to the  Judge's  findings
      of fact, that was the Appellant's profile against which risk was to be
      assessed. There was no such consideration by the Judge.  The  omission
      may not have been entirely of the Judge's own making  as  he  was  not
      assisted by the Respondent's failure to highlight  the  point  in  the
      reasons for refusal letter or draw attention to  it  at  the  hearing,
      however, the Grounds of  Appeal  make  reference  to  the  Appellant's
      status as a single mother and I am satisfied that  the  issue  was  an
      obvious  point  for  consideration.  Further,  an   article   in   the
      Appellant's bundle reporting the killing of a woman by her father  who
      could not  face  the  societal  shame  and  dishonour  caused  by  her
      pregnancy was before the Judge, and contrary to what he stated at [39]
      was capable of supporting an objective basis for the Appellant's fear.



13.   The relevance of this issue is derived  in  particular  from  what  is
      said about illegitimate children in  the  case  of  AM  &  BM  (supra)
      at [69] and [213] where the Tribunal stated thus:

           "Turning  to  the  position  under  the  Kanun  of  women   with
           illegitimate children, she quoted from a commentary by Gjecov on
           the Kanun i Leke Dukagjinit:

           "According to most  conservative  and  mostly  historical  Kanun
           traditions such a woman with an illegitimate child  would  incur
           such shame on her  family  and  community  that  she  should  be
           killed: 'a woman may be shot in the back for kurvni'" and 'if  a
           shamed woman or girl who is pregnant and escapes  without  being
           killed and goes to a different region both woman and  child  are
           placed under permanent ban by the banner  (community)'. If  she
           and  the  child  returned  regardless,  they  regard  it  as   a
           provocation to family and community honour that -  according  to
           classic Kanun she should be publicly executed or burned alive on
           'a dung heap'."

           Although she accepted the worst extremes of Kanun culture belong
           to the past and it was mostly "only" sexually abused women  from
           the classic Kanun regions in Northern Albanian who had  to  fear
           their fathers or brothers  for  their  lives,  in  the  case  of
           ""kurva"", family rejection was the most common reaction  across
           Albania."

           ...

           "Traditional Albanian society, particularly  in  the  north,  is
           influenced by the strict code of "honour" embodied in the "Kanun
           of Leke Dukagjinit" which sets out how a woman should behave and
           the inferior role of women in society. At its  worst,  and  very
           rarely, it can lead to honour killings of women who are  thought
           to have damaged a family's  honour  by  having  stepped  outside
           rigid standards of behaviour. Such  women  are  referred  to  as
           "kurva" and may face discrimination. Families may well  consider
           that having an illegitimate child brings particular dishonour on
           a family and for that reason are likely to refuse  to  have  the
           trafficked woman returned to them, or if they accept  her  back,
           would refuse to take the child.  Albania has a large  number  of
           children who have been abandoned.  Victims  of  trafficking  may
           well be considered by their families and by society to be a very
           poor marriage prospect and they could face being forced  into  a
           marriage with someone whom they would not choose themselves."

14.   Given the  above  it  is  arguably  the  case  that  a  mother  of  an
      illegitimate child could be viewed and treated differently by society.
      It is arguably not the case that they face no higher than a  level  of
      social discrimination. I also note that in  TD  and  AD  (supra),  the
      guidance therein affirms that the presence of an illegitimate child is
      a relevant factor in assessing risk and access to  protection.  Whilst
      these cases respectively relate to conditions for trafficked women,  I
      agree with the permission granting Judge that there is  some  relevant
      information therein about the conditions that a  lone  woman  with  an
      illegitimate child might face on return and  that  they  are  material
      factors in the assessment of risk.

15.   I am therefore just persuaded that there was a failure to  consider  a
      material issue, which had it been so, may have made  a  difference  to
      the outcome of the decision. In view of the above, and bearing in mind
      the importance of the issues in any protection claim, I set aside  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The Judge's findings of fact  are
      however preserved.

Disposal

16.   The representatives sought  a  remittal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      pursuant  to  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunals,   Courts   and
      Enforcement Act 2007.  The  jurisdiction  to  do  so  should  be  used
      sparingly and whilst there is no challenge to the Judge's findings  of
      fact, the power to remit can be exercised in circumstances  where  the
      effect of the error has deprived a party of an  opportunity  for  that
      party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal or
      where the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
      necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is
      such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it  is
      appropriate to remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  am
      satisfied that such is the  case  here.  Accordingly,  the  appeal  is
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing. The decision  needs
      to be  re-made  with  full  and  proper  consideration  given  to  the
      Appellant's individual circumstances and the relevant factors referred
      to in the Country Guidance cases. For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  the
      issue is  whether  there  would  be  any  consequential  risk  to  the
      Appellant as a single mother of an illegitimate child and whether  any
      such risk would entitle her to international protection.

Decision

      The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  save  for  the
      preserved findings of fact.

      The appeal is to be heard by a Judge other than Judge M B Hussain.


Signed           Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

