
                                    [pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12941/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21st September 2016               |On 08th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between
                                     AE
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Abdar Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S Taylor promulgated on 23rd  March  2016,  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 12th October 2015. The decision by the Respondent  was
    to refuse the appellant's protection claim.

 2. An  anonymity  direction  was  made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  No
    submissions were  made  on  the  point  and  no  issue  raised  by  the
    respondent as to why such a direction should not be continued.  I  make
    an anonymity direction.

 3. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Syria. The respondent's case is
    that the appellant is not a citizen of Syria but a citizen of Egypt. It
    is not challenged that, if the appellant is a  citizen  of  Syria,  his
    protection claim succeeds. If however he is a citizen  of  Egypt,  then
    his protection claim fails in line with the decision by the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

 4. In dismissing the claim Judge Taylor found taking account  of  all  the
    evidence that the appellant was an Egyptian national. Central  to  that
    finding was a report from Sprakab relating to the  language  spoken  by
    the appellant.

 5. By decision made on the 12th August 2016 leave to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. The grant of leave provides:-

         "The Respondent rejected the Appellant's protection  claim  finding
         that he was not from Syria. The main complaint by the Appellant  is
         the Respondent's and Judge's reliance  on  a  report  from  Sprakab
         which found it "very unlikely" that the Appellant is from Syria  as
         he claims. The likelihood that the Appellant is from Egypt  as  the
         report finds is stated to be "very high". Whilst I  do  not  accept
         that the judge misdirected himself as to the law concerning Sprakab
         reports  and  the  report  does  give  specific  reasons  why   the
         Appellant's dialect is considered to be  that  of  a  speaker  from
         Egypt and not from Syria, it is arguable that the  Judge  erred  in
         failing to give full  consideration  to  the  complaint  about  the
         qualification and expertise of the First and Second  linguist.  The
         fact that the person, who assessed the dialect is not said to  have
         any connection with Egypt may  undermine  the  conclusions  of  the
         report. Put simply, it is not stated in the report how that  person
         knows the difference in dialect between that of an  Arabic  speaker
         from Syria and one from Egypt."

 6. Thus the matter appeared before me to determine in the  first  instance
    whether or not there is an error of law in the original determination.

 7. The leave granted did not prevent the Appellant's  representative  from
    arguing the other grounds of appeal. The  grounds  in  summary  are  as
    follows: -

      a) It was for the respondent to show that reliance could be placed  on
         the Sprakab Report. No reliance can be placed on the report because
         it was not  possible  to  discern  whether  the  "interviewer"  was
         Syrian, whether he had spent any time in  Syria,  or  any  time  in
         Egypt and no details of his qualification and  expertise  were  set
         out.  The  analyst,  who  compiled  the  report  on  the  basis  of
         information provided by the interviewer, may or may not have had  a
         specialist or higher degree in linguistics. There was a conspicuous
         lack of any details of any qualifications the purported expert  may
         have  nor  was  there  any  evidence  of   academic   training   or
         qualifications provided.

      b) The judge failed to make findings on the core issues of credibility
         alternatively failed to give adequate  reasons  for  findings  with
         regard to credibility, specifically with regard to the  appellant's
         Syrian nationality, his age, the accurate facts the appellant  gave
         about Syria especially in interview.

      c) The judge failed to take account of the appellant's  age  and  give
         the benefit of the doubt to the appellant by reason thereof.

    Error of law

 8. With regard to the credibility issues, the sole issue to be  determined
    was whether or not the appellant was a national of  Syria  as  is  made
    clear in paragraph 14 of the decision. It has been accepted that if the
    appellant is a Syrian national he would be entitled to asylum.  Equally
    if the appellant was not a Syrian national the appellant had not  given
    any basis for asserting that he would be at  risk  of  mistreatment  or
    persecution in any other country. Thus if he was an  Egyptian  national
    no basis for saying that he would be at risk on being returned to Egypt
    had been advanced.

 9. With regard to the age of the appellant as is evident from paragraph 13
    the judge was quite aware of the age of the appellant at  the  time  of
    the interview and at the time of the events that he was recounting. The
    judge has clearly taken account of the appellant's age is assessing the
    credibility of the appellant's account. I do not find that there is any
    error in the way that the judge dealt with the issue of the appellant's
    age.

10. Similarly as is evident from paragraph 16  the  judge  noted  that  the
    appellant had correctly answered a number  of  questions  about  Syria.
    Indeed if one considers paragraph 16  the  extent  of  the  appellant's
    knowledge of Syria  was  specifically  considered  and  the  judge  had
    indicated that if that was the only evidence he would  have  determined
    that the appellant was a Syrian national.

11. To that extent the judge has considered the age of  the  appellant  and
    has considered the appellant's knowledge of Syria. The judge  has  also
    considered the lack of  knowledge  in  certain  respects  and  specific
    facts, which the appellant did not know about Syria. There is no  error
    in law in the way that the judge has considered the issues of  age  and
    the knowledge of the appellant in respect of Syria. I do not find  that
    there is any error in the way that the judge has dealt with  the  issue
    of age and credibility.

12. In assessing credibility the judge had to further consider  the  Report
    from Sprakab and the impact that that had upon the overall  finding  of
    whether the appellant was a Syrian national. In considering the  report
    the judge found that it was  capable  of  being  relied  upon  and  was
    material to such an extent that he concluded that the appellant was  an
    Egyptian national.

13. I would however draw attention to the contents of paragraph 16  and  17
    of the decision.  Towards the end of that paragraph the judge makes the
    following comment:-

         "16. ... If the decision on the appellant's nationality  was  based
         solely on the answers to questions concerning Syria,  applying  the
         lower standard of proof I would accept that the appellant was  from
         Syria. However, the appellant has failed to answer the  conclusions
         of the linguists' report that his use of Arabic indicates  that  he
         comes from Egypt. The appellant has not countered the  findings  of
         the report and has failed to explain why he speaks with an Egyptian
         Arabic rather than Syrian Arabic. The use of a  particular  dialect
         or pronunciation would be well established in teenage years  and  I
         find that the appellant's age and limited education are  immaterial
         to the findings of the Sprakab report on linguistics.

         17.  From the findings of the Sprakab report I  am  satisfied  that
         the appellant was from Egypt and not from Syria as claimed."

14. The first point taken with regard to the  report  appears  to  be  that
    there is no evidence what qualification or experience the  analyst  has
    to establish his expertise to assess that  the  language  used  by  the
    appellant is language of an Egyptian  national  and  not  by  a  Syrian
    national. That is not to say  that  the  analyst  requires  any  formal
    qualifications in linguistics or a specialised  degree  in  linguistics
    but rather evidence had to be produced to justify the analyst  position
    as an expert qualified  to  act  as  an  analyst  and  his  ability  to
    distinguish between Arabic spoken in Syria and Arabic spoken in  Egypt.



15. In the case of RB  2010  UKUT  00329  [paragraphs  9  to  22]  detailed
    consideration was given to the process by which language  analysis  was
    undertaken. There was a telephone conversation with the appellant.  The
    analyst  in  conjunction  with  the   linguists   then   analysed   the
    conversation and prepared a report on the language  of  the  appellant.
    The conversation appears to have been analysed on some  four  occasions
    by Sprakab analysts and linguists. As is clear from paragraph 20 of the
    decision there was specific  evidence  as  to  the  qualifications  and
    expertise of the analysts and the linguists. The analysts  referred  to
    in RB were persons that had mastered the language concerned to  a  high
    degree or persons that spoke the language as their mother  tongue.  The
    analyst is to be distinguished from those that are the linguists. It is
    the linguists who have the specialised language  degrees.  The  process
    then describes that the analyst in consultation with the linguists  has
    to critically consider the telephone interview  and  identify  material
    language traits that are of significance. The classification  of  those
    linguistic traits would be undertaken by the  linguists,  whether  that
    significance be phonology or prosody, morphology or syntax or  what  is
    described as lexica [language usage  identified  as  emanating  from  a
    specific area].

16. In that event it is not for the  analyst  to  be  qualified  at  degree
    level, although there is  nothing  to  prevent  that,  but  rather  the
    analyst is the person that speaks the  language  as  a  mother  tongue.
    However it is still necessary to establish what expertise  the  analyst
    has to identify significant features  and  whether  they  emanate  from
    Arabic spoken in Syria or Arabic spoken in Egypt.

17. I would also note that as part of the report in the present case  under
    Section 3 Knowledge assessment, investigation  is  undertaken  into  an
    applicant's knowledge of the claimed country of origin, its  geography,
    local to the area  where  he  claimed  to  live,  the  currency,  radio
    stations and the like.

18. The expertise of the analyst are set out  in  the  report.  The  report
    states:-

         Analyst me01

         The analyst was born in 1964 in Syria, and was raised in Palestine

         The analyst first came to Sweden in 1994

         The analyst last visited Palestine in 1983, Lebanon in 2012, Jordan
         2011 and Syria 2011

         The analyst analyses the Arabic Language, and Arabic dialects  from
         the Middle East, North Africa,  the  Arabic  Gulf  and  Eritrea  an
         Arabic.

         The analyst spent long periods of time  in  various  parts  of  the
         Middle East, North Africa, Sudan and the Arabic Gulf.

19. Unlike in RB where consideration was being given to what is a  distinct
    language  Bajuni,  although  arguably  the  language  had   significant
    similarities to Swahili, in the present case  the  language  spoken  is
    Arabic and it is identifying dialects of Arabic that  is  material.  In
    that respect the expertise of the analyst to  distinguish  between  the
    different dialects has to be established.

20. Nowhere within the report does it identify how long the analyst was  in
    Syria. The analyst may have left Syria when he was a baby and only have
    spent a short time in  Syria  otherwise.  His  primary  experience  may
    therefore be the Arabic language in Palestine. The  analyst  has  never
    been to Egypt. It does not deal with the training or any basis for  the
    analyst  being  able  to  identify  specific   language   features   of
    significance and differentiate between Syrian and Egyptian.

21. The whole process undertaken by the Sprakab organisation was considered
    in detail in RB paragraphs 86 to 89 and full examination of the process
    by which analysts are selected to carry out this task is identified  in
    the judgement itself. The analysts are identified as persons that speak
    the language to a high degree usually at a native level  and  are  then
    taught by Sprakab the techniques necessary to undertake  the  tasks  of
    analysis that  is  "to  think  critically  and  analytically  regarding
    language". Before being permitted to undertake any  analysis  they  are
    tested and trained and evaluated to  ensure  that  their  carrying  out
    their tasks appropriately.

22. In that respect the case of MN has dealt with the issues  at  paragraph
    37 wherein Lord Carnwarth states:-

         "so here, it is inappropriate for  general  questions  relating  to
         Sprakab, its methodology and the presentation of its reports to  be
         re-litigated constantly in separate FTT hearings.  ...  Subject  to
         appropriate safeguards they (the Upper Tribunal) were  entitled  in
         my view to find no objection in principle to the admission  of  the
         Sprakab reports, whether because  they  were  in  the  name  of  an
         organisation rather than an  individual,  or  in  general  for  the
         failure in other respects to comply with practice directions. ..."

23. That having been said however Lord Carnwarth at paragraph 51 of  MN  in
    seeking to give guidance as to how one should  analyse  critically  the
    reports of Sprakab states:-

         "51. ... (i) on the basis of the material we have seen,  I  see  no
         reason in principle why Sprakab should not be  able  to  report  on
         both  (a)  language  as  evidence  of  place  of  origin  and   (b)
         familiarity with claim place of origin  provided,  in  both  cases,
         their  expertise  is  properly  demonstrated  and  their  reasoning
         adequately explained.  (As  will  be  seen  below  the  problem  in
         relation to (b) was not the nature of the evidence, but the lack of
         demonstrated expertise.

         (ii) as to(a) language:

             a) The findings (on evidence) in RB are to my mind  sufficient
             to demonstrate acceptable  expertise  and  method,  which  can
             properly be accepted unless the evidence in a particular  case
             shows otherwise;

             b) The Upper Tribunal ought to give further  consideration  to
             how the basis for the geographical attribution  of  particular
             dialects or usages can be better  explained  and  not  (as  is
             often currently seems to be) left implicit. The tribunal needs
             to be able to satisfy itself as to the data  by  reference  to
             which analysts make judgements on the geographical range of  a
             particular dialect or usage.

             c) The RB safeguard requiring the Secretary of State  to  make
             the recording available  to  any  expert  instructed  for  the
             claimant is not only sensible, but essential."

24. The point taken by the appellant's representative is that the basis for
    establishing that the analyst has the expertise necessary to critically
    look at the dialect of the appellant and to attribute specific dialects
    or language usage to a specific area has not been established.

25. It is critical to the process to be undertaken that an  assessment  can
    be made of the expertise of an individual analyst. In the present  case
    the  evidence  to  substantiate  that  the  analyst  has  the  required
    expertise to critically look at the language and country  knowledge  of
    the appellant has not been established. Whilst the  analyst  may  speak
    Arabic as a mother tongue his experience of Syrian Arabic and  Egyptian
    Arabic and therefore his ability to differentiate between  the  two  is
    unclear.

26. I have to say that, whilst the expertise of the analyst  was  an  issue
    that was raised within the Skeleton argument of  the  appellant  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, the recordings of  the  interview  would  have
    been available to the appellant  to  have  his  own  language  analysis
    carried out. I would note that the skeleton argument is dated  6  March
    for a hearing on 7 March. If that was the central issue of  the  appeal
    there would have been nothing to stop  the  appellant's  representative
    from obtaining their own report on the  appellant's  language.  Equally
    raising the issue at such  a  late  stage  gave  little  time  for  the
    respondent to deal with the matter.

27. However despite that the responsibility still lies with the  respondent
    to show that the experts that they are asking the court  to  rely  upon
    have the required  expertise  necessary  to  enable  them  to  properly
    analyse the appellant's language and  to  establish  knowledge  of  the
    country in question.

28. Before going further within this matter I would draw attention  to  the
    Sprakab and report itself within the respondent's bundle. I  note  that
    the report is separated into different sections. Specific importance is
    the section headed Linguistic Analysis Report wherein the following  is
    contained: -

    Knowledge assessment is separate and forms  no  part  of  the  language
    analysis

29. That is material because the  report  itself  separates  out  into  two
    parts, the linguistic analysis which identifies the  features  set  out
    above and a knowledge analysis relating  to  the  appellant's  personal
    knowledge of his country, facts about his country and the geography  of
    his local area. Within Section 3 of the report the Knowledge Assessment
    it has to be accepted that there are details  about  knowledge  of  the
    local area in which the appellant was living which it is  suggested  is
    indicative of an individual that has not lived in Syria  or  the  local
    area. There would be a problem with that in that there is no indication
    on what basis the persons reporting are competent or have expertise  to
    make such comments.

30. However it is to be noted within the decision  itself  that  the  judge
    having carefully considered the  case  of  MN  indicates  that  he  has
    considered  the  linguistic  aspects  of  the  report  and  it  is  the
    appellant's failure to answer conclusions that his use of  Arabic  that
    comes from Egypt that  was  material  in  his  considerations  not  the
    background or geographical knowledge.

31. The judge has considered the case of MN as set out in paragraphs 12 and
    13 of the decision. The judge has not considered the expertise  of  the
    analyst to  identify  material  parts  of  the  appellant's  speech  as
    emanating from Egypt or Syria. Without such the caveat contained within
    paragraph 51 of MN that the expertise is properly demonstrated has  not
    been satisfied.

32. That I find is a material error of law.

33. In the light of that I have to determine how to deal with  the  appeal.
    The point in issue is the expertise of the analyst. The  issue  of  the
    expertise was raised Before the First-Tier  Tribunal.  No  attempt  has
    been made to obtain further evidence substantiate the expertise. It  is
    a matter that is clearly set out within the case law.

34. As indicated by the respondent's representative if there were  failings
    in the approach of the judge with regard to the report, the findings of
    fact otherwise made by the judge still stand.

35. On the basis of those findings of fact I find that  the  appellant  has
    discharged the burden to show  that  he  is  a  national  of  Syria.  I
    therefore allow the appeal.

    Decision

36. There is a material error  of  law  in  the  original  decision  and  I
    substitute the following decision: -

         The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
