
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
AA/12464/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8th March 2019                       |On 16th April 2019                 |
|                                        |                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                     I A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss R Popal instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born in June  1971.  She  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana dismissing  her
    appeal against removal following the refusal of her asylum claim.


The Appellant's immigration history

2.   The Appellant entered the UK on 27 July 2016 with a  visit  visa  valid
    for six months.  She remained after her visa expired  in  January  2007
    and in June 2011 was issued with notice of liability to removal  as  an
    overstayer. The Appellant applied for leave  to  remain  on  Article  8
    medical grounds.  Her application was refused on 28 April 2014.

3.   The Appellant claimed asylum on 27 May 2014.  Her  appeal  against  the
    refusal dated 9 September 2015 came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Raymond on 18 August 2016.  Judge  Raymond  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal however his decision was  set  aside  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Jackson on the ground that the judge had erred in  law  in  failing  to
    treat the Appellant as a vulnerable witness. The appeal was remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal for hearing  de  novo  and  came  before  Judge
    Chana.


Grounds of appeal

4.   There are eight grounds of appeal:
         (1)  the refusal of an adjournment was unfair;
         (2)  the judge failed to take into  account  Home  Office  guidance
             when assessing credibility in rejecting the Appellant's  claim
             to have been forcibly married;
         (3)  the judge failed  to  properly  record  the  Appellant's  oral
         evidence;
         (4)  the judge's findings that the Appellant came  to  the  UK  for
             medical treatment for HIV and as an economic migrant  was  not
             open to her on the evidence before her;
         (5)  the judge failed to take into account the risk of suicide when
             assessing Article 3;
         (6)  the judge failed to properly consider the expert  evidence  in
             the round and failed to give adequate reasons for attaching no
             weight to it;
         (7)  the decision  contained  a  number  of  factual  errors  which
             cumulatively  had  given  rise  to  an  error   of   law   and
             demonstrated a lack of anxious scrutiny; and
         (8)  the judge pressured the Appellant into giving evidence and the
             Appellant was deprived of a fair hearing.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  McWilliam  on
    the grounds that it was arguable that the refusal of an adjournment was
    unfair  because  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  that   an
    adjournment  to  obtain  a  psychiatric  report  may  assist  with  the
    assessment of risk on return and  the  Appellant's  account  generally.
    Judge McWilliam granted permission on all grounds on 7 February 2019.


Rule 24 response

6.   In the Rule 24 response, the Respondent submitted  that  there  was  no
    request to adjourn made by the  Appellant's  solicitors  prior  to  the
    hearing and there had been ample time for a psychiatric  report  to  be
    commissioned. Further the judge  was  aware  that  the  case  had  been
    remitted from the Upper Tribunal in May 2017 and the Appellant  was  to
    be treated as a vulnerable witness. The judge also noted  the  evidence
    that legal aid funding was allowed for one expert and  the  Appellant's
    solicitors used such funding to commission a country expert report.

7.   The reasons given for rejecting the Appellant's  forced  marriage  were
    open to the judge on  the  evidence  before  her.  The  country  expert
    evidence was considered and the judge found that it was  based  on  the
    Appellant's latest evidence, which was  completely  at  odds  with  her
    asylum interview. The judge assessed the credibility of  the  Appellant
    treating her as a vulnerable witness and found for  many  reasons  that
    her claim was not credible. It was submitted that it was  difficult  to
    see how a mental health report  could  in  any  way  dispel  the  clear
    inconsistencies in the evidence.  In  any  event  the  Appellant  could
    receive family  support  in  Nigeria  and  the  UK,  and  could  access
    treatment for her medical needs.


Appellant's submissions

Ground 1
8.   Ms Popal relied on the grounds and submitted that  there  were  serious
    concerns for the Appellant's mental health which were disclosed in  the
    letter from Body & Soul dated  27  July  2018:  "As  a  result  of  her
    traumatic  past  and  precarious  immigration  status  [the  Appellant]
    suffers from severe  anxiety.  Our  Casework  Team  has  supported  her
    through her asylum application in addition to the legal support she has
    had as [the Appellant] has been fearful of the process and the  various
    court hearings she has had to attend.  [The  Appellant]  has  also  had
    access to complementary therapies available at Body  &  Soul  including
    Indian head massages, Reiki  and  Craniosacral  therapy.  Due  to  [the
    Appellant] suffering from depression and disturbed sleep patterns these
    therapies really helped her to relax,  reduce  her  stress  levels  and
    improve her wellbeing".

9.   Ms Popal submitted that there was an application for an adjournment  to
    obtain a psychiatric report because this  went  to  the  heart  of  the
    Appellant's claim namely the risk on return  following  HD  (trafficked
    women Nigeria) CG [2016] UKUT 00545 (IAC). The  Appellant's  solicitors
    had been instructed one month before the hearing and time was  limited.
    This was a legally aid case. The judge found that a psychiatric  report
    went  to  vulnerability,  but  failed  to  appreciate   the   risk   of
    exploitation on return to Nigeria. The Respondent, at the hearing,  did
    not accept the Appellant's mental health condition.


10.  The judge did not refer to  the  Appellant's  mental  health  condition
    although she accepted the Appellant was a vulnerable  witness.  It  was
    the Appellant's case that she has severe depression,  from  the  trauma
    she has suffered, and  HIV  and  she  was  accessing  counselling.  The
    Appellant's mental health condition and her complex  medical  condition
    meant that a psychiatric report would be relevant to risk on return. In
    refusing to grant the adjournment  the  judge  failed  to  address  the
    delay, the solicitor's recent instructions and legal aid  funding,  and
    the risk on return. None of the matters raised in the  application  for
    the adjournment formed part of the judge's  reasons  for  refusing  the
    adjournment.

11.  Ms Popal relied on paragraph 5 of her grounds  which  stated  that  the
    Tribunal would be required to make an  assessment  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant has any discernible  characteristics  of  vulnerability  with
    mental health being a discernible characteristic. A medico legal report
    would therefore be highly relevant when assessing the Appellant's  risk
    on return. The judge refused the adjournment stating  at  paragraph  26
    that "I was of the view that it would  be  fair  to  the  Appellant  to
    continue with the appeal today without a medical report. I agreed  with
    the Home Office Presenting Officer that there is no  indication  as  to
    when the funding for the medical report would be  forthcoming.   I  was
    also concerned for the public interest in that  this  appeal  has  been
    pending for a very long time and therefore  the  Appellant  had  enough
    time to provide a medical report given that it is at remittal."

12.  Ms Popal submitted that the reasons given did not address  the  matters
    raised by the Appellant and therefore the refusal  of  the  adjournment
    was not in accordance with Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014]  UKUT
    00418 (IAC) and the Appellant had been deprived of a fair hearing.

Ground 2
13.  Ms Popal submitted that the Appellant had failed to mention her  forced
    marriage because she was ashamed  which  was  directly  linked  to  the
    traumas she had suffered including gang rape. The  judge  rejected  the
    Appellant's claim  to  have  been  forcibly  married  without  a  basic
    understanding from an expert on  whether  the  traumas  had  manifested
    themselves in the Appellant's mental health condition  and  whether  it
    had affected her ability to disclose. It was necessary to have a report
    from an expert on how the traumas had affected the Appellant's  ability
    to disclose her claim.

14.  Further, the judge had failed  to  refer  to  the  Respondent's  policy
    guidance which states:

         "5.5 Underlying Factors: A true account is not always  detailed  or
             consistent in every detail. Caseworkers must take into account
             any personal  factors  which  may  explain  why  a  claimant's
             testimony might be inconsistent with other  evidence,  lacking
             detail or there has been late disclosure of  evidence.   These
             factors may include, the list is not exhaustive, age,  gender,
             variations in the  capacity  of  human  memory,  physical  and
             mental health, emotional trauma,  lack  of  education,  social
             status and cultural traditions,  feelings  of  shame,  painful
             memories particularly those of a sexual nature."


         "7.8 Gender: Gender  based  harm  such  as  rape,  sexual  assault,
             domestic violence and the prospect of forced marriage,  female
             genital mutilation or threats of honour crimes are unlikely to
             have  documentary  evidence  associated  with  them.   Greater
             reliance will therefore need to be placed  on  oral  testimony
             and consideration of the benefit of the doubt. The  shame  and
             trauma that a person has experienced as  a  result  of  gender
             based violence may however result in their evidence being less
             than complete, coherent or consistent.  It may also mean  that
             they delay disclosure."



15.  The judge's reasons for rejecting the forced marriage (on  the  grounds
    that the Appellant had disclosed rape by an unknown man but not rape by
    her husband) were irrational and failed to take account of  the  policy
    guidance.


Grounds 3 and 7
16.  Ms submitted the judge had recorded a number of facts incorrectly.  She
    criticised the judge at paragraph 36 in failing to properly record  the
    Appellant's answers in re-examination and relied on  her  note  of  the
    proceedings as follows:
         What is the stigma with mental health?
         My father younger brother has a  mental  health.  It  is  something
         experienced, he was locked into the room, that is the fear  that  I
         have, I don't want to be locked too.
         Do you think the police could protect you?
         In that country no.
         Were the police able to protect your uncle?
         No. no, no, no they didn't.
         How do you think you will be treated with mental health and HIV?
         Nobody can help me.  Moreover if I disclose this to my dad I  don't
         think even my daughter there is no way they will  accept  me.   The
         stigma is still there.

17.  Further, the judge had failed to fully set out the Appellant's case  in
    paragraphs 14 to 22 because she failed to mention that her  family  had
    forced her  to  marry  after  her  rape.  The  judge  referred  to  the
    Appellant's younger brother when it was in fact  her  father's  younger
    brother. At paragraphs 37 and 38 the judge failed  to  appreciate  that
    forced marriage  could  be  a  form  of  trafficking  and  the  judge's
    reasoning at paragraph 65, that the Appellant was an  older  lady  with
    HIV nobody would want to traffic her, demonstrated this.

Grounds 4 and 5
18.  Ms Popal submitted the judge's conclusion  at  paragraph  67  that  the
    Appellant came to the UK for medical treatment for HIV was contrary  to
    the evidence before her. The Appellant came to the UK in 2006  and  was
    not diagnosed  with  HIV  until  2008.  This  credibility  finding  was
    particularly  damaging  and  should  not  be  preserved.  The   judge's
    conclusion that the Appellant was a health  tourist  was  perverse  and
    demonstrated the judge had failed to give the Appellant's claim anxious
    scrutiny. As  a  result,  the  Appellant's  Article  3  claim  was  not
    adequately considered. Ms Popal was not able to point to the disclosure
    of a suicide risk and it was not relied on in the skeleton argument.
Ground 6
19.  Ms Popal submitted that the judge erred in law  in  failing  to  attach
    weight to the expert report on the basis that the expert had relied  on
    the truth of the Appellant's account and the judge had found  that  the
    Appellant's evidence of forced marriage was not credible. The judge had
    failed to consider all the evidence in the round  and  her  reason  for
    attaching no weight to the expert evidence amounted to a material error
    of law. Had the judge properly considered the expert report  she  could
    have come to a different conclusion.

Ground 8
20.  The Appellant was extremely unwell on the day of the hearing.  She  was
    in remission from cervical cancer and continued to bleed heavily  on  a
    daily basis. Taking into account all her other ailments  she  was  very
    vulnerable on the day of the hearing and Ms Popal  did  not  intend  to
    call her as  a  witness.   However,  the  judge  gently  persuaded  the
    Appellant to give evidence and her note reflects this friction  at  the
    hearing. The judge  said:   "Will  you  confirm  that  you  were  happy
    throughout, able to give evidence you were happy?"  The  client  nodded
    whilst looking  down  and  silently  crying.  The  client  was  clearly
    distressed.

21.  Ms Popal submitted that it was inappropriate for  the  judge  to  speak
    directly to the Appellant and the Appellant's response that  she  would
    try to give evidence conflicted with the instructions given to  counsel
    earlier. The Appellant had not slept for three nights. She was tendered
    for cross-examination and questioned by the judge. The judge's question
    in relation to the stigma attached to HIV was inappropriate. The  judge
    had used her position to persuade the Appellant to  give  evidence  and
    then asked the Appellant questions without a full understanding of  the
    Appellant's mental health. Although the hearing was a short one lasting
    only an hour, the Appellant was in tears and shaking at the end.

22.  The main concern was that the Appellant had not  had  a  fair  hearing.
    She was a vulnerable witness and that was the  reason  the  appeal  had
    been remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. Ms Popal raised  her  concern
    at the hearing that the Appellant should not give evidence,  which  was
    not taken into consideration. Ms Popal accepted that there was  nothing
    untoward in the questions  asked,  save  for  the  loaded  question  in
    relation to HIV. However, without a  psychiatric  report,  because  the
    judge refused the adjournment to obtain one, it  was  not  possible  to
    judge how this had affected the Appellant's ability to  give  evidence.
    The Appellant was a very vulnerable witness and it was not  appropriate
    to speak to her or persuade her to give evidence.

23.  The Appellant's HIV was not currently treated by generic drugs and  she
    was on a special cocktail. The judge's conclusion at paragraph 45  that
    there are many people with HIV in Nigeria and free drugs are  given  by
    humanitarian organisations was not supported by the material before the
    judge.


Respondent's submissions

24.  Mr Melvin relied on the Rule 24 response and submitted that  the  eight
    grounds were a litany of a forensic examination which did not amount to
    a material error of law. In relation to ground 8, he submitted that the
    judge did not persuade the Appellant to give evidence. Ms Popal made no
    complaint at the hearing and it was only raised after  the  judge  made
    negative credibility findings. If the Appellant sought to rely on  this
    ground, there should be a witness statement from  counsel  representing
    her and the judge should be given an opportunity to comment. Mr  Melvin
    submitted that I should attach little weight to this accusation.

25.  Mr Melvin submitted that the judge looked at the appeal in  the  round.
    The Appellant was working in the UK and sending money to her father and
    daughter. The judge concluded that they would assist her on return.  On
    those facts the case could not go very far. The Appellant came  to  the
    UK and almost immediately accepted medical treatment. This asylum claim
    came after an Article 3 medical claim was dismissed.  This was a  last-
    ditch attempt to remain in the UK and the  Appellant's  representatives
    were trying to build a case on Article 3 and 8 when the case could  not
    reach that level.  The Appellant had family members who  could  support
    her and she would not be at risk on return.

26.  In relation to the adjournment, the legal aid  board  had  advised  the
    Appellant's solicitors that funding would be given for one report. They
    chose an expert report rather than a medical report.  It could  not  be
    the case, where counsel  representing  the  Appellant  at  the  hearing
    thought the appeal would benefit from a psychiatric report, to raise it
    in the hope of a successful  outcome.  The  judge  had  given  adequate
    reasons for refusing the adjournment. At that time it was not known  if
    it was possible to get funding and it was not known how it would affect
    the outcome of the appeal.

27.  The Appellant  had  not  previously  raised  the  claim  to  have  been
    forcibly married. The judge considered this claim and found that it did
    not fit in with the Appellant's earlier evidence. It was  open  to  the
    judge to come to this finding  and  it  was  not  suggested  that  this
    finding could not be relied upon. The factual  errors  identified  were
    not material. The Home Office policy relied on by the Appellant  was  a
    policy for caseworkers in dealing with  a  claim.  The  judge  was  not
    obliged to follow it. The judge's finding in relation to trafficking at
    paragraphs 60 to 63 were open to her on the evidence before her.

28.  Mr Melvin submitted that the Appellant had family support.  She  had  a
    daughter and father in Nigeria. The judge  had  rejected  her  evidence
    that her ex-husband would cause her  harm  and  this  finding  was  not
    challenged in the grounds.  There  was  no  unfairness  caused  by  the
    Appellant giving evidence and the appeal would not be taken any further
    by expert medical evidence.  In  refusing  the  adjournment  the  judge
    considered the evidence that the  Appellant  was  working  and  sending
    money to her family in Nigeria. She had  family  support.  Even  if  an
    expert report, stating that the Appellant was  depressed  and  suffered
    from anxiety, had been obtained the findings on the Appellant's  mental
    health did not assist her as she would be  returning  to  Nigeria  with
    family support. The Appellant  had  chosen  to  submit  expert  country
    evidence and medical evidence would not  make  any  difference  to  the
    appeal given family support. The judge found  that  the  Appellant  had
    ample time to obtain a psychiatric report, but in any event,  it  would
    make no difference to the outcome of the appeal.

29.  Mr Melvin submitted, if there was an error of law,  the  appeal  should
    remain in the Upper Tribunal. The Appellant already had the benefit  of
    three appeals before the First-tier Tribunal. Mr Melvin submitted  that
    the Appellant would not be called to give evidence  and  therefore  the
    appeal could remain in the Upper Tribunal.


Appellant's response

30.  Ms Popal submitted that there was no accusation levelled at the  judge,
    but the course adopted  by  the  judge  held  led  to  unfairness.  The
    Appellant was accessing medical treatment two years after  her  arrival
    in the UK. It was not open to the judge to  conclude  that  she  was  a
    medical tourist on the material before her. Further,  it  was  not  the
    case that the Appellant had been trafficked to the UK but that she  had
    been trafficked within Nigeria. There was a lack of anxious scrutiny on
    the part of the judge. The judge had made  perverse  findings  and  not
    understood the Appellant's case. The policy  guidance  raised  in  oral
    submissions, although not in the bundle, was published guidance and was
    part of  the  tools  available  to  the  judge  and  should  have  been
    considered in the judge's decision.

31.  Ms Popal submitted that the  Appellant  did  not  have  family  support
    because her father had forced her into marriage. This was dealt with in
    the expert report and supported by  the  Appellant's  evidence  in  her
    witness statement:
         "9.  Because of my pregnancy my family gave me to an man to take as
             his wife. His name was JE. I don't know his exact age  but  he
             was older than me. He owned land and had a  farm.  I  did  not
             want to marry him but I was forced to.  He raped me many times
             and made me work for him in his house and on his farm.
         10.      My daughter T was born on 25 September  1989.  My  husband
             continued to treat me very badly. He beat me and forced me  to
             have sex with him just one week after I  had  given  birth.  I
             tried to talk to my family about my problems but they wouldn't
             listen.
         11.  I could not stay with my husband. I took my daughter  and  ran
             away back to Lagos. When I arrived my father  was  angry  with
             me. I told him I couldn't handle the beatings  and  abuse  any
             more but he said I should not have run away. He lived in  just
             one room and he told me that I couldn't  stay  there  with  my
             baby."

32.  There was an  absence  of  family  support  and  no  reference  to  the
    Appellant's evidence in the judge's decision. The judge had to  balance
    this evidence with the other evidence available and had  failed  to  do
    so. Paragraph 45 was not a factual mistake but it did  not  chime  with
    the other evidence before the judge. The case should be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal because there were so many errors and mistakes that
    it was not possible to cherry pick the findings of fact. The  Appellant
    did not have a fair hearing and so should not be deprived of  a  second
    appeal in which she may give evidence.


Discussion and conclusions

Ground 1 - refusal of the adjournment

33.  I find that the refusal of  an  adjournment  was  not  unfair  for  the
    following reasons.  Judge Chana took into account  that  the  Appellant
    had only instructed solicitors a month before the hearing and her claim
    was legally aided. There had therefore been limited time  to  obtain  a
    medical report. At paragraph 23 the judge set out  Ms  Popal's  reasons
    for applying for an adjournment including a letter  from  a  specialist
    consultant that the Appellant suffered from severe depression and was a
    victim of rape. The judge was well aware of the  serious  concerns  and
    the effect the Appellant's mental health may have  on  her  ability  to
    give evidence.

34.  There was no indication when funding for  a  medical  report  would  be
    forthcoming and the Appellant had ample opportunity to obtain a medical
    report when the case was remitted. Her solicitors had chosen to  obtain
    a country expert report instead. This report dealt with the  effect  of
    the Appellant's  mental  health  on  her  ability  to  talk  about  her
    experiences and the risk on return. A further report was not  necessary
    to enable the judge to deal fairly and justly with Appellant's claim. I
    find that the judge did take into account the Appellant's  reasons  for
    applying for an adjournment and  properly  directed  herself  following
    Nwaigwe at paragraph 25.

35.  The judge's failure to mention  that  one  of  the  reasons  given  for
    obtaining a medical report was to assess risk on  return  following  HD
    was  not  material  because  the  judge  treated  the  Appellant  as  a
    vulnerable witness throughout and accepted the evidence in  the  letter
    that she suffered from severe  depression  and  anxiety.  Applying  the
    country guidance case of HD, the Appellant's  vulnerability  would  not
    put her at risk because she had the  support  of  her  father  and  her
    daughter. The Appellant accepted she was still in contact with them and
    was sending them money. Accordingly, I find  that  the  refusal  of  an
    adjournment was not unfair and the judge's reasons given  for  refusing
    it were adequate.

Ground 2 - failure to apply policy in assessing credibility

36.  The judge treated  the  Appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness  and  the
    questions asked complied with relevant guidance. It was  not  suggested
    that the judge had failed  to  treat  the  Appellant  as  a  vulnerable
    witness during the hearing.  It was apparent from Ms Popal's  own  note
    of the proceedings that the questions asked complied with the  guidance
    and the Appellant was not re-traumatised. Save for the stigma  attached
    to HIV, Ms Popal did not criticise the form of the questions asked.

37.  Instead Ms Popal submitted that the judge failed to have regard to  the
    entirety of the Appellant's claim  in  failing  to  apply  Home  Office
    guidance when assessing the Appellant's failure to disclose her  forced
    marriage and abuse in her asylum interview.  The  Appellant  relied  on
    this in her statement dated 26 July 2018. The  Appellant's  explanation
    was that she was ashamed because the person who interviewed her  was  a
    man.

38.  It was clear from the  previous  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  of
    Judge Raymond dated 16 December 2016 that  the  Appellant  raised  this
    issue prior to that hearing. The Appellant had  ample  opportunity  and
    the benefit of legal  representation  to  explain  why  she  failed  to
    mention  this  in  her  asylum  interview.  The  judge  considered  her
    explanation and rejected it with adequate reasons.  The  Appellant  had
    given full answers to all the questions put to  her  in  her  screening
    interview and her asylum interview but failed  to  mention  her  forced
    marriage and rape by her husband. The Appellant was able to raise  rape
    by an unknown person and therefore it was not credible, even given  her
    vulnerability, that she would fail to mention her forced  marriage  and
    abuse within that marriage. The judge's rejection  of  the  Appellant's
    claim to have been forcibly married  was  open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence before her. The failure to specifically refer to  Home  Office
    policy did not amount to an error of law and the judge  had  not  acted
    unfairly in assessing the Appellant's credibility.

Grounds 3 and 7 - failure to accurately record evidence and factual  errors.



39.  I am not satisfied that the judge's  record  of  the  evidence  was  so
    incorrect that it  disclosed  a  misunderstanding  of  the  Appellant's
    claim. It is apparent from reading the decision as  a  whole  that  the
    judge was well aware seeing her father's younger brother  locked  in  a
    room on account of his mental illness had  traumatised  the  Appellant.
    The judge's reference  to  the  Appellant's  younger  brother  was  not
    material. The judge appreciated the effect this had  on  the  Appellant
    and her  fear  on  return.  The  judge  did  note,  however,  that  the
    Appellant's evidence in her asylum interview was that  her  father  had
    left money for his younger brother to obtain treatment for  his  mental
    illness. Her father had not abandoned him.

40.  In addition, the Appellant's father  had  not  ill-treated  her  mother
    because of her HIV. The evidence  before  the  judge  showed  that  the
    Appellant's father would not ill-treat the Appellant on account of  her
    mental illness or her HIV condition. The Appellant's daughter  was  now
    26 years old and could also provide support. The fact that her daughter
    had dropped out of school rather than finished her  education  was  not
    material.  The  Appellant's  evidence  was  that  she   had   a   close
    relationship with her father. She was in contact with  her  family  and
    was sending them money from the UK.

41.  There were no significant errors of fact which would give  rise  to  an
    error of law even if taken cumulatively. Many of the alleged errors set
    out at paragraph  37  of  the  grounds  were  not  factual  errors  but
    criticisms of the judge's conclusions.

Ground 4 - medical treatment

42.  The judge's finding that the Appellant  came  to  the  UK  for  medical
    treatment comes at  the  end  of  her  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence in relation to her asylum claim. This finding was not material
    to the judge's conclusions that the Appellant had not been subjected to
    forced marriage and, applying the country guidance in HD, she would not
    be at risk on return to Nigeria.

Ground 5 - suicide risk and Article 3

43.  On the facts, the Appellant's medical condition did not reach the  high
    threshold of Article 3. The Appellant's  evidence  was  that  she  felt
    suicidal on arriving in the UK and prior to  the  last  appeal  hearing
    before 2014. Ms Popal was unable  to  point  to  evidence  which  would
    support her submission that the judge had erred in law  in  failing  to
    consider suicide.

44.  Dr Nwogu accepted at paragraph 131 of the country expert  report  that:
    "As I have noted at the overview section, while [sic] ARV drugs for HIV
    positive persons  (amongst  other  things)  is  supposed  to  be  free.
    However,  access  is  limited  by  poor  management,  poor  maintenance
    facilities, poor record keeping and  corruption  since  most  of  these
    services elude the people for whom they were designed for."  Therefore,
    the evidence that the Appellant would  have  access  to  HIV  treatment
    comes from her own expert report, although it was accepted  that  those
    who needed treatment were not always receiving it. The  submission  was
    made that the Appellant is on a special cocktail of drugs but there was
    nothing before the judge to show that because she would  be  unable  to
    obtain such drugs she would be  at  risk  of  treatment  in  breach  of
    Article 3 on return to Nigeria.

Ground 6 - expert report

45.  The expert, Dr Nwogu, was asked, inter alia,  to  give  an  opinion  on
    whether the Appellant's account of forced marriage was supported by the
    objective evidence.  The  judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for  why  she
    attached little weight to this opinion and why she rejected  that  part
    of the Appellant's claim. In opining on  risk  on  return,  the  expert
    proceeds on the basis that the Appellant would be returning to  Nigeria
    without any family support. The judge was  entitled  to  attach  little
    weight to this opinion given that it was the Appellant's evidence  that
    she was still in contact with her family and was sending money to them.
    The judge's finding that the Appellant had the support  of  her  family
    was open to the judge on the evidence before her.

46.  There was no  misapplication  of  Mibanga.  The  judge  considered  the
    expert report in the light of the Appellant's evidence. The majority of
    the expert report did not support the  initial  account  given  by  the
    Appellant in her asylum interview.

47.  The judge's finding that the Appellant was not trafficked into  the  UK
    because she came as  a  visitor  was  not  a  misunderstanding  of  the
    Appellant's claim. The Appellant's claim to have  been  trafficked  was
    based on her forced marriage. Having rejected the Appellant's claim  to
    have been forcibly married, the judge was entitled to find  that  there
    was no evidence that the Appellant had been trafficked in the past  and
    no reason to think that she would be  trafficked  in  the  future.  The
    Appellant could return to her 26 year old daughter  who  could  provide
    her with the necessary support.

Ground 8 - unfairness

48.  It was a matter for counsel whether the Appellant was  called  to  give
    evidence notwithstanding the judge's opinion that it would assist  her.
    The Appellant was not obliged to give evidence and it would  have  been
    open to Ms Popal not to call her. The fact that the Appellant did  give
    evidence did not amount to an error of law. The oral evidence  did  not
    give rise to any further inconsistencies upon which the judge relied. I
    appreciate that the Appellant found it very distressing, but it  was  a
    matter for counsel whether she  was  called  and  tendered  for  cross-
    examination.

Summary of conclusions

49.  Accordingly, I find that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision of 6 September 2018.  The  judge's  finding  that  the
    Appellant would have family support on return to Nigeria  was  open  to
    her on the evidence before her. Applying country guidance the Appellant
    would not be at risk on return.  A further  medical  report  would  not
    have affected the outcome of the appeal. Any  vulnerability  caused  by
    severe depression and anxiety would  not  put  the  Appellant  at  risk
    because she could return to her father  and  her  daughter.  The  judge
    considered all relevant matters and her findings were open  to  her  on
    the evidence before her. There was no material error of law  in  and  I
    dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

Appeal is dismissed


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 8 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 8 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
