
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
AA/12700/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 April 2017                      |  On 3 May 2017                 |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                     S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr A Bandegani (counsel) instructed by Migrant
Legal Action
For the Respondent:   Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, preserving the anonymity  order  which  has  existed
throughout each step of the appeal process.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Widdup promulgated on 6 February 2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

3.  The  Appellant  was  born  on  22  March  1994  and  is  a  national  of
Afghanistan.

4. The appellant entered the UK on 14 May 2009. He claimed asylum  the  next
day. On 6 November 2009 the respondent refused the  appellant's  application
for  asylum  but  granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain  until  22nd  of
September 2011, because of the appellant's young age. On 28  September  2011
the appellant submitted an application for further leave to  remain  in  the
UK. The respondent refused that application on 9  May  2012.  The  appellant
appealed against that refusal.  His  appeal  was  dismissed  in  a  decision
promulgated  on  17  January  2013.  Permission  to  appeal   the   decision
dismissing the appellant's appeal (dated 17 January 2013)  was  refused  and
the appellant's appeal rights were exhausted on 14 March 2013.

5. On 26 April 2013, 7 May 2013 and 30 October 2014 the appellant  submitted
further representations. On  24  September  2015,  the  respondent  rejected
those representations.

The Judge's Decision

6. The Appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 24 September  2015
to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup  ("the  Judge")
dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's decision.  Grounds  of  appeal
were lodged and on 6 March 2017 Judge  Osborne  gave  permission  to  appeal
stating inter alia

      2. The grounds assert that the Judge failed to direct herself  and  to
      apply the law in  relation  to  article  15(c)  of  the  qualification
      directive. The Judge  failed  to  assess  or  determine  the  critical
      question which is whether there is a  risk  of  serious  harm  in  the
      appellant's home area. Additionally, the Judge  failed  to  apply  the
      sliding scale approach which was approved in MOJ (return to Mogadishu)
      Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442. The Judge wholly failed  to  assess  the
      risk facing the appellant from indiscriminate  violence  in  his  home
      area. The Judge failed to refer to  consider  relevant  parts  of  the
      UNHCR eligibility guidelines [2016] which  were  referred  to  at  the
      hearing. The Judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the  fact  that  the
      appellant suffers from mental  health  problems  and  failed  to  have
      regard to the fact that the witness is a foster carer and a first-hand
      witness to the appellant's presentation  as  a  human  with  whom  she
      lives. The Judge wholly failed to consider the careful evidence of  Mr
      K. The Judge failed to decide whether  the  appellant  should  benefit
      from the respondent's policy  contained  at  276  ADE(vi)  immigration
      rules but merely considered that issue outside the rules under article
      8.


      3. The Judge at the  start  of  the  hearing  asked  counsel  for  the
      appellant to confirm the issues to be decided which were stated to  be
      asylum, current risk  under  article  15(c),  paragraph  276  ADE  and
      article 8 outside the rules. Having asked that  question,  and  having
      been given that apply, it is at least arguable that the  Judge  failed
      to consider any issues under paragraph 276 ADE but  instead  proceeded
      to consider the article 8 issues outside the immigration  rules  only.
      It is at least arguable that the Judge erred in that approach.


      4. As this arguable error of law has been identified, all  the  issues
      raised in the grounds are arguable.

The Hearing

7. For  the  appellant,  Mr  Bandegani  moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He
initially took me to [89] to [93] of the decision. In those paragraphs,  the
Judge refers to a CIG report on Afghanistan dated  August  2016.  The  Judge
quotes from that report. Mr  Bandegani  said  that  despite  making  careful
enquiry he cannot find that report, and that report does not feature on  the
respondent's website.

(b) Mr Bandegani told me that  the  fundamental  point  in  the  grounds  of
appeal is that the Judge has not properly considered article  15(c)  of  the
qualification directive. He told me that at [81] the Judge says that she  is
going to consider whether the appellant can succeed under either  article  3
or article 15(c), but then confined her findings and conclusions to  article
3 ECHR. He told me that  for  article  15(c)  considerations,  the  critical
question is risk on return to their home  area,  and  that  the  appellant's
home area is Jalalabad; the Judge has only considered conditions  in  Kabul.
He told me that the Judge did not carry out a qualitative  and  quantitative
analysis with regard to both the safety and  reasonableness  of  return.  He
told me that the Judge had not carried out  a  sliding  scale  analysis.  He
relied on QD & AH v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 698.

(c) Mr Bandegani told me that the consideration of risk, either in terms  of
article  3  ECHR  or  article  15(c)  of  the  qualification  directive,  is
inadequate. He told me  that  the  Judge  has  not  carried  out  a  careful
assessment of the volumes of background  materials  placed  before  her.  He
said that the Judge had ignored the UNHCR's eligibility guidelines 2016.  He
told me that those errors were compounded between [91] and  [93]  where  the
judge referred only to the policy section of the CIG for  August  2016,  and
not the underlying evidence.

(d) Mr Bandegani placed great emphasis  on  the  appellant's  vulnerability,
telling me that the appellant suffered from depression and  persistent  back
pain. He told me that the judge had only looked  at  safety  and  completely
elided the question of reasonableness. He told me that [86] to  [93]  offers
superficial treatment of the background  materials,  focusing  on  only  one
document which was not amongst the background materials produced  by  either
party. He told me that the conclusion reached at [95] is inadequate  because
it makes no reference to article 15(c) of the  qualification  directive  and
because it is not supported by findings  of  fact  or  an  analysis  of  the
evidence. He told me that the Judge has applied the wrong test in law.

(e) This case has some procedural history. The Judge refers to  the  earlier
determination of the First-tier  Judge  Easterman  a  number  of  times.  Mr
Bandegani took me to [77] and [110] where the Judge adopts the  findings  of
First-tier Judge Easterman. He told me that the findings  adopted  form  the
earlier decision do not support the conclusions that the Judge comes to.

(f) Mr Bandegani told me that neither the First-tier Judge in  the  decision
which is the subject matter of this appeal, nor First-tier  judge  Easterman
made positive findings that the appellant has family members  in  Kabul.  He
told me that the appellant's solicitors are making  further  enquiries  with
experts in Kabul, and that a visit will be made to Kabul (as part  of  those
enquiries) to try to trace the  appellant's  family.  Those  enquiries  will
result in further information being available in May this year.

(g) Mr Bandegani told me that the Judge's consideration of  article  8  ECHR
was inadequate  and  that  the  Judge  had  completely  failed  to  consider
paragraph 276 ADE (1)(vi) of  the  rules.  He  told  me  that  decision  was
tainted by a failure to give reasons and to make findings. He  urged  me  to
set the decision aside and to remit the case of the First-tier  tribunal  to
be determined of new after May 2017 so that up  to  date  information  about
the appellant's family members in Kabul can be presented to  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

8. Mr Tarlow, for the appellant, told me that the decision does not  contain
errors, material or otherwise. He told me that counsels submission from  the
appellant amounted  to  nothing  more  than  a  disagreement  with  findings
competently made by the Judge. He told me that at [82]  the  Judge  properly
considers the situation in Kabul. He told me that was no  need  to  consider
the situation in Jalalabad because, on the facts as the Judge found them  to
be, the appellant's family moved to Kabul,  so  that  Kabul  is  their  home
area. Jalalabad may be the town of  origin  but  removal  from  there  makes
Kabul the home area. He  took  me  to  [86]  and  told  me  that  the  Judge
correctly considered, and then  followed,  country  guidance  and  found  no
reasons for departing from it. He urged me to dismiss the appeal  and  allow
the decision to stand.

Analysis

9.  In  AK  (Article  15(c)) Afghanistan CG  [2012]  UKUT  00163(IAC) the
Tribunal held that whilst when assessing a claim in the context  of  Article
15(c) in which the respondent asserts that Kabul  city  would  be  a  viable
internal relocation alternative, it is necessary to take into account  (both
in assessing "safety" and reasonableness") not only the  level  of  violence
in that city but also the difficulties experienced by that city's  poor  and
also the many  Internally  Displaced  Persons  (IDPs)  living  there,  these
considerations  will  not  in  general  make  return  to  Kabul  unsafe   or
unreasonable.

10. In AWQ and DH v The Netherlands (Application No  25077/06  )  ECtHR  the
Appellant claimed to be at  risk  in  Afghanistan  because  of  the  general
security situation and because amongst other things he had lived abroad  for
a long period. It was held that the appellant was not at risk.

11. Between [1] and [15] the Judge sets out the background to  this  appeal.
At [16] she records the confirmation  she  received  from  counsel  for  the
appellant that the issues to be determined are

      (i) asylum
      (ii) article 15(c) of the qualification directive
      (iii) paragraph 276 ADE of the immigration rules, and
      (iv) article 8 outside the immigration rules.

Between [54] and [79] the Judge sets out her  findings  of  fact  and  draws
conclusion in relation to asylum.

12. Between [98] and [112] the Judge considers article  8  ECHR  grounds  of
appeal outside the immigration rules. At [80] and [81] the Judge  says  that
she will consider article 15(c) of the qualification directive  and  article
3 ECHR grounds. At [95] the Judge reaches the conclusion that the  appellant
cannot succeed on article 3 ECHR grounds.

13.  No  conclusion  is  reached  in  relation  to  article  15(c)  of   the
qualification directive. There is no real analysis of article 15(c), nor  of
the evidence driving  at  article  15(c),  contained  within  the  decision.
Nowhere in the decision is any consideration given to paragraph 276  ADE  of
the immigration rules.

14. Despite the length of  the  decision,  only  two  of  the  four  matters
summarised for determination at [16] of the decision are dealt with.

15. Article 8 ECHR grounds are considered between  [96]  and  [112]  of  the
decision. Insofar as the Judge makes findings of fact  in  relation  to  the
article 8 appeal,  they  are  contained  between  [100]  and  [105]  of  the
decision. At [104] the Judge says

      The appellant has now lived in the UK since May 2009.  I  accept  that
      his removal to Afghanistan would have  sufficient  gravity  to  engage
      article 8.

At [102] and [103] the Judge finds that the family life within  the  meaning
of the 1950 convention does not exist for the appellant in the UK. [104]  is
a finding that private life within article 8 ECHR  meaning  exists  for  the
appellant.

16. The assessment of proportionality which follows is inadequate. At  [107]
the Judge takes account of section 117B of the 2002 Act. At [108] the  Judge
finds that the appellant will be returned to  a  government-controlled  area
of Afghanistan. At [111] the Judge finds that  the  appellant  has  garnered
transferable skills during his time in the UK. No  proper  analysis  of  the
appellant's home, his friendships, his  integration  with  UK  society,  his
contribution to society, his hobbies and activities and  pastimes,  and  the
impact removal will have on those  component  parts  of  article  8  private
life, is carried out.

17. I find that the superficial consideration of article 8 ECHR  grounds  of
appeal,  the  absence  of  consideration  of  paragraph  276  ADE   of   the
immigration rules, and the absence of a reasoned  consideration  of  article
15(c) in applying the tests set out in QD & AH v SSHD [2008] EWCA  Civ  698.
and MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442  (IAC)  are
all errors of law. I find that these are  material  errors  of  law  because
detailed consideration of each of those separate parts  of  the  appellant's
appeal may result in a different outcome.

18. Counsel for the appellant tells me that by the end of May 2017 there  is
likely to be fresh expert evidence about the circumstances which might  face
the appellant in Kabul. At the same time there  is  likely  to  be  evidence
which will help to determine whether or  not  the  appellant  has  surviving
relatives in Kabul, (neither Judge Widdup nor Judge Easterman were  able  to
make findings in fact on that question).

19. I find that I cannot substitute my own decision because  of  the  extent
of the fact-finding exercise required to  reach  a  just  decision  in  this
appeal.


Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

20. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

21. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

22. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Hatton  Cross
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Widdup.

Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

24. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on  6  February  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

Signed                      Paul Doyle
  Date 1 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
