
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12467/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 October 2016                   |On 6 December 2016                   |
|Prepared 20 October 2016             |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                 Thilna [W]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Mannan, Counsel instructed by Linga & Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Sri Lanka, date of  birth  23  June  1983,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision  dated  14  September  2015,
    refusing leave to remain within the United Kingdom based upon his  fear
    of return to Sri Lanka.  The appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lucas who, on 14 April 2016, dismissed the appeal making a series
    of adverse credibility findings against the Appellant.   Permission  to
    appeal was given, on 7 September 2016, and the Respondent made  a  Rule
    24 response, on 19 September 2016, supporting the judge's decision.

2.   With the benefit of reflection the Respondent accepts that there is  or
    appears to be a measure of predetermination  by the  judge,  driven  by
    the appalling immigration history that the Appellant e  and  the  judge
    took the view from the outset that the  Appellant  was  effectively  an
    economic migrant who did not wish to return to his home country and was
    prepared to tell any untruths in order to resist removal.

3.   The judge had the benefit  of  hearing  the  Appellant's  evidence  and
    forming a view about the evidence and its weight  which  of  course  is
    principally his responsibility.  The judge nevertheless was  obviously,
    in the context of the familiar case law which includes  Mibanga  [2005]
    [EWCA] Civ 367 required to look at the evidence as a whole and  in  the
    round.  The way  in  which  the  decision  has  been  written  strongly
    suggests that was not the exercise which was  carried  out  although  I
    have to say looking at the papers I can well see why  the  judge  would
    have formed the view that he did of the Appellant's redibility and  the
    reliability of his account.

4.   Be that as it may it is trite  law  that  a  party  to  proceedings  is
    entitled to at least have the  appearance  of  a  fair  hearing  and  a
    balanced view of the evidence looked at in the round as a whole.  It is
    the acceptance by Mr Armstrong on behalf of the Respondent persuades me
    that this is a case where were the matter to be  re-made  there  is  at
    least the possibility of a different view being taken of  the  evidence
    as a whole in terms of not only the Appellant's  credibility  but  also
    the assessment of risk on return.

5.   For that reason I am satisfied there are two material errors of law  by
    the judge, first in the sense of not looking at  the  evidence  in  the
    round and secondly in the assessment, that seems to have been made,  of
    the Article 8 case on which I have heard no argument.

6.   The original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.  The  matter  will  have
    to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

    Listed for two hours.

    Not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas.

    No findings of fact to stand.

    Any further documentation relied upon in support of the  appeal  to  be
    served not less than fourteen working days before any listing the case.

    A Tamil interpreter is required.



NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the limited extent that the appeal is  returned  to
the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Date 18 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
