
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12167/2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2015                    |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     HK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Jones, instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, HK, is an Iraqi national of Arab  descent  who  is  from
    Kirkuk.  The litigation  history  of  the  appellant  is  lengthy.   He
    entered the United Kingdom as long ago as April 2008  when  he  claimed
    asylum.  His asylum  claim  was  refused  on  18  September  2009.   He
    appealed against that refusal, his appeals were dismissed by the First-
    tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal.  On 18 May 2012, the Court of  Appeal
    sealed a consent order setting aside the Upper Tribunal's decision.   A
    rehearing of the appellant's appeal in the Upper  Tribunal  was  stayed
    awaiting the outcome of an appeal against HM2, HM and  Others  (Article
    15(c)) Iraq CG  [2012]  UKUT  409  (IAC).   Eventually,  the  appellant
    appeared on 28 January 2014 before Upper Tribunal  Judge  Hanson.   The
    Upper Tribunal dismissed his appeal.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the
    Court of Appeal which approved a consent order on 23 July 2015 allowing
    the appeal against the decision of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hanson  and
    remitting the matter to a differently constituted Upper Tribunal for re-
    determination on the merits.  The appeal was then heard  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 6 October 2015 when Mr D Jones of Counsel appeared for  the
    appellant and Mr Harrison, a Senior  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,
    appeared for the respondent.

 2. The statement of reasons annexed to the consent order before the  Court
    of Appeal reads as follows:

         "1.  The parties agree that UTJ Hanson's decision is flawed  by  an
             error of law namely the failure to have proper regard  to  the
             December 2013 Operational Guidance Note for Iraq including its
             relevance to his claims for international protection.

         2.   That  was  a  material  error  since  the  December  2013  OGN
             confirmed that those who had worked  for  or  were  associated
             with foreign companies were potentially at risk of persecution
             a development from the position in  the  earlier  Home  Office
             material.

         3.   Although UTJ Hanson made some  reference  to  earlier  country
             guidance case law which acknowledged a risk to those in such a
             position, and appeared to contemplate the appellant's claim in
             that context, he failed to deal properly with the geographical
             extent of the risk to the appellant.

         4.   This is a significant flaw because, irrespective of whether he
             would be at risk as a 'mere' civilian on return to  Iraq,  the
             appellant has an individual risk profile which might place him
             at a higher level of risk sufficient to engage the  protection
             of  the  Refugee  Convention  or  possibly  Article  15(c)  of
             Directive 2004/83/EU.

         5.   In these circumstances the parties agree the most  appropriate
             course is for the appeal  to  be  allowed  to  the  extent  of
             remitting it to a differently constituted Upper Tribunal for a
             full determination of the merits.  For the avoidance of doubt,
             the positive findings  of  fact  and  credibility  are  to  be
             maintained  but  the  merits  of  the  appellant's  claim  for
             international protection are otherwise to be re-determined  de
             novo on the basis of the facts and evidence  existing  at  the
             time of the Tribunal's re-determination."

 3. The "positive  findings  of  fact  and  credibility"  appear  in  Judge
    Hanson's decision and may be summarised as follows:

      i) There is a Company 77 which has an office in the Kurdish region  of
         Iraq.  It is not clear whether there it is an American company  but
         it has an association with  Turkey.   In  2007  the  appellant  was
         employed under contract to bring materials  into  Iraq  which  were
         thought to be used by the coalition forces or the government of the
         time.  It  was  not  implausible  that  extremists  considered  any
         association with the forces of the coalition in Iraq at  that  time
         to render those involved as legitimate targets.

     ii)  In  2007,  individuals  perceived  as  assisting   government   or
         international forces were targeted and remained at  risk  in  their
         home area.

    iii) The appellant's claim to have been  kidnapped  and  released  after
         payment of a  ransom  was  in  accordance  with  events  that  were
         occurring in Iraq at the relevant time (2007).

     iv) It was plausible that collateral damage was suffered by individuals
         in Kirkuk as a result of activities by insurgent  groups  in  2007.
         It was  plausible  that  the  appellant's  family  member  suffered
         collateral (as opposed to targeted) harm.

      v) The appellant himself did not work for the police  although  family
         members did do so.

     vi) It seems likely that the appellant was  specifically  targeted  and
         kidnapped as a result of his involvement with Company 77  and  that
         he was threatened thereafter as  he  continued  working  with  that
         company.

    vii) The appellant is a single male  with  the  ability  to  speak  both
         Arabic and Kurdish.

 4. Since the hearing before Judge Hanson, fresh country guidance has  been
    issued by the Upper Tribunal in the form of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq  CG
    [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC).  Mr Jones, for the appellant, told me that the
    only issues remaining in the appeal were (1) the  extent  of  the  risk
    which the appellant would be  exposed  to  now  as  a  result  of  past
    targeting and harm suffered at the hands of insurgents and  extremists;
    (2) the internal flight alternative; (3) Article 15(c).

 5. Mr Harrison, for the Secretary of  State,  made  a  number  of  helpful
    submissions.  He agreed that Baghdad  represented  the  only  place  of
    refuge for the appellant assuming that  he  was  safe  anywhere  within
    Iraq.  He agreed that it was not plausible for the  appellant  to  find
    refuge in the Kurdish region of Iraq.  Both Mr Harrison  and  Mr  Jones
    observed that  the  appellant  faced  a  real  risk  of  indiscriminate
    violence amounting to serious harm within Kirkuk and drew my  attention
    to the country guidance of AA at head notes B, C and D:

         "B. DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (excluding IKR)

         5.   Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish  Region  (IKR)
         will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will  be  to  Baghdad.  The
         Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P)  in  the  United
         Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of  a  current  or
         expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a laissez passer.

         6.   No Iraqi national will be returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
         possession of one of these documents.

         7.   In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in HF  (Iraq)
         and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA
         Civ 1276, an  international  protection  claim  made  by  P  cannot
         succeed by reference to any alleged risk of harm  arising  from  an
         absence of Iraqi  identification  documentation,  if  the  Tribunal
         finds that P's return is not  currently  feasible,  given  what  is
         known about the state of P's documentation.

         C. POSITION ON DOCUMENTATION WHERE RETURN IS FEASIBLE

         8.   It will only be where  the  Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the
         return of P to Iraq is feasible that the issue of alleged  risk  of
         harm arising from an absence of Iraqi identification  documentation
         will require judicial determination.

         9.   Having a Civil Status Identity Document (CSID) is one  of  the
         ways in which it is possible for an Iraqi national  in  the  United
         Kingdom to obtain  a  passport  or  a  laissez  passer.  Where  the
         Secretary of State proposes to remove P by means of a  passport  or
         laissez passer, she will be expected to demonstrate to the Tribunal
         what,  if  any,  identification   documentation   led   the   Iraqi
         authorities to issue P with the passport or laissez passer  (or  to
         signal their intention to do so).

         10.  Where P is returned to Iraq on a  laissez  passer  or  expired
         passport, P will be at no risk of serious  harm  at  the  point  of
         return by reason of not having a current passport or other  current
         form of Iraqi identification document.

         11.  Where P's return to Iraq  is  found  by  the  Tribunal  to  be
         feasible, it will generally be necessary to decide whether P has  a
         CSID, or will be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after  arrival
         in Iraq. A CSID is generally required in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to
         access  financial  assistance  from  the  authorities;  employment;
         education; housing; and medical treatment. If P shows there are  no
         family or other members likely to  be  able  to  provide  means  of
         support, P is in general likely to face a real risk of destitution,
         amounting to serious harm, if, by the time any funds provided to  P
         by the Secretary of State or her agents to assist P's  return  have
         been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still  have  no
         CSID.

         12.  Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P  should
         as a general matter be able to obtain one  from  the  Civil  Status
         Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using  an  Iraqi  passport
         (whether current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such
         a passport, P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend  on  whether  P
         knows  the  page  and  volume  number  of  the  book  holding   P's
         information (and that of P's family). P's ability to  persuade  the
         officials that P is the person named on the relevant page is likely
         to depend on whether P has family members or other individuals  who
         are prepared to vouch for P.

         13.  P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered
         if P is unable to go to the Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  P's
         Governorate because it is in an area where  Article  15(c)  serious
         harm is occurring. As a result of  the  violence,  alternative  CSA
         Offices for Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in
         Baghdad and Kerbala. The evidence does  not  demonstrate  that  the
         "Central Archive", which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able  to
         provide CSIDs to those in  need  of  them.  There  is,  however,  a
         National Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for formal
         recognition of identity. The precise operation of  this  court  is,
         however, unclear.

         D. INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN  THE  IRAQI  KURDISH
         REGION)

         14.  As a general matter, it will not  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
         harsh for a person from a contested area  to  relocate  to  Baghdad
         City or (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.

         15.  In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for
         P to relocate to  Baghdad,  the  following  factors  are,  however,
         likely to be relevant:

             (a)  whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain  one  (see
             Part C above);

             (b)  whether P can speak Arabic (those  who  cannot  are  less
             likely to find employment);

             (c)  whether P has family members or friends in  Baghdad  able
             to accommodate him;

             (d)   whether  P  is  a  lone  female  (women   face   greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);

             (e)  whether P can find a sponsor to access a  hotel  room  or
             rent accommodation;

             (f)  whether P is from a minority community;

             (g)  whether there is support available for P bearing in  mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.

         16.  There is not a real risk of an  ordinary  civilian  travelling
         from  Baghdad  airport  to  the  southern  governorates,  suffering
         serious harm en route to such governorates  so  as  engage  Article
         15(c)."

 6. The parties are also  agreed  that  the  appellant  has  destroyed  his
    passport and that he has not  obtained  a  replacement  whilst  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Further, the appellant has not obtained whilst in  the
    United Kingdom a Civil Status  Identity  Document  (CSID).   The  Upper
    Tribunal in AA discussed the relevance of a CSID as regards  relocation
    to Baghdad at [128 - 129]:

         "128.     There  are  significant  differences   as   between   the
             circumstances in the contested areas and those  prevailing  in
             Baghdad. The April 2015 CIG reports that despite the levels of
             violence in  Baghdad,  displacement  there  has  remained  low
             (around 60,000) with the majority of those displaced  (40,000)
             moving within the governorate. This is in contrast to the high
             levels of population  displacement  away  from  the  contested
             areas.

         129. Although displacement levels are  clearly  a  relevant  factor
             when taking the  inclusive  approach  to  a  consideration  of
             Article  15(c),  we  are  cautious  about  giving  them  undue
             prominence in our holistic assessment. A person who is  facing
             egregious violence in one place may decide to move to  another
             place that, whilst safer, is still far from peaceful.  We  do,
             however, accept that the large movement  of  people  from  the
             contested areas to Baghdad city is indicative of  there  being
             sufficiently less violence in Baghdad to make the arduous  and
             upsetting  process  of  fleeing  one's  home  worthwhile.  The
             geography also indicates that those moving to Baghdad from the
             contested areas do not face a "Hobson's Choice", in that some,
             at least, would appear to have the option of seeking refuge in
             the Southern Governorates or across the border in Jordan."

 7. Both representatives agreed that this appeal turns upon the ability  of
    the appellant to obtain or replace his CSID.  In the light of the Upper
    Tribunal's observations in AA at [129] and to the exception  identified
    by the respondent and quoted at [128], the parties agree that,  if  the
    appellant is unable to replace or obtain  a  new  CSID,  he  will  face
    significant difficulties and destitution likely to breach the Article 3
    ECHR.

 8. In the light of these submissions, I indicated to  the  representatives
    that I wished to hear evidence from the appellant as regards the  CSIDs
    or other identity documents  which  may  have  been  possessed  or  are
    possessed by his  family  members  and  also  the  whereabouts  of  the
    appellant's family and friends who live in or formerly lived  in  Iraq.
    After a brief break, I heard evidence from the appellant who  spoke  in
    English.   His  mother  and  father  had  identity  cards  (his  father
    possessed a military identity card).  Both his parents also possessed a
    nationality card.  The appellant told me  that  he  himself  had  never
    lived in Baghdad and he had no family property in that city.  He has no
    family living in Baghdad at the present time,  nor  does  he  have  any
    friends living there.  Many  of  his  family  members  have  left  Iraq
    although his sister has remained in the country with her children.  The
    appellant understands that she is living some fifteen miles from Kirkuk
    but remains in hiding.  The sister's husband is in Turkey.  A number of
    the appellant's cousins are living in refugee camps in Lebanon.  Cross-
    examined by Mr Harrison, the appellant said that he had  a  friend  who
    lived in Kirkuk but he was no longer in touch with him.

 9. I indicated to the representatives that I found  the  appellant's  oral
    evidence to be truthful.

10. In submissions to the Tribunal, Mr Harrison told me  that  he  accepted
    that the appellant would have difficulties  obtaining  a  CSID  but  he
    certainly could not obtain one from Kirkuk as it is now  too  dangerous
    for him to visit.

11. Mr Jones submitted that the only option which remained remotely  viable
    was for the appellant to relocate to Baghdad, a city where he had never
    lived.  The appellant is a Sunni who has a genuine and subjective  fear
    that he will be targeted  and  harmed  by  those  who  have  previously
    threatened and injured him.  I agree with Mr Jones that that subjective
    fear is a factor to be considered when assessing the reasonableness  of
    relocation within Iraq.  I also agree with Mr Jones's  submission  that
    the appellant has no documents himself nor does he have family  members
    in Iraq who can vouch for him and which might enable him  to  obtain  a
    CSID.  As the Tribunal observed in AA, as a result of violence in areas
    such as Kirkuk, Civil Status Affairs offices have been  established  in
    Baghdad but there was no evidence that there is any  "central  archive"
    which would enable those offices to issue CSIDs to those who need  them
    but who  are  unable  to  provide  the  necessary  documentation.   The
    appellant himself has no valid passport nor does he have any  documents
    within the United Kingdom which would assist him  whilst  any  identity
    documents which have existed are possessed by family members who are no
    longer resident in Iraq.  I accept the appellant's contention  that  it
    would simply be too dangerous for him to attempt to  visit  his  sister
    near Kirkuk and that, even if he were to rendezvous with his sister, it
    is difficult to see how she, under such difficult circumstances,  could
    offer the appellant the assistance which he  requires.   In  short,  it
    would be unduly harsh to expect  the  appellant  to  undertake  such  a
    journey to Kirkuk or to spend any time in hiding with his sister.

12. I accept also Mr Jones' submission that there was no reason to  suppose
    that there is any  time  limit  on  the  perception  in  the  minds  of
    extremists and insurgents of an  individual's  collaboration  with  the
    former coalition  forces.   I  accept  also  the  force  of  Mr  Jones'
    submission that past persecution and, in the case  of  this  particular
    appellant, established prospective risk (Demirkaya [1999] Imm AR  498).
    The appellant is, therefore, an individual with  a  genuine  subjective
    fear of persecution and ill-treatment who cannot  return  to  his  home
    area of Kirkuk for whom relocation to Baghdad without a CSID  or  other
    valid identity document would expose him to a real risk of  destitution
    and infringement of Article 3 ECHR.

13. For the sake of completeness, I find also that the appellant would  not
    be able to obtain a CSID whilst remaining in the  United  Kingdom.   At
    [154] the Tribunal in AA concluded:

         "As can be seen from the evidence we have set out  earlier  in  the
         determination, this conclusion does not accord with the UNHCR's  or
         Amnesty International's views - both  organisations  being  of  the
         opinion that it is not appropriate for States to deny persons  from
         Iraq international protection on the basis of the applicability  of
         an internal flight alternative.

         The appellant does  not  have  a  passport  or  any  of  the  other
         documents which are required to obtain a CSID whilst outside  Iraq.
         I find that he is likely to be "severely hampered" to the extent of
         being unable to obtain a CSID whilst in this country.   Ultimately,
         the appellant cannot assist himself before he returns to  Iraq  and
         that difficulties he would encounter in obtaining a  CSID  in  Iraq
         are such that he would be exposed  to  a  significant  risk  whilst
         seeking to obtain  the  document  which  he  may  ultimately  never
         obtain.  I agree with Mr Jones that the appellant's  appeal  should
         succeed on asylum/Article 3 ECHR grounds irrespective of whether he
         should also succeed under Article 15(c).  Accordingly, I allow  his
         appeal against the respondent's decision on asylum and human rights
         grounds."

 Notice of Decision

14. I allow this appeal on asylum grounds.

15. I allow this appeal on human rights grounds (Article 3 ECHR).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 11 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

