
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/12461/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 August 2016                    |On 14 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MY
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sierra Leone, born in 1986.  She appeals
    with permission[1] the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Shepherd) to dismiss her  appeal  against  a  decision  to  refuse  her
    protection.

 2. By way of letter dated 7th September 2016 the  Respondent  agreed  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be  set  aside  for  legal
    error. She invites the Tribunal to so find and to remit the  matter  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for re-making. The Appellant's  representatives
    had agreed to this course. The matter is therefore settled by  consent.
    The decision of Judge Shepherd is set aside for the reasons given in Ms
    Cronin's grounds and the matter remitted to be heard  de  novo  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The parties are advised that this matter will not have  a  CMR  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal. If either party considers that this matter  should
    have any specific listing instructions they should apply in writing  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.



    Decisions

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and it
    is set aside.

 5. The matter is to be re-made in the First-tier  Tribunal  by  any  judge
    other than Judge Shepherd.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         13th September 2016
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused by First-tier
Tribunal Judge Pooler on the 12th April 2016 but was granted upon renewed
application by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on the 11th August 2016

