
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12069/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 January 2017                   |On 2 February 2017                   |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                            Salar Azeez Mohammed
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mrs O Duru, instructed by Jemek Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Salar Azeez Mohammed, date of birth 1.1.74, is a citizen
    of Iraq.

 2. This is his appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    James promulgated 31.3.16, dismissing his appeal against  the  decision
    of the Secretary of State, dated  26.8.15,  to  refuse  his  protection
    claim.

 3. The Judge heard the appeal on 10.3.16.

 4. The grounds of application for permission to  appeal  assert  that  the
    judge of the First-tier Tribunal (1) failed to  give  adequate  reasons
    for his findings; (2) reached flawed credibility findings;  (3)  failed
    to properly consider the evidence; and (4) failed to consider and apply
    relevant Country Guidance case law in finding at [34] of  the  decision
    that for article 15(c)  reasons  the  appellant  could  not  return  to
    Makhmour, but that he "would be able to relocate to Erbil or  Kabul  to
    avoid risks that he would  face  in  Makhmour."  The  grounds,  and  in
    particular ground 4, are somewhat  incoherently  drafted.  Ground  four
    makes no reference to the relevant  Country  Guidance  decision  in  AA
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2016] UKUT 000544 (IAC), which was promulgated
    in October 2015.


 5. I note that whilst the judge must have been confused  in  referring  to
    Kabul, which is in Afghanistan, rather than Baghdad, Iraq,  as  drafted
    ground four also makes a geographical error referring to return to Iran
    rather than Iraq.

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro granted permission to appeal on  ground
    four only, noting that in applying findings to the background  position
    in Iraq, the judge has omitted to make any  reference  to  the  current
    Country Guidance and  persistently  referred  to  relocation  to  Kabul
    rather than Baghdad.

 7. Thus the matter came before me on 26.1.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, with only ground 4 pursued by Mrs Duru.

Error of Law

 8. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of Judge James should be set aside.

 9. Mr Mills accepts that the judge erred by referring to Kabul instead  of
    Baghdad and failed to reference the country guidance of AA.   The  Rule
    24 response submits that the error is not material  as  the  judge  has
    properly considered relocation to Erbil, as  set  out  in  the  refusal
    decision. At [33] the judge did not accept  as  valid  the  appellant's
    concerns about relocation to Erbil, and did not accept that  he  is  of
    interest to the KRG.

10. However, without a careful, anxious consideration of the  circumstances
    in the IKR and the means of  return,  and  given  the  absence  of  any
    consideration of the relevant case law, I cannot be satisfied that  the
    judge has properly and adequately addressed the risk on return and  the
    feasibility of return to either Baghdad  or  the  IKR  via  Erbil.  The
    decision as made is unsafe and in error of law so that it should be set
    aside to be remade afresh.

Remittal

11. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the facts are  unclear  on  a
    crucial issue at the heart of an appeal, as  they  are  in  this  case,
    effectively there has not been a valid determination of  those  issues.
    The errors of the First-tier Tribunal vitiate  all  other  findings  of
    fact and the conclusions from those facts so that there has not been  a
    valid determination of the issues in the appeal.

12. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the parties of a fair  hearing  and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Consequential Directions

14.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
    Birmingham;

15. The appeal is to be relisted at the first available date;

16. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

17. The ELH is 3 hours;

18. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judge James;

19. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing;

20. The First-tier Tribunal may give such further or alternative directions
    as are deemed appropriate.

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: no fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

