
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/12160/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 20 March 2015                    |On 23 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     TM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Physsas, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, who claimed asylum on 16
       August 2011. This application was refused by the Secretary of State
       on 17 October 2011, and a decision was thereafter made on the 25
       October 2011 to remove the appellant.

    2. The appellant brought an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. In a
       determination signed on 16 June 2012 the First-tier Tribunal
       dismissed the appeal on all grounds, finding the appellant's account
       to be lacking in credibility in many respects. The appellant appealed
       this determination to the Upper Tribunal, but that appeal was
       dismissed - Upper Tribunal Judge Warr concluding that there was no
       material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's determination.

    3. Undeterred by this the appellant appealed to the Court of Appeal,
       with the permission of Jackson LJ. On 22 January 2015 Underhill LJ
       ordered that:

          "The appeal is allowed to the extent that the case is remitted  to
          the Upper Tribunal, for the Upper Tribunal to determine whether it
          or  the   First-tier   Tribunal   will   conduct   a   substantive
          reconsideration of the Appellant's appeal, in the terms set out in
          the attached statement of reasons"

    4. Paragraph 4 of the Statement of Reasons reads:

          "The parties agree that the Upper Tribunal erred in law in finding
          no error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  approach  to  the
          medical  evidence  when  considering  the   credibility   of   the
          Appellant's claim and in the First-tier Tribunal's approach to the
          background evidence and country guidance for the reasons given  in
          the grant of permission.  Therefore,  it  is  agreed  between  the
          parties that the matter should be remitted to the  Upper  Tribunal
          of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber   for   a   substantive
          reconsideration of the Appellant's appeal, with the Upper Tribunal
          to consider whether it or the First-tier Tribunal will  conduct  a
          full re-hearing of the appeal."

    5. Thus the matter came before me.

    6. For the reasons given by Underhill LJ I find that the First-tier
       Tribunal's determination of 16 June 2012 contains an error of law
       capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal and I set such
       determination aside.

    7. It was submitted by the parties that the re-hearing of the appeal
       should be de novo, a submission I am in full agreement with. As to
       whether this de-novo rehearing should be undertaken by the First-
       tier, or Upper, Tribunal - having considered paragraph 7 of the
       Senior President's Practice Direction of 25 September 2012 I conclude
       that the nature and extent of the judicial fact finding which is
       necessary for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that
       it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal - an
       approach advocated by both parties.



Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 20 March 2015
