
                                    [pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12957/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 August 2016                            |On 13 September 2016          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                           mr Mohammed Fuad Ahmed
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss R Pickering
For the Respondent:    Miss Pettersen


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was  born  on  8  December
    1973.

2.   The appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal A Davies (the Immigration Judge)  sitting  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) to dismiss his appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection
    and human rights grounds.  The grounds assert that the Judge  erred  in
    law by treating  the  delay  in  advancing  his  claim  as  potentially
    determinative in credibility terms.  Furthermore, it  is  alleged  that
    the Immigration Judge failed to consider relevant evidence on the issue
    of risk on return.  It is argued that the Immigration Judge also  erred
    in law in failing to assess the evidence in  the  round.   Accordingly,
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fisher decided to grant permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT).

Background

3.   The appellant claimed to fear persecution on grounds of  his  political
    opinion as a supporter of the  Bangladesh  National  Party  (BNP).   He
    claimed that he had supported that party  since  1990  when  he  was  a
    student.  The appellant claims to have  been  beaten  on  a  number  of
    occasions which had caused scarring.  He moved to Beinibazar  for  five
    years. During that period he was not involved  in  politics.   However,
    subsequently, he got a job in Sylhet and became involved in trade-union
    like organisations. These organisations became  more  influential  when
    the BNP came into power in 2001.  He also decided to  help  friends  in
    the BNP financially.  The political situation changed in 2007 due to  a
    military  backed  coup  in  Bangladesh.   The  appellant  claimed  that
    following the coup  he  fell  under  suspicion  by  an  anti-corruption
    commission because  his  earnings  did  not  match  the  money  in  his
    accounts.  He also claims that he was harassed for his political views.



The Immigration History

4.   The appellant arrived in the UK on 8 November 2007  and  made  a  human
    rights claim on 20 January 2012.  This was refused three  years  later.
    On 2 March 2015 he made a claim for asylum.   However,  the  respondent
    rejected that application and issued him with  a  form  IS.151A  as  an
    overstayer on 11 March 2015.  It seems that the appellant was in the UK
    from 2007 until 2012 as a visitor but later, in 2015, not only  claimed
    asylum but also relied on his rights under Article 8 of the ECHR  as  a
    basis for remaining in the UK.

Decision of the FtT

5.   The Immigration Judge considered that the appellant's  alleged  history
    of threats in Bangladesh did not constitute a "Convention" reason.  The
    appellant had encountered difficulties with the opposition in his  area
    but the respondent did not  accept  that  the  appellant  was  in  fact
    politically  active.   The  Immigration  Judge   considered   objective
    evidence including a Human Rights Report on Bangladesh from  2015.   He
    considered that corruption was a significant problem but then noted the
    contents of a report by the Immigration and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada
    (also in 2015) which focused on the BNP and treatment of  its  members.
    Student wings and the Awimi League were, according  to  sources,  often
    involved in violent clashes.  After the 2014  elections  BNP  activists
    were harassed,  detained  and  restricted  in  their  activities.   The
    appellant's personal circumstances were considered but  the  period  of
    activity dated back a long way.  This was regarded by  the  Immigration
    Judge as  "extremely  short"  (paragraph  33).   A  considerable  delay
    occurred between his departure in 2007 and his claim and given that  he
    had not been politically active with the BNP since departing Bangladesh
    it was not considered  that  he  would  be  at  risk  on  return.   The
    respondent had considered the appellant's protected human rights  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR but considered that the claim  neither  succeeded
    under the Immigration Rules nor by directly applying that Article.  The
    appellant had lived in the UK for a number of years but the  respondent
    was entitled to control immigration in the public  interest,  attaching
    little weight to a person  who  unlawfully  overstayed  or  claimed  an
    immigration status to which he was not entitled (asylum/human  rights).
    Carrying out the balancing exercise that was  required,  following  the
    recent changes to the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    under Section 117A(3) the appellant's protected human rights  were  not
    an overriding  consideration.   The  respondent  took  account  of  the
    factors but concluded that the appellant was not entitled to remain  in
    the UK.  Furthermore, any  problems  the  appellant  had  in  accessing
    medical treatment in Bangladesh  would  not  constitute  a  reason  for
    allowing him to remain in the  UK.   The  appellant  had  substantially
    overstayed  his  entitlement  to  be  here  and  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to return him was entirely legitimate and in accordance with
    the public end.  Accordingly,  the  appellant  did  not  succeed  under
    Article 8 or under the Immigration Rules.

The Hearing

6.   At the hearing it was submitted on behalf of  the  appellant  that  the
    Immigration Judge erred in his approach to Section 8 of the Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004  ("Section  8")  and  had
    attached excessive weight to the delay in advancing his  asylum  claim.
    It was alleged  that  an  explanation  of  the  delay  had  been  given
    including the appellant's lack of knowledge of the asylum process  and,
    whilst the Immigration Judge was entitled to take delay  into  account,
    he was not entitled to give it such prominence in his decision.

7.   The respondent on the other hand submitted that there had been  a  very
    significant  delay  in  advancing  the  appellant's   claim   and   the
    Immigration Judge had taken into account the appellant's explanation in
    his witness statement (see for example paragraph 26 of that  statement)
    where the appellant had blamed it on depression.  I noted in the course
    of the hearing that there  was  no  evidence  as  such  of  depression,
    certainly for such a prolonged period.

8.   Ground 2 was the subject of permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    as both parties agreed.  However,  unfortunately,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fisher who gave permission on 8 August  2016  did  not  give  any
    explanation as to why he granted permission to  appeal  on  the  second
    ground.  Nevertheless, Miss Pickering  helpfully  explained  fully  the
    basis for the additional ground for appeal.  She said that her client's
    activities for the BNP  had  been  accepted  to  some  extent.   I  was
    referred, for example, to paragraph 20 of his decision.  The difference
    between her client's position and that of the Immigration Judge related
    to the problems at a later stage, i.e. in 2007 when it appears that the
    Government  of  Bangladesh  began  an  anticorruption  campaign.    The
    Immigration Judge ought to have attached greater  weight  to  the  many
    positive things he said about the appellant's evidence,  including  the
    helpful supporting evidence from the appellant's sister  Rumana  Begum.
    She had given  evidence  at  the  hearing  and  the  Immigration  Judge
    appeared to accept some of what she said,  but  did  not  make  express
    reference to the points she made in her witness statement  in  relation
    to the appellant's account, in particular, Rumana  Begum  explained  in
    paragraph 4 of her witness statement that the military backed unelected
    Government of Bangladesh came to power in 2007 and following that event
    her brother was again "in trouble" along with many others.  He  stopped
    living at home and started to live in different places due to a fear of
    the "combined force" which started to arrest people from top to  bottom
    in society without charge.  Ms  Begum  went  on  to  explain  that  her
    brother had left Bangladesh in November 2007 for the UK.  There were  a
    couple of subsequent occasions when her brother was  "harassed"  either
    by individuals or by the Authorities.  Ms Begum herself came to live in
    the UK with her husband in 2008.

9.   Miss Pickering relied on a number of  parts  of  her  client's  witness
    statement, including paragraph 20, where the appellant  explained  that
    as a member of the BNP Party he was a leader of a union or similar such
    organisation.  He was involved with stenographers and involved  in  the
    divisional level organisations.  He also  provided  letters  and  other
    information about  this.   He  claimed  that  he  was  able  to  use  a
    connection with someone in the immigration department to enable him  to
    leave Bangladesh via the airport.  The connection with the  Immigration
    Officer was through his BNP connections.  He had to give him some money
    to enable the Immigration Officer to facilitate his departure.   If  he
    was forced to return to Bangladesh he fears that he would be stopped at
    the airport, where his details would be held  as  a  former  Government
    employee.  His passport and ID documents  would  soon  reveal  his  BNP
    affiliations.

10.  The respondent's representative, Miss Pettersen,  on  the  other  hand,
    submitted that the credit assessment had been made by  the  Immigration
    Judge and that he was entitled to take into  account  the  considerable
    delay outlined above.  He reached comprehensive conclusions,  including
    at paragraph  16  of  his  decision.   He  noted  the  absence  of  any
    explanation for  the  considerable  delay  between  2012  and  2015  in
    advancing the claim and he was entitled  to  take  into  account  this,
    particularly against the background of Section  8  referred  to  above.
    There were  some  historic  activities  by  the  appellant,  which  the
    Immigration Judge accepted, but paragraph 20 was by no means  decisive.
    The Immigration Judge's decision contained a  proper  analysis  of  the
    evidence, making detailed findings the Immigration Judge  had  in  mind
    the absence of any  need  for  corroboration  and  considered  all  the
    evidence that was put before him.  The  fact  that  the  appellant  had
    worked for a Government department in the past did not  mean  that  the
    actions of the  existing  Government  in  Bangladesh  in  investigating
    corruption were persecutory.  The Government of Bangladesh was entitled
    to investigate financial impropriety.   Any  gaps  in  the  Immigration
    Judge's analysis were not  significant  or  material  to  the  ultimate
    decision.

11.  Miss Pickering in reply pointed out  that  the  Immigration  Judge  had
    been entitled to dismiss the appellant's sister's evidence but  he  had
    not done so.  There were inconsistent findings (and she referred me  in
    this context to paragraphs 25 and 31 of the decision).  The Immigration
    Judge understood the nervousness of the  appellant  but  was  wrong  to
    reject the possibility or even likelihood that he was in fact  in  fear
    of his personal safety.  On the question of  delay  the  appellant  had
    expressed his lack of knowledge of procedures and  I  was  referred  to
    question 143 in the asylum interview, where the appellant  stated  that
    he had not had a solicitor acting for him  in  2011  when  he  made  an
    application through a law centre to approach the respondent.  This  had
    apparently led to the first  claim  (for  protection  on  human  rights
    grounds in 2012). The appellant claimed to have been genuinely ignorant
    about how to renew his visa or  take  other  steps  to  regularise  his
    status in the UK.

Discussion

12.  There appear to be two  grounds  on  which  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted.  The first relates to the delay in advancing  the  appellant's
    claim  and  whether  the  Immigration  Judge  attached  too  great   an
    importance to this or allowed it to dominate his credibility  findings.
    In  relation  to  this,  the  delay  here  was  considerable  and   the
    appellant's explanation that he was ignorant of  asylum  procedures  is
    patently incorrect, particularly since, when he  did  become  aware  of
    these procedures in 2012 when interviewed about his human rights claim.
    Indeed, he still failed to claim asylum  for  a  further  three  years.
    When he finally advanced that claim the respondent had been entitled to
    take the delay into account.  Furthermore, in the  Immigration  Judge's
    decision he does not simply deal with the delay in  one  paragraph  but
    makes reference to it on a number of occasions, indicating that, in the
    particular circumstances of the case, it undermines the credibility  of
    the whole account presented before him.

13.  The overall decision was on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  had  not
    provided  a  full  explanation  as  to  why  he   feared   persecution,
    particularly having regard to  later  events.   The  Immigration  Judge
    accepted much of his evidence in relation to his activities for the BNP
    in the 1990s, but did not accept  that  the  clampdown  in  2007  which
    followed the military  backed  government  taking  over  and  targeting
    corruption, would have led the authorities  to  be  interested  in  the
    appellant. Even if they had been interested in the appellant from  2007
    onwards this was  not  reasonably  likely  to  be  connected  with  the
    appellant's  historic  association  with  the  BNP.   Having  carefully
    considered the relevant paragraphs of the Immigration Judge's  decision
    in this respect he clearly made an assessment  based  on  the  evidence
    that was presented before him.  He was entitled to  conclude  that  the
    appellant's involvement with the BNP was largely historic and  had  not
    continued until 2007.  He carefully looked at  the  objective  evidence
    and referred to this in his decision.  Having considered the  objective
    evidence there was, in the Immigration Judge's view, no reason for  the
    appellant to fear his return to Bangladesh.  Miss Pickering  makes  the
    additional point that the Immigration Judge had  failed  to  take  full
    account of the appellant's sister's  evidence.  However,  her  evidence
    appears to have been somewhat vague  and  did  not  contain  sufficient
    detail of the alleged visits in which the appellant had been sought  by
    the Authorities.  Again, the Immigration Judge  had  been  entitled  to
    reach the conclusion he did that the appellant was not of  interest  to
    the Authorities in the circumstances of the case.

Notice of Decision

14.  The appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss
    the asylum/humanitarian/human rights appeal is dismissed.

15.  The decision by the First-tier Tribunal  stands  and  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse further leave to remain also stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury     13 September 2016




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury     13 September 2016
