
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/12619/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2016                            |On 18 July 2016            |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                     S M
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr R Toal (counsel) instructed by Birnberg Peirce &
Partners, solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, preserving  the  anonymity  direction  made  in  the
First-tier.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Woolf promulgated on  11  April  2016,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1978 and is a national of Sri Lanka.

4. On 17 September 2015 the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
protection claim application.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Woolf ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 14 June 2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
McGeachy gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "While I consider that this is a detailed and clear determination  the
      reality is that the Judge does not make clear findings  regarding  the
      appellant's claimed detention in 2008 and it is arguable that that  is
      a material error. I  therefore  grant  permission  to  appeal  on  all
      grounds."

The Hearing

7. (a) Mr Toal, counsel for the  appellant,  sought  leave  to  introduce  a
third ground of appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds. Mr Norton did  not  oppose
the application, and so I allowed it. Mr Toal  then  moved  the  grounds  of
appeal. He argued that there was  ample  evidence  that  the  appellant  was
first detained in 2008, but  the  Judge  did  not  make  clear  findings  in
relation to that  detention.  He  reminded  me  of  paragraph  339K  of  the
immigration rules and argued  that  the  detention  in  2008  is  a  serious
indication of a well-founded fear of persecution.

(b) Mr Toal moved to the  second  ground  of  appeal  and  argued  that  the
Judge's adverse credibility findings were unsafe  and  that  those  findings
clouded the Judge's mind when considering the medical evidence. He  took  me
to the report prepared by Dr Dhumad, and told me that, despite finding  that
Dr Dhumad is adequately qualified to offer an expert opinion, the Judge  did
not accept his conclusions and findings solely because the  Judge  (wrongly)
finds that the appellant is not a  credible  witness.  He  argued  that  the
joint presidential guidance had not been followed.

(c) The third ground of appeal is directed at  [77]  of  the  decision.  The
appellant's husband is the third appellant in the country guidance  case  of
GJ. The Supreme Court, on 22 June 2016, referred his case  to  the  European
Court of Justice. Mr Toal argued that to remove the  respondent  whilst  her
husband's case pending before the Court of  Justice  is  a  disproportionate
breach of the appellant's right to respect for family life.

8. For the respondent, Mr Norton argued that the decision does  not  contain
any errors of law, material or otherwise. He drew my attention  to  [67]  to
[73] of the decision and told me that at [73]  of  the  decision  the  Judge
correctly finds that the claimant was not detained in 2008. He then took  me
to [44] to [65] of the decision and told me that there the Judge dealt  with
the  psychiatrist's  report  with  anxious  scrutiny  before  giving  cogent
reasons for finding that the appellant had manipulated the psychiatrist.  He
told me that the article 8 ECHR grounds are dealt with  adequately  at  [77]
of the decision, and that, because of the operation of  section  3C  of  the
1971 act, the appellant will not be separated from  her  husband;  leave  to
remain will always be in line with that granted to her husband.

Analysis

9. The first ground of appeal relates to the appellant's claim to have  been
detained in 2008. It is suggested that the Judge simply did  not  deal  with
the evidence. To support that ground of appeal, counsel  for  the  appellant
read extracts from the appellant's witness statement  to  me.  There  is  no
merit in that ground of appeal. The first sentence of [67] of  the  decision
records the appellant's claim to have been detained both in 2008  and  2014.
Between [68] and [72] the Judge considers the claim that the  appellant  had
been detained in November 2014, and rejects it.  At  [73]  the  Judge  takes
guidance from the case of GJ and, in  the  penultimate  sentence,  considers
the profile the appellant would have if she had been detained in 2008.

10. The judge could have made clear findings  in  relation  to  the  claimed
detention in 2008, however it is clear from a fair reading of [67]  to  [73]
of the decision that the Judge finds that, even if the  appellant  had  been
detained  in  2008,  that  detention  cannot  be  sufficient  to  place  the
appellant within a risk category as defined in GJ.

11. The second ground of appeal relates to the treatment of the two  reports
from Dr Dhumad. At [44] the Judge says that she is satisfied that Dr  Dhumad
is adequately  qualified  to  reach  conclusions  about  the  state  of  the
appellant's mental health. Between [44] and [65] of the decision  the  Judge
discusses Dr Dhumad's evidence, before  rejecting  his  conclusions  on  the
basis of the appellant's  performance  at  screening  interview  and  asylum
interview and because of the appellant's ability to  prepare  of  a  witness
statement.

12. In BN (psychiatric evidence - discrepancies)  Albania  [2010]  UKUT  279
(IAC) the Tribunal held that (i)  the  Tribunal  is  entitled  to  reject  a
clinical diagnosis that an appellant suffers from a depressive  illness  but
it must give clear reasons for doing  so  which  engage  adequately  with  a
medical opinion representing the judgment of a professional psychiatrist  on
what he has seen of the appellant;  (ii)  In  the  present  case  where  the
psychiatric evidence was being relied  on  to  provide  an  explanation  for
admitted discrepancies  in  the  appellant's  evidence,  the  psychiatrists'
comment on the role of depression in explaining  inconsistencies  could  not
and did not even purport to deal with all the aspects  of  the  claim  which
the Immigration Judge  had  found  incredible;(iii)  On  the  facts  of  the
present  case  even  taking  the  diagnosis  as  correct,  it  provided   no
reasonable explanation for the many aspects of the appellant's evidence  and
behaviour which led to the rejection of his claim as credible.  Accordingly,
if there were any error of law in what the Immigration Judge  had  concluded
in relation to the diagnosis, the error had no effect on the result.

13. In Y and Z (Sri Lanka) v SSHD (2009) EWCA Civ 362 the  Court  of  Appeal
said that whilst  the  factuality  of  a  claimant's  account  might  be  so
controverted by the Tribunal's own findings as to undermine the  psychiatric
evidence, care was required where  the  factual  basis  of  the  psychiatric
findings was sought to be undermined by suggesting that  the  claimants  had
been exaggerating their symptoms.  That was in the first instance  a  matter
for the experts themselves, a fundamental aspect of whose expertise was  the
evaluation of the patients' accounts of  their  symptoms.  Accordingly,  the
Tribunal could modify or disregard that evaluation only if it had  good  and
objective reasoning for discounting it.

14. In M(DRC) 2003 UKIAT 00054 the Tribunal said that it was wrong  to  make
adverse  findings  of  credibility  first  and  then  dismiss  the   report.
Similarly, in Ex parte Virjon B [2002] EWHC 1469, Forbes  J  found  that  an
Adjudicator had been wrong to use adverse credibility findings  as  a  basis
for  rejecting  medical  evidence  without  first  considering  the  medical
evidence itself.

15. In Mazrae (2004) EWCA Civ  1235  the  Court  of  Appeal  said  that  the
Adjudicator's approach to credibility was flawed in  that  she  appeared  to
have  reached  an  adverse  finding  on  credibility  based  solely  on  the
appellant's own account, a finding which she went on to say was  not  shaken
by the background material and an  expert  report,  having  considered  them
separately. Although the application was refused for  various  reasons  Lord
Justice Sedley admitted to  having  grave  doubts  about  the  Adjudicator's
reasoning in  this  respect  and  said  that  the  Adjudicator  should  have
considered and  evaluated  all  the  evidence  together  -  the  appellant's
account, the medical report and expert report, rather than  dismissing  each
in isolation from each other.

16. Although the Judge correctly takes  guidance  in  the  case  of  GJ  and
others, she does so after taking an incorrect approach  to  the  psychiatric
evidence. The Judge should have considered each strand  of  evidence  before
reaching conclusions as to credibility. I find that  that  is  not  just  an
error of law, it is a material error of law. If the evidence  in  this  case
had been considered in the round,  a  different  conclusion  may  have  been
reached. It is realistically possible that if the evidence of Dr Dhumad  had
been considered correctly, then the appellant may have been found  to  be  a
credible and reliable witness.

17. I must find that the decision is tainted by a material error of  law.  I
therefore set the decision aside

18. The Judge's  decision  cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
entirety. All matters must be determined of new.

REMITTAL TO FT

19. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:


    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. I find that this case should be  remitted  because  of  the  nature  and
extent of the judicial fact finding which will be necessary to make  a  just
decision in this case. In this case none of the  findings  of  fact  are  to
stand.

21. I remit the matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton
Cross, before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Woolf.

CONCLUSION

Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

23. I set aside the decision. The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                                                              Date 18
July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle










