
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/12029/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent   |Determination & Reasons             |
|On 24th April 2016                       |On 26th July 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              miss Faiza Yousaf
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Camille Warren (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Andy McVeety (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bird, promulgated at Taylor House on 25th January 2016.   In  the
    determination, the judge dismissed the  appeal  of  Faiza  Yousaf,  who
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Pakistan, who was born on  29th
    August 1984.  She appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 9th September 2015, refusing  her  application
    for asylum and to recognise her as a refugee with a  well-founded  fear
    of persecution "on the basis of her membership of a  particular  social
    group as a woman in Pakistan" (see page 1 of the refusal letter).

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she was drugged and raped by a  spiritual
    healer in Pakistan, and that in order to have  an  abortion,  she  then
    married her friend, Shiraz, because for an abortion it was necessary to
    provide a certificate from a male member of the household who  approved
    of the abortion, and he arranged for the abortion approximately a  week
    after their marriage.  Subsequently however, her  marriage  broke  down
    with Shiraz on account of the domestic violence suffered.

The Judge's Findings

 4. In her findings, the judge set out, "the basis of the Appellant's claim
    for asylum" and observed that, "around 2009 she was raped by a man  who
    had been treating her father but also treated her" (paragraph 7).   The
    Appellant found out she was pregnant.  One of her colleagues had  taken
    to pick up her test results and he saw the results.  She spoke  to  her
    colleague, Shiraz, and told him about the rape and asked for his  help.
    He suggested that they marry and then this could  be  organised.   "She
    knew that he was already married and had children but she did not  know
    what else to do.  Her family would not help her and her life  would  be
    in danger if she told her parents" (paragraph  8).   In  order  to  get
    married to Shiraz he would need to get the consent from his first wife.
     His parents came to her parents and asked for the  hand  in  marriage.
    The parents did not know, "that he was already  married  and  they  had
    given their consent" (paragraph 9).

 5. Their marriage was arranged, but a week before  the  marriage  ceremony
    Shiraz's mother said that she would not attend  the  wedding,  but  the
    marriage went ahead anyway  (paragraph  9).   Once  the  Appellant  had
    married she could not go and live in Shiraz's family's house until  his
    mother consented and, "it was at this time that her partner  said  that
    it would be better if they left it for a while"  (paragraph  10).   The
    Appellant  remained  in  her  own  parents'  home  for  over  a   year.
    Thereafter, "as things were getting difficult it was decided  that  she
    should come to the United Kingdom as a student  and  that  her  husband
    would  come  as  her  dependant"  (paragraph  11).   He  made  all  the
    arrangements and they came to the United Kingdom.  The  Appellant  said
    that shortly after arriving here, "her brother got married in  Pakistan
    in June 2011 but the Appellant did not attend" (paragraph 11).

 6. Thereafter the Appellant did become pregnant but miscarried in  October
    2011.  The Appellant said that about a year after their marriage  their
    relationship deteriorated and that, "after her miscarriage  she  wanted
    to return to her see her family but  her  husband  was  against  this".
    Nevertheless the Appellant did return, "but then wanted  to  return  to
    the UK after about ten days" but that,  "when  she  came  back  he  was
    annoyed and they argued" and his mother was not accepting her  and  her
    own brother got divorced in April 2012 and his ex-wife  telephoned  the
    Appellant to say that she knew about the abortion and the fact that her
    husband had a first wife (paragraph 12).

 7. A few days later her mother  had  telephoned  to  say  that  they  knew
    everything and asked why the Appellant had not  said  anything  to  her
    parents.  The Appellant's mother said she did not want anything further
    to do with the Appellant (paragraph 13).  The Appellant then said  that
    following the birth of her daughter in November 2012  she  had  emailed
    her father telling him about the truth.  He telephoned her and told her
    that the family did not want to have any contact  with  her  (paragraph
    14).  In early 2013 her husband suffered from financial problems and he
    could not support  her  and  the  child  and  finally  left  her.   The
    Appellant said that her husband "had returned  shortly  but  there  had
    been ill-treatment and he left again.  The Appellant feared that if she
    returned to Pakistan her parents will ill-treat her or seek to take her
    life.  There were also threats from her husband's first wife's  family"
    (paragraph 15).

 8. The evidence was set out extensively by the judge and  the  judge  also
    observed how,

         "The Appellant's claim to have married Mr Shiraz  Jangua  was  then
         considered at paragraphs 22  to  30.   It  was  accepted  that  the
         Appellant was married to Mr Jangua but it  was  not  accepted  that
         this relationship had broken down because of domestic violence.  No
         evidence had been provided to substantiate this  claim"  (paragraph
         17).

 9. The judge went on to describe how she  heard  evidence  from  witnesses
    (see paragraphs 22 to 23).

10. The judge then gave reasons for her decision and set out the  facts  in
    summary (see paragraph 28).  The judge observed that, "at the hearing I
    asked the Appellant how was  it  possible  that  her  parents  had  not
    initiated any enquiries to find out a little more  about  this  family.
    The Appellant said that they have not" (paragraph 28)  when  the  judge
    began considering the question about the marriage of the  Appellant  to
    Shiraz.  The judge went on to explain how "the Appellant was unable  to
    explain why her husband's mother had not said anything".

11. The judge did not regard the explanation as to why she did  not  attend
    the wedding to be a credible one.  The conclusion reached by the  judge
    was that,

         "The Appellant's account of the reasons for the marriage, namely in
         order to obtain a marriage certificate, does not sit well with  the
         involvement of the family into the matter.   It  appears  that  the
         marriage was  arranged  fairly  traditionally  with  the  husband's
         mother coming to  her  parents  to  ask  for  the  Appellant.   The
         Appellants consented and there was  an  engagement  as  well  as  a
         marriage ceremony" (paragraph 30).

    Ultimately, the judge had little doubt that,

         "On the whole I did not find this Appellant to be credible  in  the
         evidence that she gave.  I could not accept  her  explanation  that
         her parents failed  to  make  any  enquiries  about  her  husband's
         family.  She was unable to explain why her husband would marry her,
         being a married man with two children, just so that she could  have
         a marriage certificate in order to get an abortion" (paragraph 31).



    The judge went on to also observe that there was no "objective evidence
    to show that this was a  requirement".   Furthermore,  the  judge  also
    found it extraordinary that the Appellant "was unable  to  explain  why
    her husband, who was a professional man, would not obtain consent  from
    his wife if that was a legal requirement and would need to  be  put  on
    the form" (paragraph 31).  Finally, the judge held that "if  the  whole
    reason for this marriage was for the Appellant to get an abortion,  the
    Appellant has been unable to obtain any evidence to substantiate  this"
    (paragraph 32).

12. In relation to the Appellant producing the  evidence  from  the  United
    Kingdom that she had been the victim of rape, the judge  observed  that
    there was a letter from the West London Rape Crisis  Centre  from  Miss
    Foziha Hamid,

         "... who describes herself as a clinical manager.  She states  that
         the Appellant's symptoms are consistent with a diagnosis of complex
         traumatic stress disorder.  It is not clear whether Miss Hamid  had
         the medical expertise  to  form  such  an  opinion.   There  is  no
         evidence of her qualifications" (paragraph 36).

13. The judge dismissed her appeal observing how the Appellant was a  well-
    educated lady with an MBA from a university in Pakistan (paragraph  41)
    and the entire claim based upon bringing dishonour to  the  family  was
    untenable (see paragraphs 42 to 43).

14. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

15. The grounds of application state that the  judge  erred  in  concluding
    that the Appellant was being returned as a single woman with  a  child,
    whereas in reality her case had been that she had been raped and risked
    ill-treatment at the hands of relatives of hers in Pakistan.

16. Secondly that the judge did not in any event  consider  the  associated
    risks set out in the subjective country guidance material  in  relation
    to the case of SM (lone women -  ostracism)  Pakistan  CG  [2016]  UKUT
    000067.  Third, the judge disregarded or misstated the  evidence.   For
    example, if the judge held that the Appellant was not credible, she did
    not explain why the Appellant was not credible.  This was  particularly
    so given that the rape was unchallenged by the Respondent.

17. Third, the  Appellant  was  someone  who  "the  Respondent  accepts  is
    destitute, without support from her family" and  the  judge  failed  to
    record the Appellant's examination-in-chief and submissions,  which  in
    combination included the fact that,  as  someone  supported  by  asylum
    support, she had established that she was destitute".

18. Finally, there was also the Article 8 and Section 55 BCIA  claim  which
    the judge had not considered.

19. On 23rd March 2016, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.

Submissions

20. At the hearing before me on 24th May  2016,  Ms  Warren,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that the judge had misunderstood the
    basis of the claim, and focused on the fact that the  Appellant  was  a
    lone woman with a child rather than the fact that she  had  been  raped
    and feared reprisals from her family.  This was an  entirely  different
    claim from that of a lone woman.  Moreover, the rape was only  referred
    to by the judge at paragraph 28.  Yet, the judge had accepted that  the
    Appellant had been the victim  of  rape,  which  led  to  her  becoming
    pregnant,  and  this  resulted  in  her  seeking  an  abortion.    More
    particularly,  Ms  Warren  referred  to  the  fact  that  the   written
    submissions, which are detailed and lengthy, were submitted before  the
    judge and these fundamentally addressed the true nature  of  the  claim
    that was before the judge.   It  was  also  explained  in  the  written
    submissions (see paragraph 14.7) that the Appellant needed to have  the
    "consent of a guardian" if she was unmarried, if she were  to  have  an
    abortion, failing which this would not be available  to  her.   In  the
    circumstances, the judge should  not  have  taken  the  view  that  the
    requirement of a certificate of marriage or  a  male's  consent  was  a
    requirement.

21. For his part, Mr McVeety submitted that this was simply an  attempt  to
    reargue the case.

22. First, it was simply not the case that the judge had misunderstood  the
    nature of the claim.  The judge had been perfectly aware throughout the
    determination  that  the  essence  of  the  claim  emanated  from   the
    Appellant's claim  that  she  had  initially  been  raped,  had  fallen
    pregnant, and had to abort her baby (see paragraph 28).

23. Second, the judge had also  then  had  regard  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant additionally claimed that  there  was  a  risk  to  her  from
    members of her family (see paragraphs 13 to 14).  The  judge  expressly
    considered then the position as to whether the Appellant  would  be  at
    risk as a member of a particular social group,  namely,  a  lone  woman
    with a child (paragraph 27).  Accordingly, the  entire  nature  of  the
    claim, in the  various  ways  in  which  it  had  been  put,  had  been
    considered by the judge.

24. Third, in so far as the country guidance case of KA (domestic violence,
    risk of return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 was concerned (as  affirmed
    by SA), that particularly educated women, such as the Appellant who has
    an MBA, would be able to access social facilities and would not  be  at
    risk of ill-treatment and persecution.  In this respect paragraph 12 of
    the Grounds of Appeal is entirely misleading when it states that,  "the
    Appellant is someone who the Respondent accepts is destitute  .......",
    because this is predicated on the basis that just because the Appellant
    has been given asylum support in the  United  Kingdom,  that  for  this
    reason alone, she is going to be destitute  upon  return  to  Pakistan,
    which does not follow at all,  and  is  certainly  not  accepted.   The
    Appellant is a middle class lady who would have facilities available to
    her on account of her education and her family background.

25. Fourth, it is simply not the case that the judge has accepted that  the
    Appellant had been raped.  The contrary is  her  position.   The  judge
    addresses the question of rape  at  paragraph  36  when  the  Appellant
    "produces a letter from the West London Rape Crisis  Centre  from  Miss
    Foziha Hamid who describes herself as a clinical manager" and the judge
    observes that, "it is not clear whether  Miss  Hamid  has  the  medical
    expertise to form such  an  opinion.   There  is  no  evidence  of  her
    qualifications" (paragraph 36).  Accordingly, if anything, the claim is
    rejected that she was raped.

26. Finally, as far as Article 8 and Section 55 of the BCIA  is  concerned,
    these aspects are dealt with in the refusal letter.  The Appellant  has
    to show why the assessment in the refusal letter is wrong.   The  plain
    fact is that if the Appellant can return  back  to  Pakistan  then  her
    child can go with her because a young child's proposition is to  remain
    united with the caring parent.  As far as the  Immigration  Rules  were
    concerned, the Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  paragraph  276ADE
    because there  were  no  serious  obstacles  to  her  reintegration  in
    Pakistan as she could find a job and be socially integrated as she  had
    only been in the UK for a short period of time.   As  for  freestanding
    Article 8 jurisprudence, the result here would be rather different.

27. In reply, Ms Warren submitted that if one has a look at the established
    cases on gender persecution such as Lord Bingham's statement in  Forna,
    or Lady Hale's statement in ex  parte  Hoxha,  it  is  clear  that  the
    Appellant qualifies as a member of a particular  social  group  and  is
    therefore subject to the risk of ill-treatment  and  persecution.   She
    has already suffered past persecution and this is highly indicative  of
    the treatment that she would receive in the future.  For these reasons,
    the appeal should be allowed.

No Error of Law

28. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA) (2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons are
    essentially those given by Mr McVeety  in  his  forthright  submissions
    before me.  Ms Warren, who has presented the case of the  Appellant  in
    measured and careful terms has not been able to  demonstrate  that  the
    judge fell into error.

29. First, the judge was right to conclude that, "the Appellant  could  not
    explain why her  parents  who  were  traditional  people  had  made  no
    enquiries through the community or  the  relations  about  this  family
    their daughter was to marry into" (paragraph 22).   Second,  the  judge
    was entitled to conclude that,

         "The Appellant's claim that the reasons for the marriage, namely in
         order to obtain a marriage certificate, does not sit well with  the
         involvement of the family into the matter.   It  appears  that  the
         marriage was  arranged  fairly  traditionally  with  her  husband's
         mother coming to her parents to ask for the  Appellant"  (paragraph
         30).

30. Second, the judge was right to conclude that, "I could not  accept  her
    explanation that her parents were able to make any enquiries about  her
    husband's family".

31. Third, the judge also observed  that,  "the  Appellant  was  unable  to
    explain why her husband would marry her, being a married man  with  two
    children, just so that she could have a marriage certificate  in  order
    to get an abortion".

32. Fourth, the Appellant was unable to point to any objective evidence  to
    show that this was a requirement.

33. Fifth, the Appellant herself was unable to explain why her husband, who
    is a professional man, "would not obtain consent from his wife if  that
    was a legal requirement and would need to be  put  on  the  form"  (see
    paragraph 31).

34. Finally, the judge was entitled to take the view that,  "if  the  whole
    reason for this marriage was for the Appellant to get an abortion,  the
    Appellant has been unable to obtain any evidence to substantiate  this"
    (paragraph 32).  I bear  in  mind  Ms  Warren's  noteworthy  submission
    before me that the written submissions  make  it  clear  (at  paragraph
    14.7) that the "consent of  guardian"  is  required  for  an  abortion.
    However, this does not mean, and the judge did not so  find,  that  the
    Appellant had to marry in order for such a consent to be forthcoming in
    one form or another.

35. In fact, the judge took a jaundiced view that it was highly  improbable
    that a person such as Shiraz would marry the Appellant just in order to
    allow her to have an abortion.  In essence, the claim  put  forward  by
    the Appellant was comprehensively rejected, including  the  claim  that
    she had been raped (see paragraph 36) and that she would be at risk  as
    a lone woman returning with a child.

36. The case of Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 is  authority  for  the  proposition
    that the proper position of children is with their parent, and a  child
    as young as Umainah Janjua  in  this  case  would  not  risk  suffering
    adverse affects to his or her "best interests" by being required to  be
    with the mother  when  she  goes  back  to  Pakistan.   In  short,  the
    determination is detailed and comprehensive and devoid of any error  of
    law.

Notice of Decision

37. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

38. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th July 2016

