
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12890/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th July 2016                             |On 22nd August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                     RG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born on [ ] 1987.  The  Appellant
    left Albania in September/October 2012 finally arriving in  the  UK  on
    1st February 2013 via a lorry.  The Appellant claimed  asylum  on  28th
    February 2013.  That asylum claim was based on an allegation  that  the
    Appellant had a well-founded fear of  persecution  in  Albania  on  the
    basis of her membership of a particular social group, namely  that  she
    was trafficked from Albania to Kosovo and if returned  to  Albania  she
    fears her family as they do not accept her.  She also fears that her ex-
    boyfriend and the traffickers he sold her to in Kosovo would kill  her.



 2. The Appellant's application for asylum was refused by Notice of Refusal
    dated 8th October 2015.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Rothwell sitting at Hatton Cross on 12th  February  2016.
    In a decision and reasons promulgated on 3rd May 2016  the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed on asylum grounds and pursuant to Article 3  of  the
    European Convention of Human Rights.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    granted the Appellant anonymity.  No application is made to  vary  that
    order and that is maintained.

 4. On 7th May 2016 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Those Grounds of Appeal contend firstly that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge failed to give adequate reasons  for  his  decision
    and secondly, failed to apply the country guidance authority of TD  and
    AD (Trafficked women) (CG) [2016] UKUT 92.

 5. On 13th May 2016 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Mark  Davies  refused  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal stating  that  the  judge  gave
    more than adequate reasons for his findings and that  the  grounds  are
    simply a disagreement with the findings made by the judge.

 6. On 6th June 2016 renewed Grounds of Appeal were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 16th June 2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Macleman  granted
    permission to appeal.  It is on that basis that the appeal comes before
    me to determine whether or not there is an error of law in the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  For the sake of  continuity  in  the
    appeal process the Secretary of State is  referred  to  herein  as  the
    Respondent and Ms RG as the Appellant.  The Appellant  appears  by  her
    instructed Counsel Mr Murphy.  The Secretary of State  appears  by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Tufan.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr Tufan relies on the grounds initially set out and on the  permission
    granted by Judge Macleman.  He submits that the judge has not  followed
    the authority of TD and AD.  Reference is made to that authority in the
    First-tier Judge's  decision.   Much  of  the  guidance  given  in  the
    previous country guidance authority of AM  and  BM  (Trafficked  women)
    Albania CG [2010] UKUT 00080 (IAC) is maintained by that authority.  Mr
    Tufan submits that the ratio in TD and AD has  not  been  followed  and
    that the Appellant has turned down a return package that has  been  put
    to her.  He submits that it is unlikely that the Appellant is going  to
    be a victim of trafficking.  He indicates that the  case  law  suggests
    that the age law for trafficking is more likely to be 17 to 19, whereas
    the Appellant was aged approximately 28, had  a  child  and  was  in  a
    relationship.  He submits that internal relocation  is  available.   He
    notes that the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that internal relocation
    would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  Appellant  because  she  would  not
    voluntarily avail herself of the protection of  state  support  because
    her father and ex-boyfriend would locate her  in  Tirana.   He  submits
    that this finding is unsustainable because the First-tier Judge had not
    considered if her fear  and  refusal  to  engage  with  the  protection
    offered was objectively  well-founded  and  in  all  the  circumstances
    reasonable.  Further, he considered that the reasons given by the judge
    for refusal did not stand up to scrutiny as TD and AD makes plain  that
    protection from trafficking is available whilst a victim is  under  the
    care of the International Organisation for Migration (IOM).   He  asked
    me to find material errors of law, to set aside  the  decision  and  to
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. Mr Murphy submits that all  the  Grounds  of  Appeal,  and  indeed  the
    submissions made by  Mr  Tufan,  amount  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings of the judge.  He submits that the judge  has  looked  at  the
    evidence and has paid careful attention to the  witness  statement  and
    the Appellant's testimony.  He points out the history set  out  in  the
    Appellant's witness statement, the problems she  experienced  when  she
    started dating her ex-boyfriend and the fact that  he,  and  his  gang,
    tricked and trafficked her.  These points were, he submits, all  picked
    up by the judge and set out in detail within the judge's decision.

 9. Mr Murphy takes me to paragraph 31 of Judge Rothwell's decision, noting
    that the Appellant states she has not lived anywhere  else  in  Albania
    and to the evidence provided that the Appellant's ex-boyfriend was part
    of a gang.

10. Mr Murphy then considers the findings of the judge.  He notes that  the
    Appellant's credibility is not challenged by the Secretary of State and
    that at paragraphs 47  and  48  Judge  Rothwell  has  given  clear  and
    sustainable reasons that the Appellant did not have  access  to  family
    support and as to why she faces a real risk of serious harm if she were
    returned to her father's home.  Further, at paragraph 49 the judge  has
    considered  the  threat  from  the  Appellant's  former  boyfriend  and
    accepted that she has had no contact with him since he left her at  the
    border in Kosovo in a car with a friend who must have been one  of  the
    traffickers.  She finds, he submits quite reasonably, that  she  has  a
    discrete fear of her former boyfriend in its own  right.   Further,  he
    takes me to paragraph 50  of  the  judge's  decision  and  the  judge's
    finding which is based on logical reasoning that  the  Appellant's  ex-
    boyfriend had considerable links to trafficking networks and as to  why
    that took place.  He submits that there  is  no  irrationality  in  the
    judge's analysis.

11. Thereafter he points out that the judge has gone  on  to  consider  the
    option of internal flight and gives a number of reasons as to why  that
    is not open to her.  He points to the conclusion reached  at  paragraph
    52 and to her consideration of  TD  and  AD  at  paragraph  53  showing
    clearly that when the judge came to  give  due  consideration  in  this
    matter she had in mind the current authority.  He notes that the  judge
    has made findings that the Appellant would not, and  could  not,  avail
    herself of the protection of the shelters because she  does  not  trust
    them to protect her and firmly believes  that  her  father  and/or  her
    former boyfriend will be able to locate her.   He  submits  that  these
    were findings the judge was entitled to reach and  that  actually  they
    make sense.

12. Thereafter at paragraphs 57 and 58 the judge has gone  on  to  consider
    further the issue of internal flight, and at paragraphs 60 and  61  has
    made findings as to why the internal relocation  is  not  a  reasonable
    option open to her.  He submits that the decision is  well  constructed
    and shows no material errors of law.

13. Before concluding his submissions he briefly  addresses  the  grant  of
    leave for permission made by Judge Macleman.  In  particular  he  notes
    the following:

       . So far as the Appellant's boyfriend  is  concerned,  the  gang  was
         sophisticated.  He considers this to be an issue of rationality and
         that the judge has made a finding of fact that was open to her  and
         the submission made with regard to the boyfriend by  the  Secretary
         of State amounts to nothing more than disagreement.

       . That the judge has given well reasoned findings as to why  internal
         flight is not an option to her and  that  she  has  given  due  and
         proper consideration to TD and AD and followed it.

       . So far as the risk of re-trafficking is concerned, he submits  that
         what the judge has said is wholly rational and  anyway  he  submits
         that that is not material even if the judge were to  be  in  error,
         which he considers that she was not.  He asked me  to  dismiss  the
         Secretary of State's appeal.

14. In brief response Mr Tufan  submits  that  for  the  Appellant's  legal
    representatives to contend the trafficking gang  was  sophisticated  is
    without foundation and that there  is,  in  his  view,  sufficiency  of
    protection.

The Law

15.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

16. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Case Law

17. The current case law is to be found in TD  and  AD  (Trafficked  women)
    (CG) [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC).  The head note of that authority now sets
    out the current law:

         "Much of the guidance given in AM & BM (Trafficked  women)  Albania
         CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC) is maintained.   Where  that  guidance  has
         been  amended  or  supplemented  by  this  decision  it  has   been
         highlighted in bold:

             'a)  It is not possible  to  set  out  a  typical  profile  of
                  trafficked women from Albania: trafficked women come  from
                  all  areas  of  the  country  and   from   varied   social
                  backgrounds.

             b)   Much of Albanian society is governed by a strict code  of
                  honour which not only means that  trafficked  women  would
                  have very considerable difficulty  in  reintegrating  into
                  their home areas on return  but  also  will  affect  their
                  ability to relocate internally. Those  who  have  children
                  outside marriage are particularly vulnerable.  In  extreme
                  cases the close relatives  of  the  trafficked  woman  may
                  refuse to have the trafficked woman's  child  return  with
                  her and could force her to abandon the child.

             c)   Some women are lured to leave Albania with false promises
                  of relationships or work. Others may seek out  traffickers
                  in order to facilitate their departure  from  Albania  and
                  their establishment in prostitution abroad. Although  such
                  women cannot be said to have left  Albania  against  their
                  will,  where  they  have  fallen  under  the  control   of
                  traffickers for  the  purpose  of  exploitation  there  is
                  likely   to   be   considerable   violence   within    the
                  relationships and  a  lack  of  freedom:  such  women  are
                  victims of trafficking.

             d)   In the past few years the Albanian  government  has  made
                  significant   efforts   to   improve   its   response   to
                  trafficking.  This  includes   widening   the   scope   of
                  legislation, publishing the Standard Operating Procedures,
                  implementing an  effective  National  Referral  Mechanism,
                  appointing  a  new  Anti-trafficking   Co-ordinator,   and
                  providing training to law enforcement officials. There  is
                  in general a Horvath-standard sufficiency  of  protection,
                  but  it  will  not  be  effective  in  every  case.   When
                  considering whether or  not  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
                  protection for a  victim  of  trafficking  her  particular
                  circumstances must be considered.

             e)    There is now in  place  a  reception  and  reintegration
                  programme for victims of trafficking. Returning victims of
                  trafficking are able to stay in a shelter on arrival,  and
                  in 'heavy cases' may be able to stay there  for  up  to  2
                  years. During this initial period after return victims  of
                  trafficking  are  supported  and  protected.  Unless   the
                  individual has particular vulnerabilities such as physical
                  or mental health issues, this option cannot  generally  be
                  said to be unreasonable; whether it is must be  determined
                  on a case by case basis.

             f)   Once asked to leave the shelter a victim  of  trafficking
                  can live on her own. In doing so she will face significant
                  challenges  including,  but  not   limited   to,   stigma,
                  isolation, financial hardship and uncertainty, a sense  of
                  physical insecurity and the subjective fear of being found
                  either by their families or former traffickers. Some women
                  will have  the  capacity  to  negotiate  these  challenges
                  without undue hardship. There will however be  victims  of
                  trafficking with characteristics, such as  mental  illness
                  or psychological scarring, for whom living alone in  these
                  circumstances  would  not   be   reasonable.   Whether   a
                  particular appellant falls into that  category  will  call
                  for a careful assessment of all the circumstances.

             g)   Re-trafficking is a reality. Whether that risk exists for
                  an individual claimant will turn in part  on  the  factors
                  that led to the initial trafficking, and on  her  personal
                  circumstances, including  her  background,  age,  and  her
                  willingness and ability to seek help from the authorities.
                  For  a  proportion  of  victims  of   trafficking,   their
                  situations may mean that they are especially vulnerable to
                  re-trafficking, or being forced  into  other  exploitative
                  situations.

             h)   Trafficked women from Albania may well be  members  of  a
                  particular social group on  that  account  alone.  Whether
                  they are  at  risk  of  persecution  on  account  of  such
                  membership  and  whether  they  will  be  able  to  access
                  sufficiency of protection from the authorities will depend
                  upon their  individual  circumstances  including  but  not
                  limited to the following:

                  1)       The social status and  economic  standing  of her
                      family

                  2)         The  level  of  education  of   the   victim of
                      trafficking or her family

                  3)       The  victim  of  trafficking's  state  of health,
                      particularly her mental health

                  4)       The presence of an illegitimate child

                  5)       The area of origin

                  6)       Age

                  7)       What support network will be available'".

Findings

18. I was satisfied in this matter that there is no material error  of  law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The judge has  given
    more than adequate reasons for her findings and  the  conclusions  that
    she reaches regarding the influence of the Appellant's ex-boyfriend are
    based on the evidence and the case  law  that  was  put  to  her.   The
    assessment made by the judge of the Appellant's vulnerability  is  well
    reasoned and is evidence based.  The  judge  considered,  and  properly
    applied, the relevant case law regarding trafficking and the risk of re-
    trafficking.  When looked at in the round, the submissions made by  the
    Secretary of State amount to little more than simple disagreement  with
    the findings made by  the  judge  and  the  judge  considered  all  the
    evidence and made findings on that evidence applying the correct burden
    and standard of proof.  As Mr Murphy points out, the credibility of the
    Appellant is not challenged by the Secretary of State.   The  judge  in
    her  detailed  findings  has  considered  the  threat  posed   by   the
    Appellant's ex-boyfriend and made findings she was entitled to  of  his
    links to the trafficking networks and finding that there is a real risk
    that the Appellant's father and/or ex-boyfriend and/or  his  associates
    would inflict serious harm on her because she has defied her father and
    returned with an illegitimate child and because she  has  also  escaped
    from her traffickers in Kosovo.

19. Thereafter the judge has gone on to give detailed consideration of  the
    Appellant's ability (or lack  of  it)  to  relocate  internally  within
    Albania.  She has noted that as a returned victim  of  trafficking  she
    would only  be  eligible  for  reintegration  if  she  were  to  return
    voluntarily and that  successful  reintegration  would  depend  on  the
    assistance of her family.  The  judge  has  given  reasons,  which  are
    perfectly logical, as to why she has a subjective fear  and  would  not
    avail herself of the protection of the shelters because  she  does  not
    trust them to protect her and firmly believes that her father and/or ex-
    boyfriend would be in a position to locate her.  Consequently the judge
    has given logical and clear reasons as to  why  she  would  not  return
    voluntarily and of her lack of trust in the authorities to protect her.
     She has considered the relevant factors effectively  set  out  in  (h)
    above of the head note of TD and AD and has made findings that she  was
    perfectly entitled to, namely that the Appellant could  not  return  to
    her home area and that internal relocation was not a reasonable option.



20. This is in fact  a  very  thorough  and  well  set  out  decision.   It
    discloses no material errors of law.  In such circumstances, the appeal
    of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  dismissed  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 17th August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 17th August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

