











UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/12076/2015
                                   AA/12077/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|on 3 May 2016                     |on 19 May 2016                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                                   D J N L
                                   K R S S
                          anonymity directionS made

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, counsel (instructed by Law Land
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I continue the anonymity directions made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.
      They are to remain in place unless and  until  this  Tribunal  or  any
      other appropriate court, directs otherwise.  As  such,  no  report  of
      these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify the appellants
      or any member of their family. Failure to comply with  this  direction
      could amount to a contempt of Court.


   2. The appellants are nationals of Sri Lanka, born on [ ] 1984  and  [  ]
      1988 respectively. The respondent  in  the  refusal  letter  dated  27
      August 2015 identified the second appellant as the  dependant  of  the
      first.


   3. The appellants entered into a civil partnership on 3 March 2014 whilst
      resident in the UK.


   4. They  appeal  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Harrington, who dismissed their asylum and human rights
      appeals, in a decision promulgated on 15 February 2016.


   5. The first appellant - 'the appellant' - claimed  to  have  a  fear  of
      persecution in Sri Lanka as a gay man.


   6. The appellant claimed asylum because of  his  homosexual  relationship
      with the second appellant. His family do not want him to return to Sri
      Lanka and his parents and the villagers have threatened their lives.


   7. He met the second appellant  in  October  2009  and  the  relationship
      commenced in May/June 2010. They began living together in May 2013 and
      decided to enter into a civil partnership. They awaited the outcome of
      the  appellant's  FLO  application  prior  to  claiming  asylum.  That
      application was refused in December 2014.


   8. The second appellant contended that his parents have stated that  they
      will kill them if they return to Sri Lanka. His father  is  a  village
      head man - a government post. He does not know how  his  father  found
      out about their relationship. His family will know where he is  if  he
      returns to Sri Lanka. It is a small island and  it  is  easy  to  find
      people through contacts.


   9. The respondent accepted  that  gay  men  in  Sri  Lanka  constitute  a
      particular social group. She also accepted the appellant's claim to be
      a gay man. It was not accepted that he has discharged the low standard
      of proof in relation to the threats he claimed were made.


  10. Their fear is from families, who are  non  state  actors.  They  could
      return to another part of Colombo and it is not considered that  their
      families would be able to locate them if they did so.


  11. At the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  was  accepted  by
      counsel for the appellants (not Mr Coleman) that neither  Appendix  FM
      nor paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules were relied on [22].  At
      the hearing the  presenting  officer  confirmed  that  the  respondent
      accepted the appellants' relationship in full and did not allege  that
      there was a sufficiency of state protection.


  12. The Judge concluded that there was nothing suspicious about the period
      of delay in making the claim.  She  found  that  the  appellants  were
      telling the truth about the threats  they  have  received  from  their
      families [30].


  13. She found that on the assumption that the appellants could be  located
      by their families, they would seek to  seriously  harm  them  and  the
      threats were not mere bluster [31].


  14. She concluded however in reliance on LH & IP (gay men: risk) Sri Lanka
      CG [2015] UKUT 00073 (IAC), that the appellants cannot safely relocate
      to Colombo because there is a real risk that they  will  come  to  the
      attention of one or both of their families [35].


  15. However, she went on to conclude that there is no  real  risk  of  the
      appellants' coming to the attention of either  of  their  families  if
      they relocate to another urban area, such as Kandy. There was  nothing
      to show that the appellant's family have contacts outside the  Colombo
      area, either by virtue of work or family; there  is  nothing  to  show
      that the second appellant's family have contacts  outside  their  home
      area and possibly Colombo.


  16. It was not accepted that the second appellant's  father's  post  as  a
      head man is sufficiently high level to allow him to search  government
      databases because the second appellant did not allege  that  this  was
      the case and because if this were the case, he would expect  objective
      information dealing with the issue [36 (c)].


  17. Whilst accepting that gossip travels in Sri Lanka, she concluded  that
      there must be some overlap between groups for gossip to  pass  between
      them and she could see no overlap between the appellants' families and
      those who would be around them if they were  to  relocate  to  another
      urban area [36 (d)].


  18. She concluded that internal relocation  to  an  urban  area  would  be
      reasonable and would not be unduly harsh [37].


  19. She went on to consider the Article 8 claim, finding that  they  would
      return to Sri Lanka together and could continue family life on return.
      The failure by Sri Lanka to recognise the civil partnership is  not  a
      sufficiently serious interference with family  life  to  constitute  a
      breach of Article 8.


  20. The interference was proportionate in the circumstances [43].


  21. On 15 March  2016,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer,  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal, stating that it was arguable that  the
      Judge may  have  made  unsafe  findings  on  the  option  of  internal
      relocation, given the accepted finding of their same sex relationship,
      the societal approbation of such a relationship, the  fact  that  they
      should not have to lie, the real risk of harm from their families  and
      the prevalence of gossip travelling.


  22. Mr Coleman relied  on  the  grounds  accompanying  the  permission  to
      appeal. It was hard to conceive that gossip could travel  between  the
      UK and Sri Lanka and in particular to Colombo, yet  could  not  travel
      between Colombo to  Kandy,  thus  making  it  a  safe  place  for  the
      appellants to return to. Mr Coleman noted that Kandy was 70 miles from
      Colombo, pointing out that the Judge found that there would be a  risk
      if they were to relocate to Colombo.


  23. He submitted that she overlooked the fact that the appellants had come
      to such adverse attention whilst they were in  the  UK  which  was  "a
      whole continent away". That was at a time when the families  were  not
      even looking for them.


  24. He submitted that in coming  to  her  conclusion  at  [36]  the  Judge
      ignored the level of approbation, particularly when having  regard  to
      the fact that the second appellant's father is a village head man.


  25. Mr Coleman also submitted that the "largest mistake" made was that the
      Judge assessed the risk to  them  from  family  members  but  did  not
      consider the risk from the local community which  is  a  much  broader
      basis.


  26. In that respect he referred  to  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  at
      paragraph 14 of  his  witness  statement.  There  he  stated  that  he
      received calls approximately once a week after they were  seen  living
      together as a couple since May 2013. The first threat was  in  January
      2014.


  27. He stated that "we also received calls  from  people  in  our  village
      community." He stated at paragraph 18 of his statement that the reason
      he cannot return to Sri Lanka is that his life and his partner's  life
      would be in real danger from his family and the community. The problem
      was that he had  been  "outed"  by  his  friend  and  as  such,  their
      families, their parents, their relatives and the whole community  were
      outraged.


  28. Mr Coleman referred to the interview of the second appellant.  At  Q99
      he was referred to background evidence about a large LGBT community in
      Sri Lanka. He stated that he did not know about other people. However,
      his father works for the government and his "home village people won't
      accept it." The Judge  found  his  evidence  in  that  respect  to  be
      credible.


  29. At Question 192, when asked whether, apart from  his  family  members,
      and his partner's family members, anyone else had threatened either of
      them, the appellant stated "also the neighbours in my village."


  30. Accordingly, Mr Coleman submitted that the Judge had  considered  only
      the risk from their families but failed  to  consider  risk  from  the
      larger community and neighbours. That is evident from her  conclusions
      as to risks set out at [38] where she concluded  that  the  appellants
      could safely relocate to an urban area to  avoid  the  risk  posed  by
      their families. Similarly, at [36 (a)]  her  assessment  of  risk  was
      limited:   she  found  that  there  was  nothing  to  show  that   the
      appellant's family have contact outside the Colombo area.


  31. At [35] she concluded that he could not  safely  relocate  to  Colombo
      because of a risk that they will  come  to  the  attention  of  "their
      families."


  32. In dealing with the risk of harm at [31] she concluded  that  assuming
      that they could be located by their  families,  their  families  would
      seek to seriously harm them.


  33. There is nothing in  the  decision  that  assesses  the  risk  to  the
      appellants from the community. Although the Judge set out at [30]  the
      threats that they have received  from  their  families,  she  did  not
      acknowledge that there had been threats from the community as well.


  34. Accordingly, given that they  would  be  living  only  70  miles  from
      Colombo, there was not only the family to  be  considered.  There  was
      also the internal gossip which could arise identifying the appellants,
      and which would be passed from the  community  to  the  families.  She
      noted that the appellants  cannot  be  expected  to  lie  about  their
      sexuality if asked. She also accepted  that  wherever  the  appellants
      live, those around them  are  likely  over  time  to  recognise  their
      relationship, as  their  friends  in  the  UK  did,  even  before  the
      appellants told them about the relationship [34].


  35. The Judge found that relocating together to an area where they have no
      ties, family or work, raises obvious questions as  to  why  they  have
      chosen to live together. It cannot be claimed, as  it  could  if  they
      were working or studying locally, that it is  purely  a  residence  of
      convenience, so it will be clear it is a residence of choice which  is
      likely to result in further inquiry [34a].


  36. The Judge had  regard  to  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
      appellants as set out at [27h] that the appellants would stand out  in
      the community and so people would make enquiries. Internal  relocation
      was thus not available.


  37. The Judge found that there was nothing before her  to  show  that  the
      first appellant's family  have  contacts  outside  the  Colombo  area,
      either by virtue of work or family. Nor was  there  anything  to  show
      that the second appellant's family have contacts outside the area  and
      possibly Colombo. She referred to LH and IP, supra at [119]. There  it
      was found that if risk exists, internal relocation would  normally  be
      sufficient to enable an individual to avoid the risk, since risks  are
      usually from family, friends or neighbours. There was  no  information
      about Kandy. That was submitted to constitute a material  omission  by
      the Judge.


  38. In the circumstances, the case should be sent back to Judge Harrington
      where the risk of internal flight can properly assessed.   This  would
      include not only fear of discovery by  family  members  but  also  the
      potential discovery by their families, arising out  of  identification
      and communication from members of the community. There may be  such  a
      connection arising from gossip in  the  community  which  would  reach
      their family. It is accordingly a wider risk.


  39. On behalf of  the  respondent,  Mr  Walker  referred  to  [38].  Judge
      Harrington has looked at the country guidance decision in LH  &IP.  It
      is a question of fact  whether  a  risk  to  a  particular  individual
      reaches the international  protection  standard,  and  in  particular,
      whether it extends beyond their home area. Where a risk of persecution
      or serious harm exists in an appellant's home area, there  may  be  an
      internal relocation option, particularly for individuals returning via
      Colombo from the UK.


  40. Accordingly there may be other  large  areas  where  they  can  safely
      relocate. The internal relocation option is not  unreasonable  in  the
      circumstances.


      Assessment


  41. In  a  thorough  and  detailed  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Harrington  has  concluded  that  the  appellants  could  safely   and
      reasonably relocate to an urban area to avoid the risk posed by  their
      family.


  42. I find that there is force in Mr Coleman's submissions that the  whole
      emphasis by the Judge related to the avoidance of risk posed by  their
      families. At paragraph [36] she concluded that there was no real  risk
      of their coming to the attention of either of their families  if  they
      relocated to an urban area such as Kandy.


  43. At [31] there was reference again to the  risk  they  faced  by  being
      located by their families. At [35] they could not relocate to  Colombo
      because there is a real risk that they will come to the  attention  of
      one or both of their families.


  44. However, it is evident that  the  appellants  claimed  a  wider  risk,
      namely threats from the communities in which they would  reside.  That
      was a claim that they made as part of the asylum interview and by  the
      appellant in his witness statement. It was also asserted that  he  had
      in fact received threats from members of the community whilst  in  the
      UK.


  45. I also find that the Judge  did  not  give  anxious  scrutiny  to  the
      possibility that gossip from the community in Kandy  could  travel  to
      their families in Colombo, some 70 miles away, thereby identifying the
      appellants' whereabouts. It is evident that gossip did travel  between
      Sri Lanka and the  UK.  The  possibility  of  such  gossip  ultimately
      reaching the families some 70 miles away was not assessed.  The  Judge
      should have considered the risk to return that might  arise  from  the
      community itself.


  46. I accordingly set aside the decision on that narrow basis. I accept Mr
      Coleman's submission that this is an appropriate case to  be  remitted
      to the First-tier Tribunal Judge Harrington  to  assess  the  risk  of
      internal relocation posed by members of the community  in  which  they
      live.  The  risk  of  their  discovery  in  the  local  community   is
      accordingly a wider risk which has to be properly assessed.


  47. The further assessment can be  made  on  the  basis  of  evidence  and
      submissions restricted to the availability of internal flight.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law, and is set aside.


      The case is  remitted  to  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Harrington  to
      consider the risk  of  the  appellants  coming  from  members  of  the
      community of an urban area, to which they relocate, including the risk
      of their  coming  to  the  attention  of  either  of  their  families.
      Anonymity directions made.


      Signed                                       Date 17 May 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

