
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/12779/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 21 December 2016                        |On 3rd January 2017        |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                     M N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms I Sabic (counsel) instructed by Duncan Lewis,
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, preserving the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
tier Tribunal.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Hembrough promulgated on 10  October  2016,  which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 21 March 1957 and is a national of Iran.

4. On 30 September 2015 the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for asylum.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Hembrough ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  28  November  2016  Resident
Judge Phillips gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      3. This is a detailed and carefully considered decision and I can  see
      little if any merit in the assertions that the Judge  failed  to  take
      make adequate findings in respect of risk on return or that he  failed
      to follow relevant case  law  and  guidance.  As  to  the  former  the
      suggestion that having made a finding in relation to  the  Appellant's
      alcohol consumption, a matter that was not claimed would cause risk on
      return, the Judge should nevertheless have considered risk  on  return
      for this reason has no clear basis in law. So far as relevant case law
      is concerned the Judge did not believe the  core  of  the  Appellant's
      account and given this fact he believed some bits is hardly relevant.


      4. However, there is arguable merit in the other asserted grounds.  In
      his detailed decision, it is arguable that the  Judge  has  speculated
      and made findings on matters that were  not  before  him  in  evidence
      seeking to ascertain the reasons why the Appellant came to the  United
      Kingdom and made what the Judge considered to be  a  false  claim  for
      asylum. It is arguable that these speculative findings on the  reasons
      why the Appellant  made  a  false  claim  have  infected  the  Judge's
      decision in respect of the actual claim.


The Hearing

6. (a) Ms Sabic, for  the  appellant,  moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  She
reminded me that the appellant's claim is that he has  a  well-founded  fear
of persecution because of his imputed political opinion. She  told  me  that
the foundation for his claim is that his ex-wife came  to  the  UK  and  was
granted asylum because she claimed that she had  converted  to  Christianity
and that she had a fear of the  Iranian  regime  because  of  her  political
activities as an advocate for women's rights. She told  me  that  the  Judge
failed to make adequate findings  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  wife's
successful claim for asylum. She took me to the second sentence of  [68]  of
the decision & the first sentence of [70], where the Judge  states  that  he
cannot make any findings about whether or not the  appellant's  ex-wife  was
engaged in political activity in Iran.
(b) Ms Sabic told me that the appellants wife's claim is the foundation  for
the appellant's claim to have been arrested and mistreated in Iran, so  that
the failure to make any findings in relation to  the  appellant's  ex-wife's
political profile in the  eyes  of  the  Iranian  regime  is  a  fundamental
failing and so a material error of law.


(c) Ms Sabic took me to  [65]  and  [67]  where,  she  told  me,  the  Judge
manifestly proceeds on assumptions, speculating about the  reasons  for  the
irretrievable breakdown  of  the  appellant's  marriage  and  the  terms  of
financial settlement on divorce. She urged me to set the decision aside  and
to remit the case to the First-tier tribunal to consider of new.

7. Mr Nath, for the respondent, told me  that  the  determinative  issue  in
this case was credibility, and that is something  which  the  Judge  decided
after considering each strand of evidence. He says  that,  in  reality,  the
Judge narrates that there  is  no  evidence  of  the  appellant's  ex-wife's
political activities in Iran, and that it  was  correct  for  the  Judge  to
record the lack of evidence when considering whether or not  the  burden  of
proof has been discharged. He told me that the decision is  a  well-reasoned
decision which does not contain errors, material or otherwise. He  urged  me
to dismiss the appeal and allow the Judge's decision to stand.

Analysis

8. The appellant participated in a screening interview on  3  January  2015.
When he was asked to briefly explain why he could not  return  to  Iran,  he
said that he feared the Iranian regime who had  arrested  him  a  number  of
times. He said nothing about  his  wife's  political  profile.  During  that
interview, when he was asked about his marital status, he said that his  ex-
wife has lied about her reasons for separately claiming asylum.

9.  On  1  June  2015  the  appellant  participated  in  substantive  asylum
interview. In that interview  he  departed  from  the  account  he  gave  at
screening interview and said that he has drawn the adverse attention of  the
Iranian authorities because his wife was granted asylum in the UK.  In  that
interview he cannot name a political party his wife is affiliated with,  and
can only say that she actively campaigned for women's rights.

10. Before the First-tier,  the  appellant  adopted  his  witness  statement
dated 15 September 2016 as his evidence in chief. At paragraph  32  of  that
statement he says

      I was not aware of my wife's  activities  since  she  was  hiding  her
      activities from me, because I was not interested and did not  want  to
      be in trouble with the authorities. I was not a political  person  and
      nor was my wife. She was dragged into this by her friends.

11. The appellant says at paragraph 33 of his witness statement

      I explained throughout my interview that I  did  not  know  about  the
      details of my wife's activities. When I was not at  home  and  was  at
      work which normally took one or two weeks,  she  had  been  organising
      meetings and gatherings with her friends. I do not have  any  evidence
      of this. Even if I had I would not have been able to bring  them  with
      me from Iran.

12. Each of those three sources of evidence indicate that the appellant  can
give no specific  detail  of  his  wife's  political  activity.  It  is  not
surprising that the Judge records that he cannot make  findings  on  whether
or not the appellant's  ex-wife  has  a  political  profile.  It  is  beyond
dispute that the appellant's ex-wife was granted asylum, but the  Judge  was
correct, on the evidence presented, to go  no  further  than  to  find  that
asylum had been granted.

13. The reason for the grant of asylum might be one of the  cornerstones  of
the appellant's case, but it is clear from  the  appellant's  bundle  placed
before the First-tier and from the evidence recorded by  the  Judge  in  his
decision that the appellant did not produce reliable evidence of the  reason
for the grant of asylum. The appellant  concedes  at  paragraph  33  of  his
witness statement

      I do not have any evidence of this.

14. Between [6] and [16] of the decision the Judge sets out  the  detail  of
the appellant's claim for asylum. Between [17] and [19]  he  summarises  the
respondent's reasons for refusal. Between [28] and [61]  he  summarises  the
evidence and submissions, before commencing his findings of fact that [62].

15. At [63] the  Judge  identifies  that  this  is  a  case  that  turns  on
credibility, and then proceeds to address credibility.

16. It is true that the language used by the Judge in the first sentence  of
[65] and the last  sentence  of  [67]  talks  of  suspicion  &  possibility.
Removal of those  two  sentences  makes  no  difference  to  the  conclusion
reached.

17. The thrust of the appellant's appeal is that the was a  failure  by  the
Judge to grapple  with  the  central  issue.  There  is  no  merit  in  that
criticism. As I have already indicated, the Judge considered  the  evidence,
and found that there was insufficient evidence to identify  the  reason  the
appellant's ex-wife's application for asylum was successful.  That  was  not
the end of the Judge's consideration of the central issues in this case.  In
the first sentence of [71] the Judge considers whether the  appellant's  ex-
wife was or was not engaged in political activity.

18. The Judge provides adequate reasons for finding that  the  appellant  is
neither a credible nor a reliable witness.  The  Judge  correctly  adopts  a
neutral  stance  in  relation  to  the   appellant's   ex-wife's   political
activities and the reason she has been granted asylum  in  the  UK.  As  the
appellant's evidence is that he does not have any specific detail about  his
ex-wife's activities, there was no other conclusion open to the Judge.   The
Judge reaches his findings of fact based on the  evidence  rehearsed  before
him.  The  Judge  then  takes  correct  guidance  in  law  before   reaching
conclusions which were well  within  the  range  of  reasonable  conclusions
available to the Judge.


19. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

20. There is nothing wrong  with  the  Judge's  fact  finding  exercise.  In
reality the appellant's appeal amounts to little more  than  a  disagreement
with the way the Judge has applied the facts as he found  them  to  be.  The
appellant might not like the conclusion that the  Judge  has  come  to,  but
that conclusion is the result  of  the  correctly  applied  legal  equation.
There is nothing wrong with the Judge's fact finding exercise.  The  correct
test in law has been applied. The  decision  does  not  contain  a  material
error of law.

21.   The Judge's decision, when read as a whole,  sets  out  findings  that
are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

22.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

23.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
promulgated on 10 October 2016 stands.


Signed                                                              Date 23
December 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
