

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12380/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Sent           |
|On 9 August 2013                              |On 14 August 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                            UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                 D E TAYLOR


                                   Between


                           FLAVIA HILDAH NABUSONDA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:
For the Respondent: Mrs Pettersen, HOPO


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


   1. This is the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Sarsfield made following a hearing at Bradford on the 5
      January 2013, dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
      respondent made on 24 October 2011 to refuse to grant  her  asylum  in
      the UK.


   2. The appellant challenged the decision on the grounds  that  the  judge
      had erred in failing to grant her an adjournment when she was  feeling
      unwell and admitting  documents  adduced  by  the  respondent  at  the
      hearing and not giving her the opportunity to consider them. She  said
      that she was not given a fair hearing. She was unrepresented.

   3. Permission to appeal was granted on the 2 February 2013 by  Designated
      Judge Murray for the reasons stated in the grounds.

   4. Mrs Pettersen did not  seek  to  defend  the  determination,  nor  the
      judge's conduct of the hearing. She said that the appellant needed  to
      know that she had been treated fairly and on the face of  it,  it  did
      not appear that she was. She agreed that the proper  course  would  be
      for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard
      afresh by a judge other than Judge Sarsfield.

   5. The decision is set aside. The judge should have been very cautious in
      proceeding with an appeal where the appellant said  that  she  was  in
      pain and was taking strong  painkillers.  Medical  evidence  had  been
      provided at the CMR hearing, just two weeks earlier, which  said  that
      her condition made it difficult to travel. Even if he was justified in
      proceeding, there is nothing in the determination which indicates that
      the appellant, who was unrepresented, was given any time  to  consider
      the documents produced by the respondent at short  notice,  and  which
      the judge records that she appeared shocked by.

   6. This appeal will be heard at Bradford and the decision will be  remade
      by a judge  other  than  Judge  Sarsfield  under  7.2  of  the  Senior
      President's Practice Statement dated 25 September 2012 because of  the
      nature and extent of the judicial fact finding which is  necessary  in
      order for the decision in the appeal to be remade.




Signed                                  Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
