

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12654/2015
      AA/13080/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26TH OCTOBER 2016                   |On 01st November 2016               |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                     S H
                                     E H
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Dr R Moffat (Counsel instructed by Wilson & co )

For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an error of law  hearing.   The  matter  comes  before  me  for
    consideration as to whether or not there is a material error of law  in
    the  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal     (Judge   Colvin)   ("FtT")
    promulgated on 22nd August 2016 in which she dismissed the  appeals  on
    asylum, human rights and humanitarian protection grounds.

Background

2.    The appellants in this matter are brothers and  who  are  citizens  of
    Albania. They were minors at the time they made their  application  for
    asylum. The appellants claimed that they were the victims  in  a  blood
    feud which had arisen from a property dispute between their father  and
    the "S" family.  It was accepted by the respondent  that  there  was  a
    property dispute and that proceedings were issued in the  civil  courts
    which were resolved in the appellant's  father's  favour,  but  further
    that there were continuing proceedings. The respondent  took  the  view
    that this was not a blood feud and that the appellants could return  to
    Albania where protection was available.

3.    In support  of  their  claim  the  appellants  relied  on  documentary
    evidence which included a request for police assistance dated 20.4.2012
    from a bailiff in enforcement proceedings and a letter from the bailiff
    dated 18th July 2016.  There was in addition a letter  dated  23.7.2016
    from the advocate acting for the family in the property dispute and  an
    internal police report dated July  2015.  Reliance  was  placed  on  an
    expert report.

First -tier Decision


4.    The FtT took into account that the  appellants  were  minors  aged  17
    years and 14 years when they claimed asylum and correctly  applied  the
    guidance  dealing  with  young  and  vulnerable  appellants.   The  FtT
    proceeded by looking in particular at the objective material to support
    the claims made by the appellants.  The FtT accepted that there was  an
    acrimonious property dispute which involved civil proceedings  and  the
    bailiff requested police assistance [26-29]. It found  that  the  civil
    proceedings concluded in 2010 and the property was vacated in 2012. The
    FtT then considered whether or not the dispute  had  developed  into  a
    blood feud.  She referred to the guidance in EH (blood  feuds)  Albania
    CG [2012] UKUT 00348 and assessed the factors relevant to the existence
    of a blood feud. She found that the dispute was not a blood  feud  [30-
    35] having regard to the fact that there had been no deaths nor  direct
    threats made to the appellants, that they had continued to  go  out  of
    the house until their departure from Albania in December 2014 and there
    was no reference made by the police or the advocate to the existence of
    any threats to the appellants or to a  blood  feud.   That  documentary
    evidence referred to a property dispute  that  continued  over  a  long
    period of time.  There was no evidence of the  "S"  family  having  the
    power or capability to pursue a blood feud in Albania.  It  was  likely
    that the appellants remained in contact with their  family;  the  first
    appellant stated in his asylum interview in May 2015  that  his  father
    faced no problems and continued to reside at home.  The  FtT  found  no
    documentary  evidence  that  the  dispute  was  continuing  and  placed
    reliance on the fact that the letter from the advocate and  the  police
    report  made   no   reference   to   continuing   proceedings,   whilst
    acknowledging that  a  witness  statement  confirmed  that  proceedings
    continued in the High Court [29].

Grounds of application for permission to appeal


5.   The FtT impermissibly required corroborative  documentary  evidence  of
    continuing court proceedings and of the disappearance of the appellants
    father which had  been  given  in  witness  evidence  (Ground  1).  The
    appellants contended that the FtT failed to make findings as to whether
    it accepted or rejected the  relevant  documentary  evidence  from  the
    bailiff that there was violence of a life  threatening  nature  between
    the parties to the dispute (Ground 2).  Further it was  contended  that
    the FtT wrongly went behind an  agreed  concession  that  there  was  a
    property dispute and  specifically  that  the  court  proceedings  were
    continuing (Ground 3).

Rule 24 response

6.   The respondent  opposed  the  appeal  arguing  that  the  FtT  properly
    considered all the evidence and reached conclusions open  to  it.   The
    bailiff's letter had been taken into account by the FtT and it had  not
    been rejected.  The FtT considered the evidence in the  round  and  had
    not  required  the  appellants  to  provide  corroborative  documentary
    evidence in support.

Grant of permission

7.   Permission was granted by Designated Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    McCarthy on 23rd September 2016.  He found that Ground 1 was  not  made
    out. The FTJ  was  merely  recording  that  there  was  no  documentary
    evidence showing that the court proceedings were on going. This  cannot
    be read as a requirement for corroboration. Ground 3 was not  made  out
    as the concession was limited to  the  fact  that  a  property  dispute
    continued, and that the FtJ was recording  that  there  were  no  court
    documents showing that matters were on going.  Ground  2  is  made  out
    because the FtT recorded the evidence of the bailiff's letter  but  did
    not make any finding as to whether it was reliable or not. It  has  the
    potential to be independent verification of  the  appellants  claim  of
    being involved in a violent blood feud.

Submisssions

8.   Dr Moffat relied on all the grounds and expanded on the same.  The  FtT
    failed to make findings in respect of the bailiff's evidence  of  grave
    conflict that was physical and life  threatening.   This  evidence  was
    relevant and material to the issue of an active violent  blood  feud  .
    Further by  in  effect  requiring  documentary  evidence  the  FtT  was
    importing a standard higher than applicable in asylum matters.  The FtT
    ought to have expressly rejected the oral evidence that dealt with  the
    material issues.  The FtT was wrong to make an  adverse  finding  on  a
    matters agreed by the respondent.

9.   Mr Staunton submitted that the bailiff's letter  had  been  taken  into
    account and set out in [27].  The FtT reached findings on the  evidence
    and gave sufficient reasons why she found no blood feud.   The  overall
    findings  were  sustainable  and  the  appellants  concerns  were   not
    sufficient to  undermine  those  findings.   Mr  Staunton  adopted  the
    reasons given by the permitting Judge as to grounds 1 and 3.



Discussion and conclusion

10.   I am satisfied that the FtT proceeded to determine the  appeal  having
    regard to findings of fact supported by  the  evidence,  and  that  her
    decision was adequately reasoned.  In particular  the  FtT  found  that
    there was a property  dispute  which  was  acrimonious  and  which  had
    involved the court bailiff requesting police assistance for  protection
    [27-29]. In terms the FtT states "it is clear from these documents ..."
    which is wording that in my view establishes that the FtT accepted  the
    contents of the documents from the bailiff.  It cannot be  argued  that
    this evidence was not taken into account.  The  second  ground  is  not
    made out in the light of the fact that the FtT fully accepted that  the
    property dispute was  acrimonious  but  nevertheless  concluded  having
    regard to all of the evidence in the round that it had not developed in
    to a blood feud.  The FtT placed weight on the documentary evidence  of
    the police report and the advocates'  letter  both  of  which  made  no
    reference to any blood feud but  rather  to  a  property  dispute.  The
    police report concludes, "These provide evidence of the  long  property
    feud between these families." Indeed the appellants own expert made  no
    reference to on going court proceedings and his opinion is premised  on
    his understanding that the appellant's father  won  his  case  (page  2
    expert's report).

11.   As to the issue of the continuing civil  proceedings  I  am  satisfied
    that the FtT was referring to the lack of documentary  evidence  of  on
    going  proceedings.   The  FtT  clearly  accepted  that  there  was  an
    acrimonious property dispute and    found  that  the  proceedings  were
    concluded in 2010 and the property vacated in 2012  [35].   It  may  be
    that the FtT erred in finding that the proceedings were  not  on  going
    contrary to oral evidence which was not specifically rejected, but I am
    satisfied that this was not a material error of law. The FtT  concluded
    that the property dispute had not developed into a blood feud  and  the
    fact that the proceedings were on going does not in  my  view  make  it
    more likely that it was a blood feud  involving  threats  to  kill  the
    appellants. Arguably the existence of court proceedings indicated  that
    the parties were dealing with the dispute through legitimate  channels,
    which was the position taken by the respondent.

12.  The FtT properly took into account that  the  appellants  were  minors.
    The FtT had regard to the appellant's expert report and followed the CG
    case EH with specific reference to the headnote at [30].  The  FtT  was
    entitled to find that there was contact with their  father  relying  on
    the response given in interview in May 2015 that their  father  was  at
    home and had not experienced any trouble. She was entitled to place  no
    weight  on  the  appellants  evidence  and  witness  statement  of  the
    appellants sister in which she states that threats continued to be made
    in 2015 and resulted in their father fleeing from Albania.

13.  I have considered the grounds raised both separately  and  collectively
    and remain of the view that this  is  a  well  reasoned  decision.  The
    grounds of appeal are not  made  out.   The  FtT  conducted  a  careful
    analysis of the evidence and assessed the same focusing on  whether  or
    not there was a blood feud with reference to EH, which was not the same
    as establishing a violent  property  dispute.  It  is  clear  from  the
    decision what evidence  she  relied  on  and  why  in  support  of  her
    conclusions.


Decision
14.   There is no material error of law  disclosed  in  the  decision  which
    shall stand.


    The appeal is dismissed.



                               Signed            Date 28.10.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






                               NO FEE AWARD






                               Signed            Date 28.10.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


