


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
AA/12096/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester               |           Decision & Reason        |
|                                  |Promulgated                         |
|On 1 February 2018                |           On 5 February 2018       |
|                                  |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     TS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
first Appellant in this determination identified as TS.

Introduction


   1. The appellant is a Sikh and a citizen of Afghanistan.  He  arrived  in
      the United Kingdom ('UK') with his wife  and  son  (who  was  born  in
      January 2012 and shall be referred to as 'A' in  this  decision),  and
      claimed asylum in February 2014.


   2. It is undisputed that the  appellant's  case  has  been  substantially
      narrowed and turns entirely upon a single issue: A's ability to access
      education in Afghanistan.  If A is unable to do so, then  the  parties
      agree that in accordance with the guidance and  reasoning  in  TG  and
      others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595, and
      the updated country background evidence on the issue, that  this  will
      constitute such serious discrimination, which together with  the  more
      general difficult conditions for Sikh children, is such that A faces a
      real risk of persecution.  There is also  no  dispute  that  if  A  is
      entitled to refugee status on this  basis,  his  parents  should  also
      benefit from such status in line with him, and the appellant's  appeal
      should be allowed.

Procedural history

   3. In a decision dated 5 September 2016, after a  hearing  on  22  August
      2016, the First-tier Tribunal  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on
      asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.


   4. In a decision dated 23 May 2017 I found that the  First-tier  Tribunal
      erred in law in its approach to the education of A in Afghanistan  and
      the decision should be remade by me.   At  a  resumed  hearing  on  21
      September 2017 both parties confirmed that the only issue  in  dispute
      was A's ability to access education in Afghanistan.  The parties  also
      agreed that in order to properly  address  this  issue,  consideration
      must be given to whether the family will be able to  afford  the  fees
      for a private primary school in Afghanistan (said to amount to $40-190
      a month), and that much will turn upon the evidence  provided  by  the
      appellant and his wife.   However,  no  interpreter  was  booked.    I
      therefore adjourned the appeal  to  enable  the  appellant  to  submit
      further evidence addressing the affordability issue.

Hearing

   5. At the beginning of the hearing both representatives agreed  that  the
      issue in dispute remained a narrow one.   Given  the  changes  in  the
      country background evidence relevant to education for Sikh children in
      Kabul, it was also agreed the sole issue for me to decide  is  whether
      the only viable education available to A in  Kabul  (and  it  was  not
      suggested the family should go to another part of  Afghanistan)  at  a
      private primary school would be accessible, given  the  resources  and
      potential income of his parents and wider family members.


Evidence

   6. Given the two adjournments and the piecemeal manner in  which  further
      evidence was submitted, the evidence available to me was in a state of
      disarray.  It was unclear what evidence continued to be  relied  upon.
      At the beginning of the hearing I invited both representatives to make
      a list of the country background reports they each relied upon.   This
      evidence was clarified, albeit both representatives continued to agree
      that there remained one narrow issue in dispute.


   7. Mr Bates clarified that the only country background material he relied
      upon is a response to  an  information  request  dated  23  June  2017
      concerning education for Sikh children and the evidence summarised  in
      the  decision  letter.   Mr  Bates  however  acknowledged   that   the
      information request only referred to a school in Nangahar and a school
      in Ghazni, and this information was not particularly  relevant  as  it
      was accepted that the appellant and his family would  be  returned  to
      Kabul.

   8. Mr Brown submitted a short  list  of  country  background  reports  he
      relied upon, in addition to Dr Giustozzi's country expert report dated
      21 June 2017.


   9. I then heard evidence from the appellant  and  his  wife.   They  both
      confirmed the witness statements prepared specifically for the hearing
      before me. They re-emphasised that they have no family left  in  Kabul
      and would not be able to afford private school fees.  Mr Bates briefly
      cross-examined the appellant and his wife about their family links  in
      Afghanistan, the families'  businesses  and  employment  prospects  in
      Afghanistan and their access to funds to pay for A's education.


  10. During the course of cross-examination  of  the  appellant,  Mr  Bates
      explained that he wished to check 'the system' in order to clarify the
      appellant's claim that his father is an asylum seeker in the  UK,  who
      sold his business in  Kabul.   I  pointed  out  that  the  appellant's
      statement is dated 28 September 2017 and was served  back  in  October
      2017.  In the circumstances, it was simply too late to seek to rely on
      further evidence not currently available to the Tribunal.

Submissions

  11. Mr Bates relied upon the decision  letter.   He  however  acknowledged
      that the issues had substantially narrowed and the only real  question
      was the ability to afford school fees for A.   He  asked  me  to  note
      that the appellant and his wife have a strong  incentive  to  paint  a
      picture of an absence of financial support and invited me to find that
      there is insufficient cogent evidence to support the  claim  that  the
      family business has been sold or could not be restarted.


  12. Mr Bates reminded me that there was no evidence from  the  appellant's
      father or the family business and the appellant  could  have  provided
      this given that his father is in the UK as an asylum seeker.  Although
      the appellant claimed that various family members were in the  UK  but
      elderly and receipt of pensions, he provided no  documentary  evidence
      to support this.   He  therefore  asked  me  to  find  that  important
      evidence is reasonably available  and  adverse  inferences  should  be
      drawn from the failure to adduce it.

  13. Mr Brown acknowledged the finding at [36] of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      decision but invited me to find that there is now sufficient  evidence
      that family members that were in Afghanistan at the time in 2016,  are
      now in the UK.  He reminded me that the  appellant's  account  of  his
      entire family leaving Afghanistan is consistent with a familiar exodus
      of Sikhs from Afghanistan,  as  set  out  in  the  country  background
      evidence.


  14. After hearing from both representatives, I reserved my decision, which
      I now provide with reasons.

Country background evidence

  15. The country background evidence paints a consistently bleak picture of
      Afghanistan generally but particularly for children  in  Kabul  -  see
      EASO's report  on  children  in  Kabul  dated  23  August  2017.   The
      harassment and discrimination experienced  by  Sikhs  in  Afghanistan,
      including Sikh children is set out in detail in TG.


  16. The headnote of TG provides the following guidance (my emphasis):


                 "A consideration of whether an  individual  member  of  the
                 Sikh and Hindu communities is at real risk  of  persecution
                 upon return to  Afghanistan  is  fact-sensitive.   All  the
                 relevant  circumstances  must  be  considered  but  careful
                 attention should be paid to the  following...d)  access  to
                 appropriate   education   for   children   in   light    of
                 discrimination against Sikh  and  Hindu  children  and  the
                 shortage of adequate education facilities for them."


  17. TG also said this regarding children (my emphasis):




                 "94.         In  relation  to  Sikh  and  Hindu  children a
                 number of areas of concern arise from the evidence we  have
                 been asked to consider. The evidence indicates  that  there
                 have been occasions of Hindu and Sikh families not  sending
                 their children to school in Afghanistan, especially  girls,
                 as a result of the fear  of  harassment  and  ill-treatment
                 which is corroborated by the  evidence.  Within  the  state
                 system where children of all denominations are taught there
                 is evidence of requirements to learn and recite the  Koran,
                 discrimination, and lack of adequate education  facilities.
                 In areas where numbers  warrant,  such  as  Kabul,  special
                 schools have been set up to provide education for  children
                 by Sikh teachers and some children are  taught  within  the
                 Gurdwara as a  result.  Such  education  is  only  provided
                 however  up  to  and  including  primary  level  with   the
                 requirement that at secondary level children will be taught
                 within the  state  system  where  they  become  exposed  to
                 problems referred to in the evidence unless an individual's
                 family has the means to pay them to be educated  privately.
                 If credible evidence is provided of a real risk of such ill-
                 treatment and harassment to a child on return sufficient to
                 prevent them receiving a proper education, which  is  shown
                 to be a fundamental element  of  their  personal  identity,
                 that they wish to pursue, rather than  a  child  not  being
                 further educated as a result of the traditional belief that
                 they will continue within a family business  and  therefore
                 do not require to be further educated  or  for  some  other
                 reason, then this may amount to such serious discrimination
                 either on its own  or  cumulatively  with  other  forms  of
                 discrimination  such  as  to   cross   the   threshold   of
                 persecution. However, this is a fact sensitive  issue  that
                 must be considered in each case.




                 95.         In relation to children, the UNHCR in  the 2013
                 report identify a number of potential areas of  concern  at
                 pages 57-62 including child-specific forms of  persecution,
                 including under-age recruitment, child trafficking,  bonded
                 or  hazardous  child  labour,  domestic  violence   against
                 children,   forced   and/or   underage   marriage,    child
                 prostitution and  child  pornography,  and  the  systematic
                 denial of education. The position of the UNHCR in  relation
                 to children is summarised as being:




                       'Depending on the  particular  circumstances  of  the
                       case, UNHCR considers that children falling under the
                       following categories may be in need of  international
                       refugee protection:

                       a) Children from areas where either AGEs or  elements
                       of the ANSF use underage recruitment;

                       b) Children  from  social  milieus  where  bonded  or
                       hazardous child labour is practised;

                       c) Victims of violence  against  children,  including
                       sexual and gender-based violence, as well as children
                       from social milieus where such violence is practised;
                       and

                       d) School-age children, particularly girls. Depending
                       on the individual circumstances of the case, they may
                       be in need of international protection on the  ground
                       of their membership of  a  particular  social  group,
                       their  religion  and/or  their  (imputed)   political
                       opinion."

  18. In his 2017 report Dr Giustozzi  described  the  harassment  of  young
      Hindus and Sikhs in the schools to have continued unabated.  He is not
      a lone voice in making this statement.  The other reports referred  to
      by Mr Brown entirely support this such as the International  Religious
      Freedom Report on Afghanistan for 2015.


  19. Dr Giustozzi's report details specific research  carried  out  by  his
      researcher in Kabul on 20 June 2017.  She visited the  Sikh  community
      in Kart-e Parwan (the area in Kabul that most  Sikhs  live)  and  made
      enquiries  about  the  educational  opportunities  available  to  Sikh
      children at the time.  The information reported back  was  that  Sikhs
      had stopped sending their children to state  schools  because  of  the
      levels of harassment and absence of sufficient  protection  but  those
      who could afford it  sent  their  children  to  private  schools.   Dr
      Giustozzi  described  these  schools  as  guaranteeing  parents   that
      children would not be harassed.  Fees for such  schools  vary  between
      $40-$190 per month.   Dr  Giustozzi  however  concluded  that  as  the
      average  salary  of  a  government  official  is   $150   per   month,
      affordability is an issue of concern.


  20. The reference to the 'special schools' available in Kabul in  TG  must
      now be seen in light of further evidence  post-dating  that  decision.
      Sikhs  continue  to  leave  Kabul  because   of   discrimination   and
      harassment. The International Religious Freedom Report on  Afghanistan
      for  2017  reported  that  in  December  2016,   the   nongovernmental
      organization National Council of Hindus and Sikhs (NCHS) reported that
      there were fewer than 200 families, or  about  900  individuals,  from
      these two communities remaining in Afghanistan.

  21. Discrimination and harassment toward Sikh children in schools has  got
      to such a level that even primary school age children  are  no  longer
      sent to the state 'special schools'  and  the  only  viable  schooling
      option  for  them  is  attendance  at  private  schools.    Mr   Bates
      acknowledged that this was a reasonable inference  to  draw  from  the
      updated evidence, hence the concession that the sole issue in  dispute
      is that of affordability.

  22. There are two references to schooling in Kabul in the refusal  letter.
      At [16] the US IRF 2011 is referred to as the source for  there  being
      schools for Sikh children in Ghazni and Helmand and one in Kabul  that
      teaches a few classes.    This evidence has been overtaken  by  events
      and is entirely out of date.  At [19] the refusal letter refers to the
      US State Department report  on  International  Religious  Freedom  for
      2011, which outlines the impact of abuse  and  discrimination  on  the
      availability of education for Sikhs.  It is  not  disputed  that  this
      continues to be a significant concern.


  23. The options for the education of Sikh children have narrowed since TG.
       The special primary schools that were set up have dwindled because of
      the continued decline in the Sikh population and the loss of  economic
      independence.  Children taught within the state system are at risk  of
      exposure of serious harm and discrimination.  The only option  is  for
      children to attend special private schools.


Discussion

  24. It is important to take into account as a starting point,  the  First-
      tier Tribunal's factual findings.  Although  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      accepted that the appellant and his family experienced harassment  for
      reasons relating to their religion, it did not accept the  credibility
      of the claim that A was subjected to an attempted kidnapping  or  that
      family members were shot.  At the  time  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      hearing in August 2016 the appellant's father remained in  Afghanistan
      and his business had not yet been sold.  It is in  this  context  that
      the First-tier Tribunal found that some family members remained.


  25. Over 18 months has elapsed since the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  The
      appellant and his wife have provided updated  evidence  regarding  the
      circumstances  of  family  members,  and  have   been   cross-examined
      regarding this.  Their  evidence  was  entirely  consistent  with  one
      another as well as consistent with the country background  information
      that Sikhs, face a greater degree  of  harassment  and  discrimination
      such that their community continues  to  find  it  very  difficult  to
      reside in Afghanistan and their numbers continue to dwindle.


  26. Having heard oral evidence from the appellant and his wife,  I  accept
      their description of the circumstances of  their  family  members.   I
      accept that they have no  immediate  family  members  in  Afghanistan.
      They both gave detailed accounts of the whereabouts  of  their  family
      members.  I accept that the appellant's parents arrived in the UK with
      his sister in January 2017, and  have  claimed  asylum.   One  of  his
      brothers is an asylum seeker in Leeds and the other has  gone  missing
      in Afghanistan.  Unfortunately, this is not unusual given the  country
      conditions.

  27. I accept that it is reasonably likely that the appellant's father sold
      the family business selling clothes in Kabul in order to fund the trip
      from Afghanistan to the UK and they are now entirely reliant upon  the
      support they receive as asylum seekers.  I note Mr Bates' concern that
      no attempt has been made to proactively rely upon  evidence  regarding
      the sale of the business in this appeal.  The appellant explained that
      the evidence in support of his father's  departure  from  Afghanistan,
      including property sale  documents,  was  submitted  as  part  of  his
      father's asylum claim, and he thought that the SSHD would be  able  to
      access this information if it was required.  In my view the  appellant
      was reasonably entitled to believe that the SSHD would have access  to
      that information.  However, the  appellant  has  had  the  benefit  of
      professional advisors who  could  have  sought  this  information.   I
      acknowledge that the burden of proof is upon the appellant, albeit  to
      the lower standard of proof.  When all the evidence is  considered  in
      the round I am satisfied that the appellant's father sold  any  assets
      held by the family in Afghanistan in order to fund the long journey to
      the UK for himself, his wife and their daughter.  I note that  in  his
      asylum interview the appellant explained that his parents had not left
      Afghanistan with him because of a shortage of funds.  It is reasonably
      likely that the family did not have generous savings  or  assets,  and
      the appellant's father had to work for a few more  years  to  generate
      the savings to fund the journey for three people.


  28. I accept that the appellant has an  aunt  in  London  and  his  wife's
      parents have been recognised as refugees.  I  accept  that  they  rely
      upon a state pension and would not be in a position to assist  in  the
      funding of A's education.  It would have  been  more  helpful  if  the
      appellant had obtained confirmation of their income for  this  appeal.
      However, I am prepared to accept the appellant's  evidence  as  it  is
      supported by the evidence given by his wife.


  29. I therefore find that the appellant does not have any  family  members
      in a position to financially support  A's  education  and  any  family
      business in Afghanistan ceased when the  appellant's  father  left  in
      January 2017.


  30. I now turn to Mr Bates' alternative submission that the appellant  can
      simply re-start his father's business or a similar business.  I do not
      consider this to have any realistic  prospects  given  the  prevailing
      attitude to Sikhs and Sikh businesses  in  Afghanistan.    It  is  one
      thing to have continued a business in existence for  the  entirety  of
      the appellant's life.  It is quite another to restart a business after
      years of absence from Afghanistan  without  any  support  from  family
      members and in the face of generalised harassment and  discrimination.
      Reliance cannot be reasonably placed upon the  Sikh  community  as  so
      many have left Kabul and the numbers remaining are so few.   I  accept
      that the appellant's pessimistic outlook on the chances of  restarting
      a business in Kabul is  well-founded  given  the  prevailing  attitude
      toward Sikhs and the substantial decrease in their numbers.

  31. The appellant has consistently  been  candid  about  the  business  he
      worked in with his father, as set out in  his  asylum  interview.   He
      worked with his  father  for  his  whole  adult  life  until  he  left
      Afghanistan.   He knows nothing else.  He is unlikely to be able to re-
      start a business or secure any meaningful employment  in  Kabul  given
      the time he has spent away from Kabul (some three years), the lack  of
      family and community support and the prevailing discrimination  toward
      Sikhs.

  32. Mr Bates did not refer to the resettlement funds  that  the  appellant
      may receive if he returns to Afghanistan and was content to  rest  his
      case on the appellant's ability to pay the school fees with help  from
      family members or from the  appellant's  own  business  activities  in
      Kabul.



Conclusions

  33. For the avoidance of doubt, I accept the appellant's evidence  that  A
      has already started to benefit from schooling in the UK, and  that  it
      is particularly important that he continues to attend school to assist
      him with his anxieties.  This is a case in which  education  has  been
      shown to be  a  fundamental  element  of  A's  personal  identity  and
      something that his parents proactively wish him to pursue.

  34. When all the  evidence  is  considered  in  the  round  I  accept  the
      appellant's claim that he will not be able  to  afford  the  fees  for
      private school for A because he will be unable to rely upon  financial
      support  from  family  members  and  will  be  unable  to  generate  a
      meaningful income in Afghanistan.

  35. I accept that upon return to Afghanistan,  A  would  not  be  able  to
      attend state schools because of the level and extent of discrimination
      against Sikh children.


  36. I am satisfied that credible evidence has been provided of a real risk
      of ill-treatment and harassment to A on return sufficient  to  prevent
      him from receiving a proper education in a state school and his family
      will be unable to afford a private school.   A's  education  has  been
      demonstrated to be a fundamental element  of  his  personal  identity,
      that he and his parents wish to pursue.   The  serious  discrimination
      faced by A, together with the more generalised  discrimination  toward
      Sikhs is such as to cross the threshold of persecution.


Decision

  37. I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal.






Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
2 February 2018

