

                                [pic]

 Upper Tribunal

 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/12732/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

 Heard at Field House
 Decision & Reasons Promulgated
 On 18 July 2016
 On 20 July 2016




                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between


                                     NAK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION  MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent





 Representation:


 For the Appellant:    Mr K Smyth, solicitor, Kesar & Co Solicitors
 For the Respondent:   Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                         DECISION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  CAS
     O'Garro (hereinafter referred to as  the  judge),  promulgated  on  22
     February 2016. Permission to appeal was granted on limited grounds  on
     27 April  2016  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchinson  and
     thereafter by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on further grounds.


     Background


  2. The appellant, now aged 19, previously applied for asylum, that  claim
     being refused on 22 June 2011. He was granted Discretionary  Leave  to
     Remain (DLR) until 20 June 2014. On 19 June 2014,  he  sought  further
     leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  human  rights  grounds,
     specifically Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

  3. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim is that he from a village in
     Baghlan Province, Afghanistan, where he lived  with  his  parents  and
     siblings. Two of those siblings died when the appellant was very young
     and his remaining sibling, a brother, resides in  the  United  Kingdom
     with his wife and children. The appellant's  mother  died  of  natural
     causes in around 2007 and his father was  killed  by  the  Taleban  in
     either 2007 or 2008. His grandparents are deceased as is his  father's
     only brother.  After the death of his parents, the appellant was cared
     for by his sole maternal uncle, who was unmarried. After  about  three
     years, the said uncle sold the family home and sent the  appellant  to
     the United Kingdom via an agent.

  4. In refusing his claim, in 2011, the Secretary of State  accepted  that
     it was likely that the Taleban would have been recruiting children  in
     the appellant's province and  that  there  was  a  refugee  Convention
     reason apparent but considered that he had failed to establish that he
     would be at risk of serious harm on return to Afghanistan. It was also
     said that the appellant could obtain a sufficiency  of  protection  or
     relocate. His credibility was said to be damaged owing to his  failure
     to seek asylum in France. The appellant was said to  have  adduced  no
     evidence of ties in the United Kingdom and his length of residence was
     not particularly compelling.

  5. In his application for further leave to remain, the  appellant  stated
     that he had lost contact with his uncle;  was  concerned  following  a
     bomb attack on his village; that he had been in contact with  the  Red
     Cross and had asked his social worker to assist  him  in  tracing  his
     uncle; he had developed a close  relationship  with  his  brother  but
     could not live with him owing to a lack of  space  and  he  feared  to
     return to Afghanistan because the Taleban were 'not happy' with people
     who returned from Europe or spoke English like him.

  6. The Secretary of State's Reasons for Refusal letter  of  28  September
     2015 explains that the appellant's application  was  refused  for  the
     same reasons contained in the earlier refusal letter. In addition, the
     appellant's claim that his father was killed by the Taleban  and  that
     he was at risk from them was rejected owing to a lack of evidence.  It
     was not accepted that he would be at risk  owing  to  his  ability  to
     speak English as he was not an  interpreter  and  had  no  profile  in
     Afghanistan.

  7. Consideration was also given by the Secretary of State  to  Article  8
     within the Rules, however the appellant was said to be unable to  meet
     any of  the  requirements.  There  were  said  to  be  no  exceptional
     circumstances and it was considered that the appellant's removal  from
     the United Kingdom was appropriate.

  8. During the course of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the
     judge heard evidence from the appellant  alone.  The  judge  concluded
     that the appellant was not at risk of persecution owing to finding him
     not to be a witness of truth. She found that  the  appellant  had  not
     been disadvantaged by the respondent's failure  to  trace  his  uncle.
     Nor was it accepted that the appellant was at risk of serious harm and
     therefore entitled to humanitarian protection.  The  judge  considered
     that the appellant would be able to locate his uncle via word of mouth
     networks and would have family  support  on  his  return.   The  judge
     dismissed the Article 8 claim on the basis that the appellant  had  no
     family life in the United Kingdom, did not meet  the  requirements  of
     paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Rules  and  that  his  removal  was  not  a
     disproportionate response.


      Error of law


    9. Permission to appeal  was  sought  on  the  basis  that  the  judge's
       decision was unfair. The appellant, who was unrepresented at the time
       the grounds were drafted, stated that he  feared  being  tortured  or
       prosecuted without a fair trial. He also referred to his relationship
       with his brother and nephews.


   10. Judge  Grant-Hutchinson  granted  permission,  stating  that  it  was
       arguable that the judge  misdirected  herself  in  finding  that  the
       appellant had no family life. Permission was refused on the Article 3
       ground.

   11. The Secretary of State's response of 6 May 2016  indicated  that  the
       respondent opposed the appeal as it was  considered  that  the  judge
       appropriately directed herself. It was said that there was nothing on
       the face of the decision to indicate that  the  appellant  sought  to
       rely upon the relationship with his brother or  that  there  was  any
       evidence as to an established family life between them.

   12. This matter was listed for a  hearing  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Perkins on 27 May 2016. However, in advance of the hearing  Kent  Law
       Clinic made an  application  for  permission  to  appeal  on  further
       grounds. The first ground concerned  the  judge's  rejection  of  the
       appellant's asylum claim on credibility grounds; secondly,  that  the
       judge erred in her assessment of the risk to the appellant of  forced
       recruitment and thirdly, the judge erred in relation to the  standard
       of proof, in finding it reasonably likely that  the  appellant  would
       find his uncle rather than asking if there was a real  risk  that  he
       would not.

   13. Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the
       amended grounds, commenting that they were arguable, with  particular
       mention of paragraph 11 of the amended grounds.

   14. The respondent sent a further response under Rule 24 on 23 June 2016.
       Opposition to the appeal was maintained. It was said that  the  judge
       had actually found that the appellant's father was  targeted  by  the
       Taleban and that the respondent did not accept that  the  appellant's
       town was controlled by the Taleban, only that  they  were  active  in
       recruiting  in  that  area.  Otherwise,  the  judge's  findings  were
       endorsed.





 The hearing


 15. Mr Smyth did not pursue  the  ground  on  which  permission  had  been
     originally granted, that is in relation to Article 8 ECHR. He confined
     his challenged to the grounds advanced to the Upper Tribunal.  He  was
     right to do so given the content of the appellant's witness  statement
     which made it  clear  that  his  relationship  with  his  brother  was
     strained owing to the latter's view that the appellant had become  too
     westernised. Essentially, the main challenge was to the judge's errors
     of fact which both went to the core of the  appellant's  claim  as  to
     whether he was at risk in his home area. Firstly, it was  argued  that
     the judge said there was no evidence as to the  appellant's  province,
     whereas it was said that this information had been provided during the
     screening interview. Furthermore,  the  respondent  accepted,  in  the
     first asylum decision that the appellant hailed from an area where the
     Taliban recruited.

 16. It was further argued on the appellant's behalf that the judge made an
     irrational finding that it  was  not  credible  that  the  appellant's
     father was killed for which no or inadequate reasons were provided. Mr
     Smyth submitted that the aforementioned findings tainted  the  judge's
     conclusions in relation to internal  relocation  and  that  the  judge
     misapplied the standard of proof in relation to her findings  that  it
     would be reasonably likely  that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to,
     eventually, locate his uncle in Afghanistan.


 17. Mr Melvin adopted both of  the  respondent's  Rule  24  responses.  He
     conceded that the judge made mistakes as to fact but argued that these
     were immaterial to the outcome. In relation to materiality, Mr  Melvin
     emphasised that the appellant was now an adult; the view of the  Upper
     Tribunal was that there was little in the way of risk to those removed
     to Kabul; the appellant was noted to be fit and well and at  [46]  the
     judge had considered reintegration packages.  While the 2011  decision
     of the respondent accepted that there  was  Taliban  activity  in  the
     appellant's area, there was no explicit acceptance of that in the 2015
     decision. He contended that the situation in Afghanistan had  improved
     since 2011. With regard to the issue of the manner in which the  judge
     expressed the likelihood of the  appellant  locating  his  family,  Mr
     Melvin described this as semantics. He further  argued  that  for  the
     appellant to be at risk, he would need to show more than his  presence
     in the United Kingdom, westernised appearance or speaking English.

 18. At the end of the hearing, I announced that I  had  found  a  material
     error of law in the judge's decision.

Decision on Error of Law


 19. At [33] of the decision and reasons, the judge said as  follows;  "The
     appellant has provided no evidence of the Province where he lived when
     he  was  in  Afghanistan...It  would  have  assisted  to   have   that
     information in order to assess if the appellant  lived  in  a  Taliban
     controlled area..."

 20. The judge was mistaken in relation to the aforementioned  comments  in
     at least two respects.
 21. Firstly, when the appellant applied for asylum in 2011 he  provided  a
     detailed account of his origins. This  is  reflected  in  the  refusal
     letter of 22 June 2011 where it states "You lived in Kelagay  Village,
     Dushey  District,  Baghlan  Province."  The  respondent  accepted  the
     appellant's account of his nationality owing to his ability to  answer
     specific country questions. Accordingly, had the judge considered this
     evidence, which I  am  told  the  appellant  communicated  during  his
     screening interview, she could not have made the finding that she did.



 22. Secondly, in the 2011  refusal  letter,  the  respondent  specifically
     accepted it was likely that "the Taleban would  have  been  active  in
     (the appellant's) province trying to recruit  children."  Contrary  to
     what was said at  [32]  of  the  decision,  the  evidence  as  to  the
     appellant's province and whether it was a Taleban controlled area  was
     before the judge and she erred  in not taking it into consideration as
     well as using the apparent absence of this  information  to  undermine
     the credibility of the  appellant's claim.

 23. The judge comprehensively rejected  the  appellant's  account  in  the
     following manner "I do not find the appellant's claim that his  father
     was killed by the Taliban credible. I find the appellant has  made  up
     this story to enhance his asylum claim."  The  sole  remaining  reason
     provided in the preceding paragraphs was that the judge did  not  find
     it credible that the appellant's father,  alone,  was  killed  and  no
     other member of the family. In the  absence  of  evidence  before  the
     judge to indicate that the Taleban would be  likely  to  target  every
     member of a family including women and children, the judge's  finding,
     while making a valid observation  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
     harmed, does not justify the wholesale rejection of his account.

 24. Having found that the judge made at least three errors which  went  to
     the core of the appellant's claim to be at risk in his  home  area,  I
     will now examine whether they were material errors.  I  conclude  that
     the judge's negative credibility findings taint the remainder  of  her
     decision, with particular regard to the issue of internal  relocation.
     The judge did not give adequate consideration  the  reasonableness  of
     the appellant being expected  to  relocate  to  Kabul.  Owing  to  her
     finding that the appellant's claim was an invention and he was not  at
     risk in his home area, she went straight on to consider  any  risk  to
     him in Kabul. Therefore, there was no  individual  assessment  of  his
     particular circumstances including his age, length of residence in the
     United Kingdom and western attitude.

 25. It is fair to say that the judge  did  comment  upon  the  appellant's
     ability to find his uncle, however she also fell into error here.  The
     appellant's evidence was  that  approximately  4-5  months  after  his
     arrival in  the  United  Kingdom,  he  had  been  unable  to  continue
     contacting his uncle by  telephone.  Therefore  by  the  time  of  the
     hearing the appellant had not been in contact with his uncle for  over
     4 years. This was in a context where the appellant's account was  that
     there had been fighting between American forces and the Taleban in his
     home area. Accordingly, the question for the judge was whether it  was
     reasonably likely that the appellant had lost contact with  his  uncle
     and would not be able to re-establish contact. Instead the judge found
     that owing to word of mouth networks referred to in  the  respondent's
     Operational Guidance note, "there is a reasonable likelihood that  the
     appellant will be able to reunite with his uncle once he  is  returned
     to Kabul and he  will  therefore  have  that  family  support  on  his
     return."


 26. I concur with what is said in ground three, in  that  if  there  is  a
     reasonable likelihood that the appellant would eventually reunite with
     his uncle, the converse would be that it is even more likely  that  he
     would not. Furthermore, the  judge's  finding  is  predicated  on  the
     appellant being able to re-establish contact only after he is returned
     to Kabul, which would leave him  in  the  position  of  being  without
     support as at the time of his return and for an unspecified period  of
     time. There was no assessment of his circumstances in the  intervening
     days, weeks or months while he would  making  use  of  word  of  mouth
     networks. Indeed, the evidence before the judge was that the appellant
     had made efforts to  trace  his  uncle  via  the  Red  Cross,  without
     success.

 27. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there  are  errors  of  law
     such that the decision be  set  aside,  to  be  remade.  None  of  the
     findings of the judge are to stand.

 28. I considered listing this matter to be heard in the Upper Tribunal, in
     view of practice  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
     Statements of 10 February 2010 (as amended), however the appellant has
     yet to have an adequate consideration of all  aspects  of  his  asylum
     appeal at the First-tier Tribunal and it would be  unfair  to  deprive
     him of such consideration.

 29. Further directions are set out below.

 30. An anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ. I consider it appropriate
     for anonymity  to  be  continued  and  therefore  make  the  following
     anonymity direction:

        "Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. "


Conclusions


     The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
     making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision to be re-made.





     Directions





   . This appeal is remitted  to  be  heard  de  novo,  by  any  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge (except Judge O'Garro).
   . The appeal is to be listed for a hearing at Hatton Cross
   . An interpreter in the Dari language is required.
   . Time estimate is 3 hours.


 Signed     Date: 19 July 2016
 Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
