
 [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12829/2015





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st June 2017                     |On 22nd  June 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                   O.H.R.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

     Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis and Co
Solicitors, Harrow.
For the Respondent:  Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Iran born in April 1985. He is of
      Kurdish ethnicity. He claimed to have arrived here in 2007 and sought
      protection the following day. His claim included a fear of persecution
      by reason of imputed political opinion and his ethnicity.


   2. His claim was refused and he became appeal rights exhausted. He
      subsequently made further representations to include sur place
      activity and an article 8 claim. His application was refused in
      October 2015. The respondent relied upon the earlier adjudications and
      it was not accepted he had any profile likely to place him at risk.


   3. The appellant's article 8 claim centred on his relationship with a Ms
      M.M. She is originally from Somalia, having arrived here at the age of
      16. She has been accepted as a refugee. She is now aged 24. They went
      through an Islamic marriage ceremony in December 2011. The respondent
      did not accept they were in a genuine and subsisting relationship.
      Even if the relationship with genuine the requirements of appendix FM
      were not met and EX1 did not apply on the basis there were no
      insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing, for instance, in
      Iran.

   4. The appeal was heard by First-tier Judge Clarke and was dismissed in a
      decision promulgated on 8 December 2016. Regarding the claim to
      protection the judge had regard to the earlier decisions and found
      that the appellant had produced no new credible evidence that he was
      at risk.

   5. Regarding family life, the judge accepted they began their
      relationship in early 2011 and there was a religious marriage ceremony
      in December 2011. The judge found their relationship with genuine and
      subsisting. Moreover, they now have a son born in September 2015. At
      the time of hearing the appellant partner was due to give birth.

   6. The judge had regard to appendix FM and EX 1. The appellant's child
      was confirmed as neither a British citizen nor, having been born in
      2015, had he lived in the United Kingdom for the specified seven
      years. The judge then considered the alternative ground of whether
      there were insurmountable obstacles to family life with his partner
      continuing outside the United Kingdom. At paragraph 78 the judge
      referred to his partner coming to the United Kingdom at the age of 16
      and being granted refugee status from the outset. She did not have
      contact with any of her family in Somalia. She was aware of the
      appellant's immigration status from the early days of their
      relationship. At paragraph 83 the judge took the view it was a matter
      for his partner to decide whether she would accompany the appellant to
      Iran. As she and her son have both been granted permanent residency
      they cannot be forced to leave the United Kingdom.

   7. The judge noted she had no experience of life in Iran. The judge
      pondered whether there were insurmountable obstacles to family life
      continuing and concluded this was not the case. The judge described
      her as having resilience and resourcefulness as evidenced by her
      ability to adapt to life here. The judge pointed out that they could
      go to Iran as a family unit and that she would be able to integrate
      into life there as she had done here.

   8. Regarding private life and paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iii) the judge did
      not see very significant obstacles to the appellant's reintegration.


   9. The judge went on to consider the appeal on freestanding article 8
      basis. The judge referred to the section 55 duty in respect of the
      appellant's child. Reference was made to the provisions of section
      117A and B of the 2002 Act. Following the sequential approach in
      Razgar the judge concluded that removal was proportionate.

The Upper Tribunal

  10. The application for permission related solely to the article 8 claim
      and family life. Permission was granted on the basis it was arguable
      the judge failed to have adequate regard to the obstacles likely to be
      faced by the appellant's partner and their child in Iran. Furthermore,
      it was noted that at birth the second child would most likely be a
      British citizen.


  11. The appellant's representatives have provided further updated
      information. The appellant's son born September 2015 has now been
      granted British nationality as confirmed by a certificate of
      registration dated 25 April 2017. His partner gave birth to a second
      child on 26 March 2017 and he has British nationality as evidenced by
      his passport.

  12. At hearing, Mrs Cleghorn adopted her comprehensive grounds used for
      the application for permission to appeal. At the time of hearing the
      issue before the judge was whether there were insurmountable obstacles
      to family life continuing, for instance, in Iran. She submitted that
      the judge failed to adequately consider his partner's circumstances,
      namely, she was a black westernised female who had obtained refugee
      status in the United Kingdom. It was submitted that undue weight was
      given to the fact that she had successfully integrated into British
      society. This did not mean she could integrate into life in Iran.
      Reference was also made to the principle established in HJ Iran and
      the behavioural requirements imposed in Iran. This was against the
      background of the appellant and the children facing difficulties
      because of his Kurdish ethnicity.

  13. She pointed out that if an error of law was found and the decision
      remade then there has been a material change: the appellant's children
      have been confirmed as British citizens. In relation to appendix FM
      EX1 the test in relation to a British child is whether it would be
      reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom. In the
      case of a British partner the test is one of insurmountable obstacles
      which are considered to present a high threshold: much higher than in
      relation to a British child. The Zambrano principle was raised but Mrs
      Cleghorn acknowledged that the point would have more force if it were
      the child's mother who was being removed. She emphasised the situation
      in Iran in relation to religious observances and lifestyle,
      particularly for females.

  14. By way of reply, Mr Diwnycz referred me to the rule 24 response. He
      acknowledged that the test had now changed in the event of a finding
      of an error of law because of the position of the British children
      involved. He also acknowledged that there was force in the HJ Iran
      point made by Mrs Cleghorn in relation to the appellant's partner and
      her need to comply. He pointed out that there was no presenting
      officer in attendance at the First-tier Tribunal to assist the judge.

Consideration

  15. Both sides have indicated agreement that the particular circumstances
      in Iran and the restrictions imposed on women was critical to the
      assessment of whether the obstacles faced to family life would be
      insurmountable. Not only are the country conditions relevant but the
      appellant's partner's background has to be factored in. She is a black
      woman from Somalia who came to the United Kingdom at the age of 16 and
      was granted refugee status. She is Muslim but has not followed the
      strict manifestation and upbringing that is the norm in Iran. It does
      not necessarily follow that because she has been able to adapt from
      living in Somalia to living in the United Kingdom that she could
      equally adapt to life in Iran. The United Kingdom is a multicultural
      society. She would face greater difficulties in Iran. She also would
      be responsible for the upbringing of two babies whilst your husband
      would have to try and secure employment.


  16. Whilst insurmountable obstacles are a high threshold, in the factual
      matrix presented I find the First-tier Judge imposed too high a
      threshold. Consequently I found a material error of law in the
      decision.


  17. The parties have not suggested that the appeal be remitted. It can be
      remade bearing in mind both children are British. The test then is
      whether it would be reasonable to expect the children to leave the
      United Kingdom. It is my conclusion it would be. Here, they have a
      secure family unit with all the support that Britain can give. The
      children are British and they and their mother are entitled to be here
      as of right. In Iran they would have to start afresh. Whilst the
      appellant's partner has been working here in a pizzeria and has sought
      to further her education it is likely that in Iran her husband would
      be expected to be the breadwinner. Without particular skills and being
      of Kurdish ethnicity he would face difficulties. In the circumstance
      therefore it is my conclusion it would not be reasonable to expect the
      children to leave.

Decision.


   The decision of First-tier Judge Clarke dismissing the appeal materially
   errs in law.


    I remake that decision, allowing it under the Immigration rules. This is
   on the basis of appendix FM and the grant of leave to remain as a parent
   to the appellant. This is on the basis EX 1(a)(i) and (ii) applies.


Deputy Judge Farrelly

21st June 2017

