




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12039/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke on Trent     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8th June 2016                           |On 21st July 2016                |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [G K]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Jaffar (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Sangha,  promulgated  on  4th  March  2016,  following  a  hearing   at
    Birmingham on 18th February 2016.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, who  subsequently  applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Uganda, who was born on [ ] 1965.
     He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary of  State
    dated 25th August 2015, refusing his application to be recognised as  a
    refugee and his application to be granted permission to remain  on  the
    basis of humanitarian leave.  The basis of the application is  that  he
    is a homosexual who would face mistreatment upon return to Uganda.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge observed how the Appellant had  previously  claimed  that  he
    would be persecuted upon return to Uganda due to his imputed  political
    opinion, because he had been detained by the Lord's Resistance Army and
    would therefore be considered as a rebel collaborator,  and  when  that
    claim had been rejected, he had subsequently raised a  fresh  claim  in
    relation to his alleged homosexuality.  Judge Sangha also observed  how
    the previous judge had treated the asylum appeal on the basis  that  it
    was  "entirely  spurious"  (see  paragraph   11   of   Judge   Sangha's
    determination), and at the time the Appellant had attended protests  to
    strengthen his political claim "solely to give himself cover to make  a
    subsequent application" (paragraph 11).  The Appellant now claimed that
    he could not return because of his homosexuality but it was noted  that
    he had a partner and three children in Uganda  (paragraph  11).   Given
    that the previous judge had considered  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be
    entirely devoid of all credibility, Judge Sangha applied the principles
    of Devaseelan as a starting point and concluded  that  the  Appellant's
    credibility in relation to his latest claim was also very much in issue
    (paragraph 33).  The Appellant's current claim was refused on the basis
    that he "relies on his membership of six different  LGBT  organisations
    and his involvement with LGBT protests as a cover for his false  asylum
    claim" (paragraph 42).

Grounds of Application

 4. The grounds of application state that the judge made a  material  error
    of law because of his failure to consider the risk  of  persecution  on
    return to Uganda and also because he failed to have regard  to  binding
    case law  regarding  the  Appellant's  "motive"  in  engaging  in  LGBT
    activities in the UK, which motive was irrelevant for the  purposes  of
    assessing whether he risked persecution upon return.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted on 1st April 2016.

 6. A Rule 24 response was entered on 15th April 2016 on the basis that the
    claim on the perception of the authorities in Uganda cannot be divorced
    from the fact that the Appellant has  a  wife  and  three  children  in
    Uganda (see paragraph 11 of the determination), and nor that  he  would
    be returning on the factual basis of having previously manufactured  an
    earlier "sur place" claim on a differing basis (political  opinion)  to
    bolster a claim for asylum [see paragraph  11  of  the  determination].



Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 8th  June  2016,  Mr  Jaffar,  of  Counsel,
    appearing on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  drew  my  attention  to  the
    Appellant's second bundle at B4 to B63, which set out the nature of the
    Appellant's current claim.  In particular, my attention  was  drawn  to
    B44 at paragraph 82, which suggested that it was only necessary for the
    Appellant to allege that he  was  gay,  and  this  would  then  attract
    adverse attention from the Ugandan authorities to the  extent  that  he
    would face persecution.  Furthermore, at C13, there was evidence of the
    Appellant's  regular  meetings  between  2013   and   2014   with   gay
    organisations.   There  was  also  a  letter  from  Mr  Peter  Tatchell
    confirming his association with gay organisations.

 8. Furthermore, the Appellant had been photographed  many  times  in  this
    context.  The fact was that the Appellant was openly  gay  and  he  had
    engaged in high profile activities and he would therefore be at risk in
    Uganda.  At C30 there were photographs of the  Appellant.   Indeed,  at
    C35 there is a Facebook profile which actually contains the Appellant's
    name as well.  He is carrying a placard and is giving out  a  statement
    which is given with his name.  This was a case where there was  a  very
    sophisticated portrayal of the Appellant  as  a  gay  person  and  that
    portrayal had been publicised on the internet.  The Appellant was bound
    to be at risk on the lower standard.

 9. Second, the judge had only asked himself the question as to whether the
    Appellant was gay but failed to then consider how he would  be  treated
    upon return to Uganda having raised this matter in the way that he had,
    regardless of whether he was believed or not.

10. For his part, Mr McVeety submitted that the determination could only be
    faulted on the basis that there was a "Robinson  obvious"  point  which
    the judge should have considered, failing which,  there  could  not  be
    said to be any error of law, because the judge could only consider that
    which was placed before him.  It had  never  been  argued  by  previous
    Counsel before Judge Sangha that the Tribunal should turn its attention
    also to how the Appellant was likely to be  perceived  upon  return  to
    Uganda.

11. Second, the case law here, as epitomised by HJ  (Iran),  was  that  the
    Appellant was protected with respect to his "inherent characteristics",
    but not protected with respect to how he  sought  to  project  himself,
    whether that be on the internet or anywhere else, and if  his  inherent
    characteristics were put in doubt  by  the  Tribunal,  then  there  was
    nothing that HJ (Iran) would attach to.  The judge was never  asked  to
    consider the alternative position as to  how  the  Appellant  would  be
    perceived upon return.  The only matter that was put before  the  judge
    was that the Appellant was gay.  The judge rejected that.

12. Third, upon return, it was most likely  that  the  Ugandan  authorities
    would see him as a person of a heterosexual nature  because  he  had  a
    wife and  three  children,  particularly  as  by  the  Appellant's  own
    admission, he had also entered into a relationship with a woman in  the
    United Kingdom.

13. Finally, there was a credibility hurdle put in the Appellant's  way  on
    account of the application of Devaseelan principles because  previously
    Judge Paul had already decided that the Appellant was not a  person  to
    be believed.

14. In reply, Mr Jaffar submitted  that  it  was  not  the  case  that  the
    Tribunal  was  confined  to  considering  only  the  question  of   the
    Appellant's "inherent characteristics, and as to whether he was gay  or
    not, without also additionally being required to consider  whether  the
    perception of the Appellant upon  return  would  attract  the  risk  of
    persecution.  This is a question of law, and if the judge had  come  to
    the wrong conclusion with respect to the applicable law, then there was
    an error of law.

No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  I come to  this
    conclusion notwithstanding Mr Jaffar's valiant efforts to  persuade  me
    otherwise.  Whereas I accept Mr Jaffar's point that in HJ (Iran) [2010]
    UKSC 31, the court had made it quite clear that when dealing with  LGBT
    cases, "the Tribunal must first ask itself whether it is  satisfied  on
    the evidence that he is gay, or that he  will  be  treated  as  gay  by
    potential persecutors in his country of  nationality",  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that  the  Appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  of
    persecution for the reasons that he had given.  It  is  all  too  often
    said that sur place activities can  lead  to  a  successful  claim  for
    asylum notwithstanding the genuineness of such an activity.  Whether or
    not  that  is  the  case  will  rest  very  much  on   the   particular
    circumstances of the case.  What is important to bear in mind, however,
    is that the leading case that is relied upon in this  respect,  (namely
    that of Danian [2000] Imm AR 96) does not give an unqualified  approval
    to the making of claims on the basis of bad  faith.   This  is  because
    Lord Justice Sedley made it quite clear that, "nothing in it should  be
    read as giving any kind of green light to bogus asylum seekers".  It is
    against the backdrop of such case law that the judge's handling of  the
    Appellant's claim in the present context should be considered.

16. In the instant case, the judge has approached the matter  in  a  clear,
    comprehensive, and careful manner.  He has concluded in  the  following
    manner.  First, the Appellant arrived in the UK in November  2002,  but
    only raised the question of his homosexuality after his  appeal  rights
    were exhausted on 5th November 2011.

17. Second, even then, the Appellant did not make his  further  submissions
    until October 2012 when his homosexuality  was  raised  for  the  first
    time.

18. Third, the Appellant gave an explanation  that  he  was  not  confident
    enough to come out, but the judge held this to be "entirely lacking  in
    credibility" (paragraph 34) given that he had arrived in 2002  and  did
    not even make an asylum claim upon arrival  on  any  basis  whatsoever.
    His first asylum claim was after he had been encountered by immigration
    authorities on 7th April 2011 working at a domestic address  in  London
    on a false identity, when  he  claimed  to  have  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.

19. Fourth, the Appellant claimed asylum on 8th April 2011 on the basis  of
    imputed political opinion arguing that he  had  been  detained  by  the
    Lord's Resistance Army and would be regarded as a  rebel  collaborator.
    That claim was eventually rejected as wholly untenable  by  Judge  Paul
    who drew adverse credibility inferences.

20. Fifth, the judge  now  found  the  homosexual  claim  to  be  "entirely
    inconsistent and lacking in credibility in  other  aspects"  (paragraph
    35).  For example, although the Appellant said that  he  did  not  feel
    comfortable enough  in  coming  out,  "he  was  comfortable  enough  to
    participate in  public  LGBT  events  and  attend  gay  social  events"
    (paragraph 35).  More importantly, the Appellant  "has  not  given  any
    clear information regarding how he became aware  that  sexual  identity
    was grounds for asylum, and despite the fact that the Appellant  claims
    that he was a practising homosexual whilst in Uganda"  (paragraph  35),
    for which the Appellant provided no evidence whatsoever.

21. Finally, the judge found the evidence of the Appellant's witnesses also
    to be unpersuasive and the evidence of a Mr Sassaly "to  be  convoluted
    particularly  in  relation  to  how  he  determined   the   Appellant's
    sexuality" (paragraph 40).  The judge's overriding conclusion was that,
    "I find the Appellant is in fact a  very  sophisticated  person  having
    practised deceit in the past" (paragraph 42).

22. As to the question that the judge did not consider  how  the  Appellant
    would be perceived upon return to Uganda,  there  is  nothing  in  this
    contention.  The judge concluded that,

         "I do not consider the Appellant's account to be at  all  credible.
         I do not accept that the Appellant conducted any gay  relationships
         in Uganda and nor do I accept that he  was  able  to  conceal  his
         sexuality for the length of time that he claims while  evading  the
         attention of  his  family,  the  police  and  the  authorities  who
         according to his own admission was seeking him as a missing person"
         (paragraph 36).

23. Given  that  this  is  how  the  judge  comprehensively  evaluated  the
    position, it is clear that the Appellant is not likely to face the risk
    of persecution on the lower standard in terms of the perception of  the
    Ugandan authorities of him upon his return.  They had not  treated  him
    as gay previously.

24. His claim in the UK of being gay has been comprehensively  rejected  as
    has all his previous asylum claims on differing bases.  In  short,  the
    Appellant will only be viewed as a failed asylum seeker upon return  to
    Uganda.



Notice of Decision

25. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

26. An anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 20th July 2016
