
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA 12763 2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3rd August, 2016                           |On 8th August , 2016         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                    Mr SM
                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim (Counsel instructed by Simman solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mt T Melvin (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this matter is Mr SM. I shall refer to the parties  as
    the "appellant" and the "Respondent".  This is matter comes  before  me
    for consideration as to whether or not there is a material error of law
    in  the  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal   (Judge   Traynor)("FtT")
    promulgated on 17th June 2016 in which the  appellant's  asylum  appeal
    was dismissed.

Background

2.   The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  and  he  was   granted
    discretionary leave as an  unaccompanied  minor  until  24.3.2015.   He
    applied for asylum at the age of 13 years on the grounds that he was in
    fear of  unknown persons  who  had  abducted  his  father,  who  was  a
    Commander  under  Hezb  e  Islami.   His  mother  had  given  him   the
    information about his father and made arrangements for him to live with
    his maternal uncle after his father's abduction.  After some  4  months
    the appellant was approached in the town by two strangers who attempted
    to  abduct  him  when  he  identified  himself  as  his  father's  son.
    Thereafter his uncles paid for and arranged for him to be taken to  the
    UK with agents. He feared  that  if  returned  to  Kabul  he  would  be
    detained by those who had abducted his father and /or recruited by  the
    Taliban.

3.   The appellant appealed against a decision made on  29.9.2015   refusing
    his application for asylum on the grounds  that  his  account  was  not
    credible as it was vague in all respects and there  were  discrepancies
    in the accounts given at the first  asylum  interview  and  in  a  more
    recent interview.

4.    The FtT found that the appellant's claim was  lacking  in  credibility
    and was vague.  The FtT found that the account given by  the  appellant
    was from his mother and that he knew nothing of his father's activities
    and that it was based on speculation.  The evidence was speculative and
    unsubstantiated. The appellant had raised new  matters  in  his  recent
    interview with the Home office and that was discrepant with the account
    that he had given when first interviewed. The FtT concluded that he had
    embellished his account and it was fabricated .

5.    In grounds of application  for  permission  the  appellant  argued  in
    paragraphs 2 - 5 that the FtT failed to  provide  adequate  reason  for
    finding that the appellant's account was  not  credible  and  had  made
    generic findings.  The FtT failed to give the benefit of the  doubt  to
    the appellant who was a minor and that the account given by a minor may
    not be reliable.  The FtT erred in rejecting the evidence about the Red
    Cross and insufficient reasons were given.  The FtT failed to  consider
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  Further grounds were raised in respect of the
    Article 8 assessment in paragraphs 6-8.

6.   Permission was granted on the grounds set out in paras 2- 5 only.   The
    grounds in paragraphs 6-8  were  simply  a  quarrel  as  to  the  FtT's
    assessment of proportionality. The FtT was arguably  deficient  in  its
    reasoning as to whether or not it  found the claim to be based  on  his
    mother's narrative [35] and thereby speculative  or  fabricated  solely
    for the asylum claim [36].  Such a distinction may have  been  material
    given the appellant's youth.

7.    A Rule 24 response produced by the respondent opposed the  application
    .


Submisssions

8.    Mr Karim argued that the FtT findings were inadequate as it failed  to
    engage with the fact that the appellant had been given  information  by
    his mother.  He had provided extensive information in his three witness
    statements and so his account could not be vague.   The  appellant  had
    stated that he had some learning difficulties which  the  FtT  did  not
    consider.  The consideration of Article 8 and paragraph 276 was  scant.



9.   Mr Melvin relied on the  Rule  24  response.   The  FtT  gave  adequate
    reasons for rejecting the claim.  There was no medical evidence  before
    the FtT. There was limited  information  before  the  FtT  and  it  had
    considered all of the evidence in the round.   The  findings  that  the
    account was vague was open to the FtT on the evidence .

Discussion and conclusion

10.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give  with
    my reasons.  I find no material error of  law  in  the  decision  which
    shall stand. The FtT decision was detailed and fully reasoned.  The FtT
    did not find the account to be credible nor plausible and placed weight
    on the additional  information  given  by  the  appellant  at  a  later
    interview.  This information was not consistent with the account  given
    by the appellant when first interviewed [41, 42, 43]. The argument that
    the FtT failed to decide whether  the account given  by  the  appellant
    was based on  what his mother had told him was not material.   The  FtT
    found that the evidence of  his  father's  abduction,  the  attempt  to
    abduct him and the claim that his father was a Commander to be  lacking
    in credibility. Further the FtT concluded that there  was  insufficient
    evidence to support the appellant's claim that he would  be  identified
    on return. There was no  evidence  to  show  how  the  abductors  would
    identify the  appellant if returned to Afghanistan or  specifically  to
    Kabul.  The appellant had not provided any additional evidence to  show
    that his  father  was  a  Commander.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  FtT
    considered all of the evidence in the round including the two  accounts
    given by the appellant in interview and his 3  witness  statments.   It
    was open to the FtT to conclude that he had embellished his account and
    that there were discrepancies.  The apparent failure to distinguish  as
    between a speculative account based on information from his mother that
    was a truthful recollection and that the account was fabricated for the
    purpose of claiming  asylum,  is  insufficient  in  the  light  of  the
    decision taken as a whole.  The determination  is  sustainable  on  the
    evidence that was before the FtT. It was open  to   the  FtT  to  place
    weight on the  material  inconsistencies  in  the  later  interview  in
    assessing the account given in the first instance [47].

11.  The FtT finding on the evidence about contact with the  Red  Cross  are
    sustainable and reasoned.  I find no material  error  in  law  in  that
    regard.

12.  In terms of paragraph 276 ADE whilst not specifically  addressing  that
    provision I am satisfied that  the  FtT  considered  all  the  relevant
    evidence under Article 8 at [54] and which  included  consideration  of
    any difficulty in returning to Afghanistan in particular to Kabul which
    the FtT found to be a claim unsupported by any evidence.

Decision

13.  There is no material error of  law  disclosed  in  the  decision  which
    shall stand.


                               Signed            Date 5.8.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






                  ANONYMITY ORDER made
                               NO FEE AWARD as the appeal was dismissed.






                               Signed            Date 5.8.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


