
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/12465/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Liverpool                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On: 27th November 2017              |On: 8th December 2017                 |
|                                    |                                      |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mr Khan, Counsel instructed by Waterstone
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is of disputed nationality. He claims to be a national of
    Myanmar, and on that basis claimed that he has a well-founded  fear  of
    persecution for  reasons  of  his  ethnicity,  namely  Rohingya.    The
    Respondent believed him to be a national of Bangladesh and rejected the
    entire account.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  agreed  and  dismissed  the
    appeal.


 2. The Appellant now has permission to appeal.
    Anonymity Order

 3. The Appellant seeks international protection. Having had regard to Rule
    14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"



    Background and Findings of the First-tier Tribunal


 4. The Appellant's claim is as follows. He was born in 1986 in  Burma.  In
    1992 he was taken by his parents across  the  border  into  Bangladesh,
    where  they  lived  in  a  refugee  camp  established  to   accommodate
    Rohingyas, 'Balukhaki 1'.  In 1994 his father instructed  him  that  he
    was to leave the camp with two young men who were going to  make  their
    way to somewhere that they could work. His father gave him the  'family
    book' which contained confirmation of the family's right to  reside  in
    the camp as refugees. [This] was  so  that  the  Appellant  would  have
    something to show the police if he was caught, or  as  he  put  it,  he
    would "not be shot". From there the eight-year-old  Appellant  went  to
    Rajapalong, Jamalkhan then Chittagong. Eventually he got to Dhaka where
    he got a job in a motor spares shop. He was paid 4000  taka  per  month
    and given food and accommodation. He managed to save a substantial  sum
    of money. In 2014 the police raided  the  shop  (it  was  suspected  of
    selling illegal motor parts) and the Appellant was questioned. When  he
    revealed that he was from Burma they detained him. His employer managed
    to get him out on bail and he fled, using his savings to get to Europe.
      The Appellant therefore arrived in the UK and claimed asylum  putting
    forward this proposition: he had lived in Bangladesh for  most  of  his
    life and spoke fluent Bengali, but because  of  his  heritage  he  also
    spoke Rohingya. His country of origin is Myanmar and this makes  him  a
    refugee.


 5. The Respondent commissioned a  report  by  language  analysts  Sprakab.
    That concluded that the Appellant spoke a variety of Bengali spoken  in
    Noakhali district of Bangladesh. The Respondent relied upon  this,  and
    what she perceived to be implausibilities in  the  account,  to  refuse
    protection. The Respondent did not accept  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    Rohingya, or that he was from Myanmar.

 6. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant  gave
    evidence in Rohingya. The Tribunal notes that he had no  difficulty  in
    understanding the interpreter nor vice  versa.  He  produced  a  letter
    purporting to be from the from the Bangladesh High Commission in London
    advising him that he would not be issued with  a  Bangladeshi  passport
    because he was not a national of Bangladesh. The letter is signed by  a
    'TM Jobaer'. The veracity of that letter  was  not  challenged  by  the
    Respondent; in fact the HOPO very fairly acknowledged that when she had
    run a check on Bangladeshi diplomatic staff in London she had found  Mr
    Jobaer to be listed as 'Minister' (Consular), the very way in which the
    letter had been signed.  The Appellant produced a 'family book' said to
    be the one that his father had given to him in 1994.

 7. The Tribunal rejected the Appellant's  evidence.  Its  analysis  begins
    with the Sprakab report.  It notes that the analyst who spoke with  the
    Appellant did so in Bengali, and that he or she is recorded as speaking
    Hindi, Bengali, Arakan Bengali and Burmese. It did not  accept,  as  he
    asserted, that the Appellant had spoken to the  analyst  in  Rohingyan,
    since the Judge would have expected the analyst to have mentioned  that
    fact.  Sprakab's conclusion was that the Appellant spoken a variant  of
    Bengali spoken in Noakhali. The Judge found that to be consistent  with
    the Appellant's account that he escaped from the camp as  a  child  and
    grew up with people in the Bangladeshi community. It  was  not  however
    consistent with his claim to have spent so much  time  in  Dhaka.   The
    Tribunal found it implausible that the Appellant would have managed  to
    save enough money to travel to Europe, that the police would have given
    him bail, and that his employer would have helped  him  in  the  manner
    claimed.  Taking all of these findings together, the Tribunal concluded
    that in fact the Appellant is from the Noakhali district.


 8. From there it went  on  to  examine  the  Appellant's  account  of  his
    childhood. It found it to be implausible that  his  father  would  have
    given the Appellant the family book, given that the family remaining in
    the camp would have needed it to get food. If his parents  intended  to
    escape they would have escaped with him.  It was  implausible  that  he
    would have kept the book all that time given that he did not  need  it,
    speaking Bengali as he did to a native level.  The letter from the High
    Commission is rejected because it does not have a formal letterhead and
    because the Appellant had not produced a copy of the form  he  used  to
    apply for a Bangladeshi passport.   Finally turning to  deal  with  the
    only evidence that went in the Appellant's favour,  the  fact  that  he
    speaks Rohingyan, the Tribunal said this:

         "the SPRAKAB report suggests  that  he  has  spent  a  considerable
         period of time in South East  Bangladesh  (because  it  is  "highly
         likely" that his linguistic background  is  Noakhali,  Bangladesh).
         Noakhali is in the Chittagong Division of Bangladesh,  that  is  to
         say the division closest to Rakhine State in Burma, where  Rohingya
         is  spoken.  There  are  many  possible   explanations   in   these
         circumstances for the appellant speaking some Rohingya  other  than
         him being a Rohingya citizen of Burma who fled to Bangladesh"

 9. The appeal was thereby dismissed, with the Tribunal concluding that the
    Appellant had not  established  himself  to  be  either  Burmese  or  a
    Rohingya;  the apparent explanation for the  Appellant  being  able  to
    speak that language being that he is  from  the  border  area  and  has
    therefore picked it up.




    Error of Law

10. Mr Khan submitted that the Tribunal's first  error  was  one  of  fact.
    Noakhali is not, contrary to the Judge's  finding,  anywhere  near  the
    Burmese border. It might be in Chittagong, a huge state, but it  is  in
    fact some 270km by  road  from  Cox's  Bazaar,  the  nearest  populated
    crossing point and  the  place  where  the  Appellant  claims  to  have
    initially lived.  This  error  is  material  because  it  goes  to  the
    Tribunal's explanation as to how the Appellant might  have  learned  to
    speak Rohingya.     The grounds of appeal  include  a  helpful  map  to
    illustrate the point. Mr McVeety conceded that this ground is made out.
      He  further  agreed  that  the  reasoning  in  this  respect  is  not
    particularly clear. The insinuation in the passage (set out  above)  is
    that this Bangladeshi  Appellant  learned  the  language  from  Burmese
    refugees living in the border area, but there is no  clear  finding  to
    that effect, nor any assessment of whether a  more  likely  -  or  even
    reasonably likely - explanation is that the  Appellant  is  in  fact  a
    Rohingyan refugee himself.


11. Mr Khan next submitted that the Tribunal erred in its approach  to  the
    Sprakab report. He relied on the dicta in Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department v MN and KY [2014] UKSC 30 to the effect that decision-
    makers should avoid simply looking  to  Sprakab's  conclusions:  it  is
    incumbent on any Tribunal to examine such reports critically  in  light
    of all of the evidence. It  is  important  that  the  strength  of  the
    reasoning therein  is  examined.  There  is  particular  difficulty  in
    adopting Sprakab's conclusions where they are  expressed  in  terms  of
    'certainty' or 'near certainty'. The analyst will  only  have  examined
    one part of the evidence, whereas the Tribunal will be making a  global
    appraisal.  Mr Khan submits that this is just what has  happened  here.
    The Sprakab analyst could not  speak  Rohingyan.  It  was  his  or  her
    evidence, accepted by the Tribunal, that the entire interview had taken
    place in Bengali.  It  was  on  that  basis  that  the  conclusion  was
    reached, with a "very high" degree of  certainty,  that  the  Appellant
    spoke the kind of Bengali spoken in Noakhali.  As  illustrated  in  the
    paragraph above, that gave very little assistance to  the  Tribunal  in
    determining why the Appellant might speak Rohingyan. I find this ground
    to be made out. Much of the reasoning in the determination is concerned
    with the Sprakab report, but none of  it  grapples  with  that  central
    issue.


12. Finally, Mr Khan submitted that the approach taken to the  letter  from
    the  Bangladeshi  High  Commission  was  flawed  for  unfairness.   The
    Appellant had been advised  that  he  should  contact  the  Bangladeshi
    authorities and seek a passport. That was because the burden lay on him
    to prove that he is in fact Burmese; in this  case  that  involved  him
    proving a negative, ie that he is not Bangladeshi. He did so,  and  the
    resulting letter is dated the 18th October 2016. It is not on a  formal
    letterhead but bears the High Commision's address at the top, is signed
    by a TM Jobaer, who is designated a 'Minister (Consular)' and bears  an
    official stamp.   We know that the Presenting Officer had sight of this
    document before the hearing in  April  2017,  since  she  went  to  the
    trouble of conducting a check on whether there is in fact a  TM  Jobaer
    working at the Bangladeshi High Commission. She found that  there  was.
    She did not challenge the  veracity  of  the  letter  in  either  cross
    examination or submissions.

13. Notwithstanding the Respondent's position the Tribunal  found  that  no
    reliance could be placed upon the  letter.  Three  reasons  are  given.
    First that the application form was not produced. Mr  Khan  points  out
    that neither the Tribunal or Respondent had put the Appellant on notice
    that this was a document he should produce.   It is not even  clear  if
    there was ever an application form, or whether Mr Jobaer  simply  wrote
    in response to an enquiry. Second, the Tribunal finds it to be  "highly
    improbable" that TM Jobaer would have written a letter on paper without
    a letterhead. Again, Mr Khan  submits  that  this  is  unfair.  If  the
    Tribunal was concerned  about  this  matter  it  should  have  put  the
    Appellant on notice  of  this  forensic  challenge  and  given  him  an
    opportunity to remedy the perceived defect in the evidence. Finally the
    Tribunal rejects the letter because it has already found the  Appellant
    not to be credible. Whilst this might be a questionable application  of
    the Tanveer Ahmed[1] principles, this was not a point taken by Mr Khan,
    who was content to focus  on  the  procedural  unfairness.  Mr  McVeety
    accepted that this ground was made out, and I entirely agree.  The HOPO
    had not challenged the letter. In contrast she had submitted  evidence,
    by way of a printout of embassy staff, capable  of  supporting  it.  In
    those circumstances the Tribunal  should  have  put  the  Appellant  on
    notice  that  it  had  concerns  about  the  lack  of  letterhead   and
    application form and given him an opportunity to respond.

14. With the consent of the Secretary of State, the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is found to contain errors of law such that it must
    be set aside.



    The Re-Made Decision


15. The evidence in support of the Appellant's claim is as follows:


              i) He speaks Rohingyan. The First-tier Tribunal found as  fact
                 that this is so (he had given all of  his  evidence  before
                 the Tribunal in Rohingyan).    Ethnologue notes  that  this
                 is  a  language  spoken  in  the  Cox's  Bazaar   area   of
                 Bangladesh, amongst the population  of  Rohingyan  refugees
                 from Burma.


             ii) The Family Book. This states  on  the  front  that  it  was
                 issued in Banu Khali 1 to  the  head  of  household  'Norul
                 Islam' . The Appellant's  name  is  listed  amongst  family
                 members as the eldest son, born in 1986.  The book contains
                 ledgers relating to food entitlement for the family  (rice,
                 daal, oil etc) which show that food was received against  a
                 date stamped in the  book  -  the  first  date  stamped  is
                 (illegible) November 1992; the  last  is  (illegible)  July
                 1994. The book  contains  similar  records  in  respect  of
                 medical treatment received by  family  members.  The  first
                 treatment recorded is in February 1993 when  the  Appellant
                 was treated for worms. The last is  on  the  5th  September
                 1994 when his sister is treated for  the  same  affliction.
                 Other illnesses recorded during the two  years  covered  in
                 the book include fever and malaria. The entries in the book
                 are recorded in various handwritings. The date  stamps  are
                 of various depth of colour  and  clarity,  suggesting  that
                 they were made using different stamps/ink  pads.  The  book
                 itself appears to be worn around  the  edges  and  to  have
                 sustained some damage to the front cover.


            iii) The letter from the  Bangladeshi  High  Commission.  Mr  TM
                 Jobaer writes "you have applied for a Bangladeshi  passport
                 on 11-10-16. But your  document  reveals  that  you  are  a
                 Myanmar national. As such, we are  unable  to  provide  you
                 with  a  Bangladeshi  passport".  I  read   this   document
                 alongside the printout provided  by  the  HOPO  before  the
                 First-tier Tribunal confirming that TM Jobaer does work  at
                 the Bangladeshi HC.

             iv) His evidence has been consistent at its core.


16. The Respondent submits that the following  matters  weigh  against  the
    Appellant:


              i) The Family Book would have been required by the Appellant's
                 family in the camp in order to access  basic  services,  as
                 illustrated  by  the  contents.  It  is  submitted  to   be
                 implausible that his  father  would  have  given  him  that
                 document, rather than retain it for the use of  the  family
                 in the camp. The refusal letter further  asserts  there  to
                 have been  alterations  to  some  of  the  handwriting  and
                 "abrasions" to some of the pages. The UNHCR note that these
                 books are all old, predating 1993, and that  they  did  not
                 contain security features; as such they are susceptible  to
                 tampering such as the adding/omission of names.  It is  not
                 inconceivable that the Appellant simply bought the book  to
                 bolster a false claim for asylum.


             ii) It is not considered plausible  that  the  Appellant  would
                 have been able to escape from a hole in the  fence  in  the
                 refugee camp, nor that the authorities would have  released
                 him on bail having arrested him  and  threatened  him  with
                 deportation to Burma.

            iii) It is not plausible that the Appellant's  boss  would  have
                 helped him in the manner claimed.

             iv) The Sprakab report indicates that the  Appellant  does  not
                 speak the kind of Bengali spoken in Dhaka, which  indicates
                 that he may not have spent  as  long  in  the  city  as  he
                 claims.

17. I find that the Appellant has demonstrated, to the  lower  standard  of
    proof, that he is in fact a national of Myanmar of Rohingyan ethnicity.




18. The fact that he has been largely consistent  in  his  telling  of  his
    account is not a matter that I attach very  significant  weight  to.  A
    learned story can be consistent, just as a true account might very well
    become confused.

19. I am minded to attach significant weight to the  now  uncontested  fact
    that he speaks Rohingyan. There was no evidence at  all  before  me  to
    indicate that native Bangladeshis are able to speak that language.  The
    people in Cox's Bazaar  who  use  Rohingyan  do  so  because  they  are
    Rohingyans from Burma.   I find it wholly improbable that the Appellant
    has learnt a whole language in order to found a false asylum  claim.  I
    also find it improbable, although less  so,  that  he  has  managed  by
    chance, perhaps by having Rohingyan friends, to 'pick it up'. If he had
    made friends in the refugee community it is altogether more likely that
    they would learn Bengali from him, given that they were all  living  in
    Bangladesh. The  fact  that  the  Appellant  speaks  Rohingya  strongly
    indicates that he is of Rohingyan origin. It also tends to suggest that
    he originates from Burma.

20. I attach significant weight to the Family Book. As to the  plausibility
    point made by the Respondent, and adopted by the First-tier Tribunal, I
    accept that it is a submission of some force.  The  Appellant's  family
    would have needed that book in order  to  obtain  services  within  the
    camp. His evidence, however, was that his family were planning to leave
    the camp very shortly after  the  Appellant  had  gone.   Whatever  the
    reason for that, we cannot surmise. People in  desperate  circumstances
    make desperate choices. I accept that there  is  good  reason  why  the
    Appellant is unable to offer an explanation for his  father's  actions:
    he was eight years old and he did what  he  was  told.   Although  this
    point is not relied upon by Mr McVeety for the sake of  completeness  I
    address the point made by the First-tier Tribunal, that  there  was  no
    need for the Appellant to have  this  book  because  he  speaks  fluent
    Bengali so could have passed for a local if questioned by the police. I
    discount this point: it is not the evidence that the Appellant was able
    to speak fluent Bengali when he left the camp, nor  indeed  immediately
    thereafter. He would have needed that document  for  several  years  to
    prove his identity, and there is no reason why he would  have  disposed
    of it.

21. The book itself is entirely consistent with the Appellant's account, in
    terms of the make-up of his family, and the dates that they were in the
    camp. Although I have only been given a copy, it is apparent from  that
    that the book is appropriately aged.   I bear  in  mind  the  objective
    evidence that these books were easily tampered with, given the lack  of
    security features, but it is clear from the page entitled  'members  of
    family' that this page has  not  been  altered.  The  Appellant's  name
    appears third in a list of seven, and so cannot have been simply  added
    to an existing book. I am unable to tell, looking at the  copy  I  have
    been  given,  what  the  Respondent  means  when  she  says  that   the
    handwriting has been altered in places. In the medical notes there  are
    some words added in parenthesis, which I think refer to  pharmaceutical
    prescriptions. I have been unable to identify any  "abrasions".  Before
    me Mr McVeety did not elaborate on what these  might  be.   As  I  note
    above the entries in the book all have the appearance of being made  by
    different people at different times. It appears to me to be  authentic,
    and I place significant weight upon it.


22.  I  attach  some  weight  to  the  letter  from  the  Bangladeshi  High
    Commission. This Tribunal is familiar with documents from  institutions
    in and of South Asia, and I do not think that the lack of letterhead is
    itself unusual. Absent a challenge to  the  document's  veracity  I  am
    prepared to treat it as genuine. I note that the Respondent has been in
    possession of Mr Jobaer's contact details since at least April 2017 and
    no attempt has been made to contact him. The letter is nevertheless  of
    only limited weight, since it does not indicate the extent to which the
    Appellant tried to demonstrate that he might be entitled to Bangladeshi
    nationality.   What can be inferred from the language used by Mr Jobaer
    is that he was provided with the  Family  Book,  a  document  which  he
    treated as genuine, and which established to  his  satisfaction,  as  a
    representative of the Bangladeshi government, that  the  Appellant  was
    formerly a Rohingyan refugee living in Bangladesh.

23. I have assessed the plausibility of the  Appellant's  account.  For  my
    part there is nothing at all in it  that  I  find  to  be  implausible.
    Parents across South Asia might send their eldest sons -  as  young  as
    eight - off to find work. The Appellant was sent away  with  two  other
    young men whom his  parents  knew  from  the  camp.  There  is  nothing
    inherently implausible in that. Nor in in my view is it  unlikely  that
    the Appellant would manage to save money, or that his boss of  some  20
    years would help him in the way he describes  -  I  bear  in  mind  the
    evidence that the Appellant was a full time assistant in a  small  shop
    and the two men no doubt had built up a good relationship.


24. In my view the only evidence that really weighs against  the  Appellant
    is the Sprakab report, which concludes that the variety of Bengali that
    he speaks is associated with Noakhali as  opposed  to  Dhaka.  This  is
    plainly at variance with the Appellant's own evidence  about  where  he
    lived, and where  he  learnt  Bengali.    There  may  be  a  number  of
    explanations for that. The analyst might be wrong.  The  Appellant  may
    have lived in Dhaka amongst migrants from Noakhali  and  so  picked  up
    their vernacular. The Appellant might be lying about what he was  doing
    in Bangladesh all of that time. I have given careful  consideration  to
    the latter possibility, but have concluded that it  cannot  defeat  the
    Appellant's case.   That is because the evidence in his favour is  such
    that I am satisfied, on the lower standard  of  proof,  that  he  is  a
    Rohingyan who formerly lived in Balu Khali 1.  What he was doing in the
    intervening years cannot change that.

25. Accordingly I allow the  appeal,  since  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    expressly conceded that if the Appellant is a national  of  Myanmar  of
    Rohingyan ethnicity, then his appeal must be allowed.



    Decisions

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and it is set aside.


27. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal.

28. There is an order for anonymity.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          27th November 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] TA v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] UKIAT 00439

