
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/12587/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 November 2016                       |On 13 December 2016              |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                 MS S A M O
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal against the  decision  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Loughridge dismissing an appeal on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds.

 2) The appellant was born on 25 January 1984  and  is  from  Kuwait.   The
    basis of her asylum claim is that she is an undocumented Bidoon.

 3) The appellant first claimed asylum in 2010, very shortly after entering
    the UK.  She then appealed against the refusal  of  her  asylum  claim.
    Her appeal was dismissed by Judge Bircher in January 2011.   A  similar
    appeal by the appellant's sister, Amal, was also dismissed.

 4) Another sister of the appellant, Wassen, also brought an appeal against
    the refusal of an asylum claim.  This appeal was heard in February 2011
    before Judge Battersby, who found Wassen to be an undocumented  Bidoon.
    The appellant's current position is that as  her  sister,  Wassen,  was
    found to be an undocumented Bidoon the likelihood is that she  also  is
    an undocumented Bidoon.

 5) The respondent's position in relation to this is  that  the  appeal  by
    Judge Battersby was made on the basis of the evidence  before  him  and
    showed that on that occasion he was satisfied  to  the  lower  standard
    that Wassen was an undocumented Bidoon.   As  Judge  Loughridge  points
    out, at paragraph 10, the respondent's position in effect was that  the
    decision by Judge Battersby was incorrect.  Further light  is  cast  on
    this by a country guideline decision made in 2013 about the meaning  of
    an undocumented Bidoon.  This decision is  NM  (Documented/undocumented
    Bidoon: risk) Kuwait CG [2013] UKUT 00356.  This  concerns  a  security
    card issued in Kuwait known as an "green card".   As  Judge  Loughridge
    records at paragraph 17, green cards are issued by a body known as "the
    Bidoon Committee", which  has  exclusive  authority  to  determine  all
    matters touching upon nationality or  official  documentation  for  the
    Bidoon.  Between 1996 and 2000 there was an opportunity for Bidoons  to
    register with the Bidoon Committee and to be issued with  green  cards.
    The green card has to be renewed either  annually  or  once  every  two
    years.  The significance of the decision in NM was that to be  accepted
    as undocumented a Bidoon had to show not, as previously  thought,  that
    they had no civil identification documents, such as, in particular,  an
    ID card, but that they did not have a green  card.   If  an  individual
    possessed a green card the individual would be regarded as a documented
    Bidoon.  This is because, as Judge Loughridge pointed out at  paragraph
    19, the green card leads to access to benefits such as health care  and
    education.  It is further  stated  in  NM,  as  pointed  out  by  Judge
    Loughridge at paragraph 20, that green cards are not always renewed and
    that  those  who  are  not  able  to  renew  their  green   cards   are
    undocumented, despite previously being documented.

 6) Judge Loughridge considered the decision by  Judge  Battersby  allowing
    the appeal by the appellant's sister,  Wassen.   Judge  Loughridge  was
    hindered by having only a partial copy of Judge  Battersby's  decision.
    It appears that the even numbered pages of the decision  were  missing,
    perhaps not having been  copied  when  the  decision  was  promulgated.
    Judge Loughridge  noted  at  paragraph  24  that  Judge  Battersby  had
    approached the issue of  green  cards  in  a  different  way  from  the
    approach in NM.  Judge Battersby relied on a dictum  of  Sedley  LJ  as
    authority  for  the  proposition  that  possession  of  a  green  card,
    paradoxically, confirmed a person's status as an  undocumented  Bidoon.
    Judge Battersby appears to have been satisfied with the authenticity of
    Wassen's green card.  Judge Loughridge points out  that  following  the
    decision in  NM  the  possession  of  a  green  card  was  regarded  as
    confirming status as a documented Bidoon as a matter of fact.  Although
    Judge Loughridge was not aware of the full  citation  of  the  case  in
    which Sedley LJ considered this matter it appears to have been referred
    to under the name SA, and to be an appeal to the Court of Appeal from a
    decision by Judge Martin.

 7) Judge Loughridge considered that  Judge  Battersby's  conclusion  about
    Wassen should not be regarded as reliable.  This  was  because  it  was
    based on a finding that possession of a green card confirmed status  as
    an undocumented Bidoon,  whereas  the  country  guideline  case  of  NM
    subsequently established that the opposite was correct.

 8) Quite properly Judge Loughridge also considered the decision  by  Judge
    Bircher in the earlier appeal by the appellant.  In this  appeal  Judge
    Bircher took the view that the appellant's green card was not authentic
    but having regard to her and  her  family's  life  in  Kuwait  she  was
    nevertheless a documented Bidoon.  At  paragraph  27  Judge  Loughridge
    observed that the issue of the green card did not  form  the  basis  of
    Judge Bircher's decision and seems to have had little  significance  to
    the outcome.

 9) The appellant's position before Judge Loughridge  was  that  her  green
    card expired in  2007  and  she  was  undocumented  thereafter.   Judge
    Loughridge regarded this as a new submission, in  terms  of  Devaseelan
    [2002] UKIAT 00702 and required proper consideration.  In the  view  of
    Judge Loughridge, at paragraph 28,  it  was  appropriate  to  re-assess
    whether the green card was authentic.

10) At paragraph 29 Judge Loughridge observed that there was "no particular
    reason" to conclude that the appellant's green card was not  authentic.
    The difficulty for the appellant  was  that  there  was  absolutely  no
    evidence about what happened in 2007,  when  her  green  card  expired.
    There was no evidence about whether there was any attempt to renew  the
    green card and if so, what happened.  Judge Loughridge referred to  the
    decision in KD (Bidoon - destroyed documents) Kuwait [2008] UKAIT 00086
    in which the Tribunal  concluded  that  a  Bidoon  who  destroys  their
    documents does not by this reason alone become an undocumented  Bidoon.
    By the same logic, Judge Loughridge concluded that a  Bidoon  who  does
    not  seek  to  renew  a  green  card  does  not  automatically   become
    undocumented.  The appellant's evidence was that she knew nothing about
    her green card but was given it by her father when she decided to  come
    to the UK.  If this was correct it would appear that there were few, if
    any, situations in which she needed to  use  a  green  card  to  access
    services and, accordingly, it was entirely plausible that at some stage
    her father, who appeared to have obtained the green card for her, might
    simply have decided not to renew it.

11) At paragraph 30, Judge Loughridge concluded that  it  was  "simply  too
    speculative" to find that an attempt was made to renew the  appellant's
    green card in 2007 but this was unsuccessful.  If the appellant's green
    card, which expired in July 2007, was indeed the last  green  card  she
    possessed, that situation had not been shown to be due to an  inability
    to renew the card, even on the basis of the lower  standard  of  proof.
    By analogy with the decision  in  KD,  the  appellant  was  not  to  be
    regarded as having become undocumented at that time.  The test was  not
    simply one of possession of a green card but whether a green  card  was
    available.  Given that the appellant was clearly  registered  with  the
    Bidoon committee, in the absence of any evidence that  renewal  of  her
    green card was refused, the judge clearly could not make a  finding  to
    the effect that a green card was not available to her.   There  was  no
    reason to suppose that if the appellant returned to  Kuwait  she  would
    not be able to obtain a green card from the Bidoon committee.

Application for permission to appeal

12) The application for permission to appeal made much  of  the  fact  that
    Judge Loughridge did not have a complete copy of the decision by  Judge
    Battersby in respect of the  appellant's  sister,  Wassen.   The  judge
    erred by drawing conclusions from an incomplete  decision.   The  judge
    had refused an adjournment for the  purpose  of  obtaining  a  complete
    copy.

13) It is further contended in the application that the  judge  found  that
    the green card was authentic but  in  so  doing  ignored  the  original
    finding by the  respondent  that  the  card  was  not  authentic.   The
    respondent changed her position without any  change  in  the  evidence.
    The judge also disregarded the decision of Judge Bircher, who found the
    card to be inauthentic.  It was pointed out that the appellant  herself
    could not confirm that the card was authentic as it was obtained by her
    father.  It was not clear on what basis Judge Loughridge had  concluded
    that the card was genuine.  The judge did not take account of  relevant
    matters and failed properly to elucidate the findings made.

14) The application then refers to the renewal of the green card.   It  was
    contended that even if the appellant had been a  documented  Bidoon  in
    2007 she was no longer documented.  The case of NM confirmed  that  the
    ease of renewal of green cards varied widely and arbitrarily.  This was
    consistent with the submission for the appellant.  While there  was  no
    evidence confirming a failed attempt to renew the card,  this  was  not
    surprising.  The evidence did not show that the Bidoon committee  would
    provide written  confirmation  of  refusal.   The  date  of  the  older
    sister's green card was not apparent from the incomplete  copy  of  the
    decision in respect of her appeal.

15) Permission to appeal was granted principally  on  the  basis  that  the
    judge arguably erred in relying upon  an  incomplete  decision  by  the
    judge in the sister's appeal.

16) The respondent submitted a rule 24 response dated 11  May  2016.   This
    observes that the judge  was  aware  of  the  missing  pages  from  the
    sister's decision.  The  judge  noted  that  part  of  the  reason  the
    sister's appeal was allowed was because she  was  in  possession  of  a
    green card, contrary to the guidance in the  case  of  NM.   The  judge
    concluded that the appellant's green card was authentic but  there  was
    no evidence as to why it was not renewed from 2007 onwards.  The burden
    was on the appellant to provide this evidence.  The judge was  entitled
    to come to the findings made and gave  cogent  reasons  for  so  doing.
    While the previous decision in respect of the appellant found the  card
    not to be authentic, the judge noted that this did not  form  the  main
    reason why the  appeal  was  dismissed.   The  judge  directed  himself
    properly in relation to Devaseelan.

Submissions

17) In his submission on behalf of the appellant Mr Winter pointed out that
    owing to a change of location by the  appellant  she  had  changed  her
    representatives.  He further pointed out that the relationship  between
    the appellant and her sister Wassen had been established by a DNA test.



18) Turning to the decision by Judge Battersby in  respect  of  Wassen,  Mr
    Winter submitted that the appellant's new solicitors had  attempted  to
    obtain a full copy of the decision  but  both  the  appellant  and  her
    sister had only the odd numbered pages, as  did  the  Home  Office.   A
    request had been made to the Tribunal for a full copy but this had  not
    been received.  Mr Winter pointed out that an  adjournment  application
    had been made before the First-tier Tribunal as recorded  at  paragraph
    24.  Judge Loughridge was unfair not to grant an adjournment as he drew
    conclusions from the sister's decision when it  was  unclear  how  such
    conclusions had been reached.  At paragraph 24 Judge Loughridge  stated
    that the issue  in  the  appeal  heard  by  Judge  Battersby  concerned
    Wassen's husband's political activity but this was an unfair finding.

19) Mr Winter accepted that the decision in NM caused difficulties for  the
    appellant.  It was unclear what Judge  Battersby  had  said  about  the
    green card in Wassen's appeal.  In the  present  appeal  there  was  an
    inconsistency of approach.  The respondent said the green card was  not
    authentic.  This had been  followed  by  Judge  Bircher  in  the  first
    appeal.  In the later appeal Judge Loughridge appeared to  accept  that
    the card was authentic.  It was not clear on what basis the  judge  had
    made this finding.  Judge Loughridge referred to Devaseelan  but  there
    was no evidential basis  on  which  to  conclude  the  green  card  was
    authentic.  The judge was not entitled to conclude that the green  card
    was authentic on the basis of the sister's appeal when there were pages
    missing from Judge Battersby's decision and it was not clear what  part
    the green card had played in that decision.

20) Mr Winter continued that even if the green card was  authentic  it  was
    still an error for Judge Loughridge to have found the appellant was not
    undocumented.  He should have found that the appellant did not renew or
    could not renew her card.  The decision in NM confirmed  that  ease  of
    renewal varied greatly.  There was an inconsistent approach to renewal.



21) Mr Winter continued that at paragraph 37 Judge Loughridge  had  decided
    that it was not just possession of a green card  that  was  significant
    but the availability of the green card.   This  was  addressed  in  the
    application for permission to appeal.  It was not speculative to assume
    that the appellant  was  unable  to  renew  her  green  card.   Written
    refusals were arbitrary.  It was not apparent  what  the  date  of  the
    sister Wassen's green card was because a decision  in  respect  of  her
    appeal was incomplete.

22) For the respondent, Mrs O'Brien submitted that the  burden  of  showing
    unfairness was on the appellant.  The appellant's proposition was  that
    her appeal should succeed on  the  basis  of  her  sister's  successful
    appeal.   There  was  a  time  lag  between  the  two  appeals.   Judge
    Loughridge had been entitled not to adjourn but to proceed on the basis
    of the evidence presented.  It was fair to say  that  Judge  Loughridge
    had been correct in clarifying the rationale as  to  why  the  sister's
    appeal had succeeded.  Judge Loughridge referred to  the  Secretary  of
    State's position at paragraph 10 of  the  decision.   At  paragraph  24
    Judge Loughridge set out what could be extracted from the  decision  by
    Judge Battersby.  It was not incorrect to say  that  Judge  Battersby's
    decision was made with reference to the green card but it could not  be
    said for  sure  what  the  full  reasoning  was  without  the  complete
    decision.  There  was  enough,  for  the  judge  to  make  findings  at
    paragraph 24, particularly  after  the  passage  of  time  since  Judge
    Battersby's decision was issued.

23) Mrs O'Brien continued that the question of  the  green  card  had  been
    affected by the country guideline  case  of  NM  and  in  this  respect
    paragraphs 28-29 of Judge Loughridge's decision  were  correct.   Judge
    Loughridge had applied the up-to-date position.  Judge  Loughridge  did
    not depart from the principles in Devaseelan but was required  to  make
    up-to-date findings.

24) Mrs O'Brien further submitted that Judge Loughridge's  observations  at
    paragraph 28  about  Judge  Bircher's  decision  were  correct.   Judge
    Bircher did not concentrate on the green card  in  her  decision.   Her
    decision was based on credibility matters and only brief  consideration
    was given to the green  card.   There  was  a  difference  of  emphasis
    between the two decisions.  Judge Loughridge's decision was  consistent
    with NM.  Judge Loughridge took into account Judge  Bircher's  findings
    on credibility.  The appellant was had not established that she was  an
    undocumented Bidoon.  There  was  no  error  in  the  decision  and  no
    unfairness.

25) In response Mr Winter said that the adjournment request to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had been made both in writing and  orally.   It  was  not
    clear when a written request was  made.   Attempts  had  been  made  to
    obtain the decision by Judge Battersby.  This was unfairness  in  terms
    of Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 00418.  Mr Winter further submitted  that  Judge
    Bircher had agreed with  the  Home  Office  position  set  out  in  the
    original refusal letter of 8 December 2010, at paragraphs 45-47,  where
    it was concluded that no weight was attached by the respondent  to  the
    green card.  Judge Bircher's findings were relied upon  in  the  second
    refusal letter of 7 September 2015.  Nevertheless, according  to  Judge
    Loughridge at paragraph 27 no reasons were given by Judge Bircher as to
    why  the  green  card  was  considered  not  authentic.   This  was  an
    insufficient basis for Judge Loughridge  to  make  a  contrary  finding
    about the authenticity of the green card.  The appellant  was  entitled
    to rely on the previous decision by Judge Bircher.  The judge found the
    appellant had not made efforts to renew her green card while  accepting
    it was genuine.  Mr Winter submitted that the decision  should  be  set
    aside and a further hearing appointed.

Discussion

26) Taking the issue of  the  adjournment  application  first,  it  may  be
    observed  that  Judge  Loughridge  dealt  with  this  very  briefly  at
    paragraph 24, stating no more than that an adjournment would not be  "a
    proportionate way  forward."   The  use  of  the  term  "proportionate"
    indicates that Judge Loughridge was having  regard  to  the  Tribunal's
    overriding objective.  As Mrs O'Brien pointed out,  the  appellant  had
    had adequate time following her sister's appeal to obtain a  full  copy
    of the decision.  Indeed, Mr Winter acknowledged that  the  appellant's
    new solicitors had still not been able to obtain a  full  copy  of  the
    decision.  It may be that a full copy is not available.

27) The material issue, however, is not so much whether a full copy of  the
    decision should or could be provided, but whether the  judge  erred  in
    relying upon the partial copy.  Certainly  some  of  the  findings  and
    parts of the reasoning were incomplete.  Nevertheless  the  conclusions
    were clear and, in particular, Judge Battersby's reasoning was clear as
    to why possession of a green  card  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant's sister, Wassen, was an undocumented Bidoon.  All  that  was
    missing was the full citation of the case in  which  it  was  seemingly
    accepted in a decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  that  a  Bidoon  in
    possession of green card was nevertheless undocumented.  The  essential
    point is that the particular finding on which the decision in  Wassen's
    appeal was based is no longer regarded as correct following the country
    guideline decision of 2013 in NM.

28) The timing of the  events  leading  to  the  present  appeal  are  very
    significant, and were rightly considered to be so by Judge  Loughridge.
    The appellant's first asylum claim was made in  November  2010  and  an
    appeal against the refusal of this claim was dismissed in February 2011
    by Judge Bircher.  At that time the appellant did not  seek  permission
    to appeal.  The appeal by the appellant's sister, Wassen, was heard  in
    February 2011 before Judge Battersby.  Judge  Battersby's  decision  is
    dated 3 March 2011, by which time the appellant's  appeal  rights  were
    exhausted.

29) Subsequently, in March 2013 the appellant  lodged  further  submissions
    relying, at least in part, on the  outcome  of  Wassen's  appeal.   The
    appellant  produced  DNA  tests  dated  August  2012  establishing  her
    relationship with Wassen.  It is these further submissions  which  were
    refused in a decision by the  respondent  of  7  September  2015.   The
    resulting difficulty for the appellant is precisely this.   In  January
    2013, shortly before she made her further submissions to the respondent
    in March, the Upper Tribunal heard the case of  NM  which  led  to  the
    country  guideline  decision  to  the  effect  that   the   appellant's
    possession of a green card showed not  that  she  was  an  undocumented
    Bidoon, as was accepted in Wassen's appeal, but precisely the opposite,
    namely that the appellant  was  a  documented  Bidoon.   The  appellant
    having thought on the basis of the outcome of her sister's appeal  that
    success was now within her grasp by claiming that having a  green  card
    meant she was an undocumented Bidoon, this was snatched away  from  her
    by the decision in NM, made around the same time as the  appellant  was
    making her further submissions.

30) All of this is recorded by Judge Loughridge in his  decision,  although
    not in such stark terms.  In particular, although possession of a green
    card played a material part in success of Wassen's  appeal,  possession
    of a green card by the appellant would  lead  to  the  opposite  result
    because of the decision in NM.  This conclusion  was  one  which  Judge
    Loughridge was entitled to reach,  notwithstanding  that  some  of  the
    pages of the decision in Wassen's appeal  were  missing.   The  missing
    pages did not affect Judge Loughridge's reasoning on this matter and to
    this extent the missing pages were not material.

31) Accordingly, there was no prejudice or unfairness to the  appellant  by
    the decision not to adjourn.

32) The appellant presents a stronger argument in relation to the issue  of
    whether Judge Loughridge was entitled  to  find  that  the  appellant's
    green card was authentic, whereas Judge Bircher in the  earlier  appeal
    by the appellant had found that it was not.  It  is  submitted  in  the
    application for permission to appeal that the respondent's position  on
    the authenticity of the green card has been inconsistent.   It  is  not
    the position of the respondent with which I am concerned,  however,  so
    much as the position of Judge Loughridge.

33) Judge Loughridge clearly had before him a full copy of Judge  Bircher's
    decision in  the  2011  appeal  by  the  appellant.   Judge  Loughridge
    considered whether in terms of Devaseelan he was obliged to follow  the
    finding on the authenticity of the green card made by Judge Bircher  in
    the earlier appeal.  He concluded at paragraph 27 that he was not.   Mr
    Winter suggested that this finding was not adequately reasoned but I do
    not agree with  this  contention.   Judge  Loughridge  found  that  the
    finding made by Judge Bircher about  the  green  card  was  not  wholly
    material to the outcome of that appeal.

34) In this regard Mr Winter referred me to the respondent's refusal letter
    of 7 September 2015 and the reasons for refusal at paragraphs 14-24, in
    particular.  Part of  Judge  Bircher's  decision  is  quoted  in  these
    paragraphs.  Judge Bircher states that the appellant's card was  issued
    in 2007.  Judge Bircher then records that this was inconsistent with  a
    COIS report of 2009 which stated  that  "alien  reporting  cards"  were
    issued by the government until the middle of 2003 when they  ceased  to
    renew them.

35) It must be accepted that Judge  Loughridge  does  not  refer  to  Judge
    Bircher's particular finding in this respect, which is to be  found  at
    paragraph 16  of  her  decision.   Judge  Loughridge  makes  it  clear,
    however, for instance at paragraph 25, that the decision in NM  affects
    our understanding of the significance of the green card.  Judge Bircher
    clearly did not have the benefit  of  the  decision  in  NM  and  Judge
    Loughridge was entitled to assume  that  any  findings  made  by  Judge
    Bircher without regard to NM should, where relevant, be reviewed.  This
    was a position that Judge Loughridge was entitled to take.

36) The application for permission to appeal questions the basis  on  which
    Judge Loughridge was entitled to find that the appellant's  green  card
    was authentic.  This  ground  appears  to  have  been  drafted  without
    conscious irony but it completely disregards the point  that  when  the
    appellant made her further submissions in 2013 she appears to have done
    so on the basis that not only was her green card authentic but, in  the
    light of her sister's appeal, it should be taken as  showing  that  she
    was an undocumented Bidoon simply because of her possession of  such  a
    card.  So the question of why Judge Loughridge  found  the  appellant's
    green card to be authentic may be answered in part by the fact that the
    appellant herself relied upon its authenticity,  at  least  implicitly,
    when making her further submissions.  If the  appellant  now  seeks  to
    show that the card is not authentic, the  burden  will  be  on  her  to
    produce evidence to show it is not authentic.  For reasons which I have
    already considered, Judge Loughridge was not  bound  by  the  basis  on
    which Judge Bircher had found the green card  was  not  authentic.   In
    effect, to a large extent Judge Loughridge accepted the appellant's own
    contention that her green card of 2007 was genuine.

37) This brings me  to  the  final  challenge  to  the  decision  by  Judge
    Loughridge, which was based  on  the  issue  of  whether  even  if  the
    appellant had  an  authentic  green  card  in  2007,  she  was  now  an
    undocumented Bidoon and the Judge was  wrong  to  find  otherwise.  The
    difficulties of renewing a green card in terms of NM are referred to in
    the grounds.

38) I think it is worth pointing out that Judge  Loughridge,  at  paragraph
    30, eschewed a claim on behalf of the appellant  that  any  attempt  to
    renew the green card in 2007 was or would have been, unsuccessful.  The
    judge considered that there were a variety of possibilities.  The judge
    considered that there were a variety of possibilities.   One  of  these
    was that her father may simply have decided not to renew the green card
    because of the few situations in which the appellant  needed  it.   The
    essential finding by the judge was that the  appellant  had  not  shown
    that she had been unable to renew the card, even to the lower  standard
    of proof.

39) I consider this was a finding which the judge  was  entitled  to  make.
    The burden of proof was on the  appellant  to  show  that  she  was  an
    undocumented Bidoon.  She had sought to show that in  2007  she  had  a
    green card, which following the decision in NM would mean that she  was
    not undocumented unless she could also show that renewal  of  the  card
    had been refused.  The appellant, however, did  not  give  evidence  to
    this effect.  Judge Loughridge was faced with  a  complete  absence  of
    evidence as to why the appellant did not have  a  green  card  for  any
    period later than 2007.  In the absence of  evidence  it  was  for  the
    judge to address the issue of where the burden of proof lay and, as the
    judge found at paragraph 30, it was for the appellant to show that  she
    was unable to renew her card.

40) Mr Winter presented a further ancillary argument  to  the  effect  that
    Judge Loughridge was wrong to equate the circumstances of a Bidoon  who
    does not seek to renew a green card with a Bidoon who has  deliberately
    destroyed their green card or  other  identity  documents.   I  do  not
    consider it as necessary to address this point in depth.  The essential
    point was that the appellant had not  shown  either  that  she  or  her
    father acting on her behalf was unable to  renew  the  green  card  and
    accordingly she had not shown she was an undocumented Bidoon.

Conclusions

41) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

42) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

43) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for  anonymity.   I  have
    not been asked to make such an order and I see no reason  of  substance
    for doing so.


Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

