
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA124642015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th May 2017                               |On 22nd May 2017              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     IA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Halim of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Withwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Raymond promulgated on 16 December 2016, in which  her  appeal  against
    the Respondent's decision to refuse her asylum and human  rights  claim
    dated 9 September 2015 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on  [  ]  1971  who  first
    entered the United Kingdom in 2006 and has  remained  unlawfully  since
    then.  The Appellant made an  unsuccessful  application  for  leave  to
    remain on medical grounds in 2011 and claimed asylum on  27  May  2014,
    further to which she  underwent  a  screening  and  substantive  asylum
    interview.  The Appellant's asylum claim was  on  the  basis  that  she
    feared return to Nigeria because of  her  past  experiences  there  and
    because of her HIV status.  She also relied on her medical  conditions,
    family and private life in the United Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent refused the Appellant's claim on the basis that she  did
    not accept that she would be at risk of harm on return from her  family
    members or others due to her health conditions and  did  not  find  the
    Appellant to have been credible, in part due to the delay in making her
    asylum claim until 2014, some eight years after she  first  arrived  in
    the  United  Kingdom.   In  any  event,  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
    protection for the Appellant in Nigeria  and  she  had  the  option  of
    internal  relocation.   The  Respondent  refused  the  application   on
    humanitarian protection grounds and under  Articles  2  and  3  of  the
    European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  for  the  same  reasons.   The
    Respondent also refused the application  on  family  and  private  life
    grounds as the Appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE or Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances for a grant of leave to remain outside of the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. The Respondent gave separate consideration as to whether the  Appellant
    should be granted discretionary leave to remain on  the  basis  of  her
    medical conditions, but declined  to  do  so  on  the  basis  that  her
    conditions were not at a critical stage and treatment was available  in
    Nigeria.

 5. Judge Raymond dismissed the appeal on 16 December 2016 on all  grounds,
    finding that the Appellant was not credible, would not face a real risk
    of persecution on return to Nigeria and that her medical conditions did
    not meet the high threshold for a grant of  leave  to  remain  on  that
    basis.

The appeal

 6. The Appellant appeals the decision of Judge Raymond on a single  ground
    that he failed to apply the  'Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and  Sensitive
    Witness Guidance 2010' (the "Guidance").  The consequences of this were
    a material error of law by not considering the evidence before  him  in
    accordance with that Guidance.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Osborne on 17 March 2017.

Findings and reasons

 8. At the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing,  the  Appellant's  representative
    sought a ruling that the Appellant was a vulnerable witness pursuant to
    the Guidance which was refused  by  Judge  Raymond  for  the  following
    reasons:

    "... there was no report on the mental health  of  the  appellant.   Dr
    Oyebode himself as has been noted did not have access to such a report.
     Also because the Practice Direction and Guidance highlight  that  this
    is a matter which ought to  be  properly  canvassed  at  CMRH  so  that
    appropriate steps can be taken at the substantive hearing if  required.
    Whereas this matter had come before me on 06.07.16 when  the  appellant
    was represented by Ms H Manis of  Mishcon  de  Reya,  representing  the
    appellant on a pro bono basis, and she was in  the  throes  of  leaving
    that firm so as to set up her own firm,  the  present  representatives,
    and there had not been a smooth transfer of the file so as to take into
    account this transition, so that Ms Manis would have formally  been  on
    the record.  This also placed Ms Manis in difficulty over  the  medical
    evidence (presumably Dr Oyebode)  which  had  been  requested  and  not
    pursued it would seem.  In the circumstances I  considered  it  in  the
    interests of justice to allow  an  adjournment  with  Directions.   The
    matter had already been adjourned on 11.01.16 on a paper  CMHR.   There
    was therefore plenty of opportunity to address the  desirability  of  a
    vulnerable witness ruling before the matter came back before me."

 9. At the hearing before me, Counsel  for  the  Appellant  relied  on  the
    written grounds of appeal and submitted that the refusal to  apply  the
    Guidance was plainly a material error of law as its  application  would
    have affected the First-tier Tribunal's assessment of the  evidence  to
    determine the appeal.  In response to the reasons  Judge  Raymond  gave
    for refusing to apply the Guidance, it was submitted that the  Guidance
    continued to apply and matters must be considered at  the  commencement
    of the substantive hearing even if not identified at the CMHR and  that
    there was medical evidence as to the Appellant's  mental  and  physical
    health available to the First-tier Tribunal.

10. In reply,  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the
    Guidance was considered and three reasons were given for it  not  being
    applied; first, that  there  was  no  previous  request  at  the  CMHR;
    secondly; there was no medical  report  and  thirdly,  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice to proceed given the previous adjournments of  the
    appeal.  It was apparent from the decision that the Appellant gave only
    brief oral evidence and was not subject to onerous questioning so there
    was no material effect of not applying  the  Guidance  at  the  hearing
    itself.  Overall, given that the First-tier  Tribunal  considered  that
    the Appellant's account was inherently  implausible  and  made  adverse
    credibility findings,  the  failure  to  apply  the  Guidance  was  not
    material to the outcome.

11. The Guidance covers appellants  who  are  vulnerable  and/or  could  be
    sensitive witnesses.  That includes those with mental  health  problems
    and could include those who are vulnerable because of what has happened
    to them in the past.  The First-tier Tribunal had before  it  a  letter
    dated 12 of  August  2016  from  Dr  Mahazu  Yisa  and  Dr  Eben  Jones
    confirming that the Appellant was a registered patient  with  them  and
    that amongst other conditions, she was suffering  from  severe  anxiety
    and depression, currently being treated with an SSRI and being followed
    up by Dr McMullen, a Consultant Liaison Psychiatrist at King's  College
    Hospital.  The letter confirms that the  Appellant  remains  vulnerable
    and has a fragile mental state and that given  her  significant  mental
    and physical health problems, there was a  request  for  a  sympathetic
    approach when considering her appeal.

12. There was also a psychiatric report from Dr Oyebode which  stated  that
    he did not have any details of the  Appellant's  psychiatric  care  and
    that there was no clinical evidence of  a  primary  mood  disorder.  He
    found that the Appellant's mental  state  was  stable  further  to  the
    treatment she was currently receiving at  that  time.  He  did  however
    record that on examination the Appellant was taciturn and sombre with a
    low mood, also that she  reported  sleeping  difficulties  and  regular
    suicidal thoughts.

13. There was sufficient evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  that  the
    Appellant was a vulnerable  adult  and  prima  facie  fell  within  the
    Guidance. For the Judge to have stated that  there  was  no  report  on
    mental health of the appellant is firstly  not  entirely  accurate  and
    secondly ignores the evidence that he did have  before  him  of  mental
    health difficulties, even if not self-contained in a  specific  report.
    In light of the material that was available it was irrational  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal to not apply the Guidance  for  lack  of  a  mental
    health report.

14. The Guidance makes specific provision for what should happen before the
    substantive hearing, during the hearing and in the determination of the
    appeal. So far as is material for the present appeal,  it  provides  as
    follows for what is to happen before the substantive hearing:

    4. Insofar as it is possible potential issues and solutions  should  be
    identified at a CMRH or prehearing review and the case papers noted  so
    that the substantive hearing  can  proceed  with  minimal  exposure  to
    trauma or further trauma of vulnerable witnesses or appellants.  It  is
    important not to assume  that  an  individual  will  want  specific  or
    particular arrangements made.

    5. Where there has not been a pre hearing review or CMRH or the parties
    were inadequately  prepared  these  matters  should  in  any  event  be
    considered at the commencement of the substantive hearing.

15. The Guidance goes on  to  note  that  the  primary  responsibility  for
    identifying vulnerable individuals lies with the party calling them but
    representatives may fail to recognise vulnerability.  Given  the  noted
    difficulties of the Appellant's representative at the CMHR and problems
    with the transfer of the file, it was all the more  important  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal to give fresh consideration of  the  Guidance  when
    raised at the substantive hearing.

16. It is clear from the Guidance that the failure to  raise  its  possible
    application  at  a  CMHR  does  not  mean  that  the  Guidance  has  no
    application to either the substantive hearing or the  determination  of
    the appeal.  To the contrary, it expressly states  that  these  matters
    should be considered at the commencement of  the  substantive  hearing.
    Although Judge Raymond considered  the  request  for  the  Guidance  to
    apply, his failure to actually apply it because it was only  raised  at
    the substantive hearing was clearly not in accordance with the Guidance
    and an error of law.

17. The further reason given as to past  adjournments  has  no  bearing  on
    whether the Guidance should have been applied to this Appellant. It may
    have been the case  that  a  further  adjournment  of  the  substantive
    hearing should have been considered if adjustments for the  conduct  of
    the hearing were required and could not be accommodated on the day, but
    that was by no means inevitable and the application of the Guidance did
    not necessarily lead to any delay in the determination of the appeal.

18. As to the determination  of  the  appeal  following  the  hearing,  the
    Guidance, so far as material to the present appeal, states as follows:

    14. Consider the evidence, allowing for possible different  degrees  of
    understanding by witnesses and appellant compared to those who are  not
    vulnerable, in the context of evidence from others associated with  the
    appellant and background evidence before you. Where  there  were  clear
    discrepancies in the oral evidence, consider the extent  to  which  the
    age, vulnerability or sensitivity of the witness was an element of that
    discrepancy or lack of clarity.

    15. The decision should record whether the Tribunal has  concluded  the
    appellant (or a witness) is  a  child,  vulnerable  or  sensitive,  the
    effects the Tribunal considered the  identified  vulnerability  had  in
    assessing the evidence before it and as to  whether  the  Tribunal  was
    satisfied with the appellant had established his or  her  case  to  the
    relevant standard of proof. In  asylum appeals, weight should be  given
    to objective indications of risk rather than necessarily to a state  of
    mind.

19. As the  Guidance  had  not  been  applied  to  the  Appellant  at  all,
    paragraphs 14 and 15 as to the assessment of evidence and determination
    of the appeal had not been considered or applied.  This  amounts  to  a
    material error of law as the Appellant has not had the benefit  of  the
    Guidance when her claim and evidence was  assessed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It is not appropriate to suggest  that  there  would  be  no
    material difference because of the finding of  inherent  implausibility
    of the claim given that that conclusion was reached without taking  the
    vulnerability into account.    It is impossible for me to find that the
    outcome of the appeal would inevitably  have  been  the  same  had  the
    Guidance been properly applied to the Appellant.  I therefore allow the
    appeal and set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  dated  16
    December 2016 and remit the appeal for a complete rehearing.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for a de-novo hearing.

Directions to the parties

 1. This appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  complete
    rehearing.  There are no preserved findings of fact.


 2. Any further evidence relied upon shall be  filed  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and served upon the other party no later than 14 days prior to
    the hearing of the remitted appeals.


 3. The Appellant is to file with the First-tier Tribunal  and  serve  upon
    the Respondent no later than 14  days  prior  to  the  hearing  of  the
    remitted appeal a skeleton argument setting out relevant  issues,  with
    reference to evidence and case-law.


 4. The First-tier Tribunal may issue further directions as required.

Directions to administration

 1. The appeal is remitted and shall be heard at the Harmondsworth  hearing
    centre on a date to be fixed by that centre.


 2. The remitted appeal is to be  listed  before  any  Judge  except  Judge
    Raymond.


 3. There is a time estimate of 3 hours for the hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]                  Date         18th May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


