

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/12472/2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 16th August 2018                     |On 13th November 2018            |
|                                             |                            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     AS
                           (Anonymity Order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Seehra, instructed by Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  AS.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings




         1. On 28th January 2013 the Court of Appeal, by  consent,  allowed
            the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  Upper
            Tribunal dismissing his appeal and set aside the decision.  The
            case was remitted to the Upper Tribunal to be re-heard  on  the
            basis of reasons  set  out  in  an  accompanying  statement  of
            reasons.

         2. The findings of fact  established  were  retained,  the  appeal
            being remitted to the Upper Tribunal on the  grounds  that  the
            Tribunal  had  failed  to  engage  with   evidence   that   the
            appellant's  family  had  been  visited  by  the   Sri   Lankan
            authorities seeking the appellant's brother and the designation
            of the family as an LTTE family, and that the Tribunal had made
            errors of fact in relation to the detention of the appellant in
            2007 and the existence of prior CID records.

         3. There then followed considerable delay. On  25th  June  2018  I
            directed the parties to file an agreed schedule of facts by 4th
            July 2018 and that the respondent file a skeleton  argument  by
            the same time and date. A hearing on 6th July 2018  had  to  be
            adjourned because the directions had not been complied with.  I
            made further directions:

              . Additional documents that were not  before  UTJ  Hanson  are
                admitted and relevant pages will be marked;

              . Clear photos will be served;

              .  Both  parties  will  re-do  their  skeletons  and   written
                submissions.

         4. On 2nd October 2009 the  appellant's  claim  for  international
            protection and his application for leave  to  remain  on  human
            rights grounds was refused by the respondent. He appealed,  and
            his appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal for reasons
            set out in a decision promulgated on 24th November 2009. He was
            granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. His  appeal
            to the Upper Tribunal was dismissed for reasons set  out  in  a
            decision promulgated on 8th March 2012. On  28th  January  2013
            the Court  of  Appeal  allowed  an  appeal  against  the  Upper
            Tribunal decision, without determining the merits, set it aside
            and remitted it to the Upper Tribunal  for  redetermination  on
            the basis of paragraph 5 of the Statement  of  Reasons,  namely
            "with the findings of fact already being preserved"

         5. The preserved findings of fact and pertinent conclusions  drawn
            by UTJ Hanson are as follows:

             a) The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 12 December
                1981. He first arrived in the UK on  28  February  2008  and
                claimed asylum on arrival.

             b) The appellant was arrested and detained  on  three  separate
                occasions: 2000 (ill-treated, questioned about LTTE members,
                released  without  charge  on  payment  of  a  bribe),  2005
                (arrested by Minor Crimes Branch, attended court,  not  ill-
                treated, case against him that he was suspected  of  helping
                the LTTE dismissed, released) and  2007  (arrested  in  mass
                round up; permitted to report  at  leisure,  detained,  ill-
                treated; released on payment of a  bribe;  questioned  about
                his brother S).

             c) his family were questioned about his  brother,  S,  in  2009
                when they were detained.

             d) S's whereabouts are unknown.

             e) Evidence provided to the UNHCR Working Group on Enforced and
                Involuntary disappearances.

             f) Appellant has never been a member or supporter of LTTE

             g) the family were known as an LTTE family and were detained in
                a special camp;

             h) No credible evidence of  the  existence  of  an  outstanding
                arrest warrant against the appellant or that  the  appellant
                had signed a confession.

             i) the appellant had/has relatives in the LTTE - an uncle and a
                brother.

             j) the  appellant  has  attended  a  demonstration  in  the  UK
                supporting Tamil Elam.

             k) Despite extensive cross-examination by the Senior Presenting
                Officer during the hearing, the respondent made  no  headway
                in mounting a strong challenge to the general credibility of
                the appellant's account.

             l)  Bar  the  three  arrest/detentions  relied  upon   by   the
                appellant,  he  experienced   no   difficulties   with   the
                authorities.

             m) The detention in 2000, which lasted 15 days, occurred during
                a time when there was no peace in Sri Lanka

             n) At the time of his arrest in 2005, those suspected of  being
                supporters of the LTTE were not treated in "such  relatively
                civilised" manner as the appellant was.

             o) In 2007 the army undertook a general round up  in  the  area
                following a grenade attack  on  a  sentry  point;  the  army
                checked the appellant's ID card, told him to report  to  the
                military camp and did not arrest him. His release, which was
                after payment of a bribe, indicated he was of no interest to
                the authorities.

             p) There is no credible evidence that there will  be  a  record
                indicating that he was an actual or suspected LTTE member

             q) The appellant  has  no  criminal  record  and  there  is  no
                credible evidence  that  the  appellant  is  subject  to  an
                outstanding arrest warrant.

             r) There  is  no  credible  evidence  the  appellant  signed  a
                confession or similar document such as to put him at risk on
                return.

             s) Although the appellant claims he  was  asked  to  become  an
                informer in 2000, there is no credible evidence of any  harm
                coming to him as a result of not having done so even  though
                he was detained on 2 further occasions and checks were  made
                in his home area.

             t) He has some scars.

             u) There is no  credible  evidence  he  will  be  suspected  of
                raising funds for the LTTE.

             v) He claims not to have an ID card now; he has  relatives  who
                were in the LTTE.

             w) EG v UK (Application number 41178/08) - the court  does  not
                consider that the duty to report is  comparable  to  jumping
                bail  which  is  granted  in   the   context   of   criminal
                proceedings.

             x) If CID records only go back 5 years, there will  only  be  a
                reference to the 2007 detention.

         6. Since the hearing before UTJ Hanson  on  8th  March  2012,  the
            appellant claims that

            i.    his family continue to be  harassed  and  enquiries  made
                about the appellant's whereabouts;

            ii.   that his family have  been  told  they  must  inform  the
                authorities if returns to his home area;

            iii.  that the authorities  know  he  escaped  from  his  third
                detention;

            iv.   his brother A has been arrested and illtreated

            v.    the family have continued to search for S

         7. On 16th August 2018, Mr Melvin initially  submitted,  prior  to
            oral evidence, that it had not been accepted that the appellant
            had an uncle in the LTTE  although  he  acknowledged  that  the
            First-tier Tribunal had accepted that there was a family member
            who was a ranking LTTE Member. It was  a  little  difficult  to
            understand Mr Melvin's submission in the light of the  findings
            of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  UTJ  Hanson.   After   some
            discussion, Mr Melvin acknowledged that it  was  accepted  that
            the appellant had an uncle, now deceased, who was an officer in
            the LTTE but, he submitted, given he had died some 20 years ago
            there was scant evidence that this featured in any interest  in
            the appellant since the dismissed appeal. I note that  this  is
            not what is claimed by the  appellant.  The  appellant's  claim
            that he is at current risk, centres around the matters set  out
            at paragraph 6 above.

         8. The core issues now relied upon by the appellant are the arrest
            and ill treatment of his brother A and the  continued  interest
            in his family including that his family  are  being  questioned
            about  his,  the  appellant's,  whereabouts;  that  every  time
            further enquiries are made about the  missing  brother  S,  the
            family are visited.

         9. The starting point in determining this  appeal  is  the  strong
            findings  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  UTJ  Hanson.  The
            appellant's credibility has been generally  upheld.  Mr  Melvin
            sought to undermine the appellant's credibility before  me  and
            pointed  to  what  he  described  as  inconsistencies  in   the
            appellant's evidence. Notably he  referred  to  the  background
            material which indicated that there was public interest in  the
            investigation of the disappearances and that  this  meant  that
            there would be little adverse reaction to enquiries being  made
            about those who had disappeared; that there was scant  evidence
            to support the contention that  continuing  to  make  enquiries
            about the disappearance of S so many years ago would result  in
            the whereabouts of the appellant being investigated. He did not
            accept that A had been arrested and illtreated; in  support  of
            that submission he relied upon what he described as the lack of
            evidence from A, that the appellant's mother  has  not  herself
            been threatened or ill-treated, that the sheer numbers of those
            who have disappeared renders it inherently unlikely  that  this
            appellant would be sought and that there was a distinct lack of
            evidence  that  the  appellant's  family  had  previously  been
            detained in an LTTE specific camp as claimed.

        10. Of the current claims made by the appellant, it was  previously
            concluded that the appellant's release from detention  in  2007
            indicated he  was  of  no  interest  to  the  authorities.  The
            appellant's mother's evidence includes further evidence of  the
            family detention in the Zone  4  LTTE  camp  in  2009  and  the
            resettlement document. Her evidence includes  that  there  were
            questions  not  only  about  her  son  S  but  also  about  the
            appellant's 'escape'. The appellant's earlier evidence is  that
            he was questioned during his 2007 detention about his brother S
            and this was one of the  factors  that  led  to  his  'escape'.
            Although it was earlier found that he had been released and was
            of no further interest, this was in the absence of the  further
            evidence that has been provided by his mother. Although he  may
            well have been released in 2007 because at that time he was  of
            no further interest, the mother's evidence (which although  not
            tested  through  cross  examination,  is  consistent  with  the
            background country evidence) is that there was some  indication
            that her son S had been seen alive in military custody.   These
            are all matters that impact upon the appellant's account. Given
            the appellant's general overall credibility  and  the  findings
            already made and retained, I accept that the appellant's family
            were detained in 2009 as of interest to the authorities because
            of their LTTE links.

        11. The explanation by the appellant as  to  the  lack  of  written
            evidence from his brother because he was young, had  been  ill-
            treated and that making a witness  statement  could  in  itself
            lead to further problems, was, in the context of  the  findings
            already made and  the  context  of  Sri  Lanka,  credible.  The
            appellant before me did not seek to embellish his evidence.  He
            did not claim to be  active  in  any  oppositional  Sri  Lankan
            groups; he was plainly a young man who in  effect,  'keeps  his
            head down' save for attending recognised demonstrations such as
            Martyrs Day, Remembrance Day which would  not,  on  their  own,
            bring him to adverse attention. That A would not wish to  place
            himself at possible further risk was  clearly  plausible.  That
            the appellant's mother  would  want  to  continue  to  seek  an
            explanation  for  her   son   S'   disappearance   is   plainly
            understandable and credible, even though it  could  potentially
            place her at some personal risk. The fact that there  are  many
            thousands of unresolved disappearances does not mean  that  she
            would not pursue her own son's disappearance  in  the  hope  of
            findings something out.

        12. There was no contradiction in the  appellant's  evidence.  That
            there is no record in the witness statement of his  mother,  to
            her being asked about the appellant's activities in the UK  and
            that he did not know exactly what she was asked is not, in  the
            context  of  this  appellant's  overall  credibility  and   the
            findings already made, mean that he has embellished his current
            account. In the context of the evidence it is credible that  he
            is merely stating that he does not know because she did not say
            specifically what they were asked.

        13. The evidence that A had been arrested and ill-treated is cogent
            and credible - the appellant has  been  found  to  be  credible
            despite  strong  challenge  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal;  his
            evidence  about  the  camp  has  been  corroborated  by   later
            unchallenged documentation; he has not  given  inconsistent  or
            implausible evidence in the overall context of  the  conditions
            in Sri Lanka. I find that A was  arrested  and  ill-treated  as
            claimed.

        14. Mr Melvin's submission that  the  failure  of  the  appellant's
            family  to  make  complaints  to  the  authorities  about   the
            continuing harassment was supportive of a finding  of  lack  of
            credibility that  there  was  continuing  harassment  does  not
            consider the context: an uncle who  was  an  LTTE  officer  was
            killed, a brother has disappeared, one son (the appellant)  has
            been detained on three  occasions  and  questioned  about  LTTE
            contacts and S, the family were rounded up and kept in an  LTTE
            activist camp and interrogated and another  son  (A)  has  been
            detained and ill-treated,. The  appellant's  evidence  that  it
            was, he thought, in 2014 that they stopped complaining  because
            of the links between the HR organisations and  the  authorities
            who were involved in the harassment was credible.  Although  it
            was  put  to  the  appellant  that  the   evidence   was   that
            restrictions were lifted in 2015, his response that he did  not
            believe that this  would  impact  on  the  harassment  was  not
            indicative of a contradiction but indicative of  the  suspicion
            of the HR organisations and the authorities  that  he  and  his
            family would continue to have, such  suspicion  being  credible
            given   the   years   of   oppression,    violence,    arrests,
            disappearances and ill-treatment.

        15.  Leaving  Sri  Lanka  without  difficulty  is  not  necessarily
            indicative of a lack of adverse interest  by  the  authorities.
            Interest, or lack of interest, in any event changes with  time.
            Release from detention does not necessarily indicate a lack  of
            further  interest  given  the   prevalence   of   bribery   and
            corruption.

        16. The standard of proof in a claim for  international  protection
            is a low standard. This  appellant  has  been  found  generally
            credible. The current authoritative case law does indicate that
            there has generally been a change in the situation in Sri Lanka
            and that there are many individuals who in the past would  have
            been at risk of being persecuted but are no  longer.  But  that
            does not rule out the fact that there  remain  individuals  who
            may not fall within those specifically identified in  the  case
            law as being at risk,  continuing  to  be  at  real  risk.  The
            exercise in determining the likelihood of  real  risk  is  fact
            specific in the context of the country evidence available.

        17. Although it is established that diaspora activity is a  primary
            risk factor, lack of such activity does not mean a person would
            not be at real risk. This appellant does  not  fall  within  an
            identifiable category of activist or those seeking to undermine
            the Sri Lankan State. There is recent (February 2018)  evidence
            in the country material that  there  is  ongoing  surveillance,
            harassment and intimidation in the north of Sri Lanka. Although
            this would not of itself amount to persecutory  treatment,  the
            profile of this family,  taken  in  the  round,  including  the
            recent  arrest  of  his  brother,   A,   and   the   continuing
            questioning, the LTTE family history and the departure  of  the
            appellant from Sri Lanka to the UK are  all  matters  that  for
            this appellant place him at real risk of being persecuted if he
            is returned to Sri Lanka. There is a real risk that on  arrival
            in Sri Lanka he would be questioned such that  his  antecedents
            would be identified and these, combined with  the  events  that
            have taken place since he left Sri Lanka would be  such  as  to
            place him at real risk of interrogation, detention and torture.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and was set aside.

    I  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  against  the   refusal   of
    international protection (asylum) by allowing it.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


                                    Date 6th November 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
