

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/13182/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 December 2016                          |On 23 December 2016           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                               A N (Sri Lanka)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr C Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure
to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal allowing his appeal on human rights grounds, but dismissing
   the appeal against her decision to refuse  him  international  protection
   under the Refugee Convention or on humanitarian protection grounds.   The
   purpose of his appeal is to upgrade the protection he receives from leave
   to remain under Articles 2, 3 and 8 ECHR,  on  the  basis  of  his  PTSD,
   psychosis and severe depression, and on private and family life  grounds,
   to full refugee status or humanitarian protection.

Background

2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka and a former full member  of  the
   Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE).  He is a Tamil, who  joined  the
   LTTE,  fighting  as  a  cadre  from  1991-1996  and  then  training   for
   intelligence work, which he continued to undertake  for  the  LTTE  until
   2007.  He supplied meals,  and  sent  vehicles  to  nearby  battlefields.
   During his time working with the LTTE,  his  unit  was  attacked  by  Sri
   Lankan forces and he sustained injuries to his  stomach  and  a  shrapnel
   injury to his head.  He recovered, and went back to supplying weapons for
   the LTTE to the 'fighting area'. The appellant's sister and brother  were
   also members of the LTTE.

3. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that  the  appellant  was  detained  and
   tortured in 1996, 2000 and 2006.  The details of the torture are given at
   [60]-[61] in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  are  not  in
   dispute.  There is no need to repeat them here.  The medical evidence  of
   Dr Arnold also records scarring supportive of the gunshot  wound  to  the
   appellant's stomach, and injuries 'typical' of shrapnel injuries  to  his
   head, and blast injuries to  his  face,  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   accepted.  The Judge also accepted, to the lower standard appropriate for
   protection claims, that the appellant had made a complaint to  the  Human
   Rights Commission of Sri Lanka in 2007 (the Sri Lankan HRC), acknowledged
   by a letter of 7 April 2008, a photocopy of which is in the bundle.

4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge rejected the appellant's evidence that  his
   mother and his wife have received visits from the CID or other Sri Lankan
   state authorities, looking for him in Sri Lanka.   He considered that  to
   be an embellishment  intended  to  bolster  the  asylum  claim.    Having
   refused inclusion in refugee protection, the  Judge  did  not  go  on  to
   consider whether the appellant as a former combatant for the LTTE  should
   be excluded under Article 1F of the Refugee Convention or  Article  12(2)
   of the Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC.

5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that  the  appellant  presented  a
   suicide risk and had mental health difficulties.  At  [95],  he  accepted
   that returning the appellant to Sri  Lanka  would  breach  his  protected
   rights under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.  In relation to Article 8  ECHR,  the
   First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the appellant cannot function at all
   without support, that financial and psychological support is provided  by
   the appellant's brother and sister-in-law in the United Kingdom,  and  is
   at a level which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  constituted  Kugathas
   dependency.  The Judge did  not  in  terms  find  that  the  relationship
   between the appellant and his brother amounted to family life,  but  that
   is the inevitable consequence of the findings he did  make.   The  appeal
   was also allowed under Article 8 ECHR.

6. The appellant appealed, contending that the decision failed  properly  to
   follow and apply the country guidance of the Upper Tribunal in GJ  (post-
   civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) and that,  as  a
   person who had given evidence to the Sri Lankan Human  Rights  Commission
   (HRC), he should be treated in the same way as those who  had  given,  or
   might give, evidence to the Lessons Learned and Reconciliation  Committee
   (LLRC) referred to in GJ, on the basis that the appellant  had  witnessed
   war crimes during the conflict, in particular,  his  own  torture.    The
   appellant relied upon MP and others v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
   Department [2014] EWCA Civ 829 in which Lord Justice Maurice Kay accepted
   at [37]-[38] that there may exist a potential risk category of those  who
   had given, or might give, evidence to other bodies.

7. The appellant further contended that as there were no findings as to  how
   the appellant was released, the appellant's  release  was  likely  to  be
   irregular and put him at risk on return, again relying on MP and  others.
   The appellant contended that there was a  'significant  likelihood'  that
   the appellant was recorded as an absconder, since he had failed to report
   as required, and that the First-tier Tribunal should have made a  finding
   as to whether the appellant was on a stop list, or the watch list.  A man
   in his mental state would not be capable of standing up to  any  scrutiny
   on return, if that were the case.

Permission to appeal

8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was  arguable  that
   the First-tier Tribunal Judge on the basis of a reasons challenge to  the
   adequacy of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  assessment  whether  the
   appellant fell within the risk categories identified in GJ,  and  on  the
   failure to make findings whether the appellant was on  a  stop  or  watch
   list.

Rule 24 Reply

9. In her Rule 24 Reply, the respondent stated  that  there  was  no  cross-
   appeal against the Article 3 decision in the  appellant's  failure.   The
   respondent responded to the grant of permission as follows:

         "...4.   It  is  submitted  that  the  grounds  amount  to  a  mere
         disagreement.  The grounds argue that the Judge did not  follow  GJ
         but the grounds ignore paragraphs 30 and 40 of  the  determination,
         with the representative asking to expand the  categories,  and  the
         case law is 4 years old.

         5. The Judge did apply GJ and made appropriate findings, please see
         paragraphs 58,  50  and  73-81.   The  Judge  did  not  accept  the
         appellant's brother's evidence regarding  the  authorities  looking
         for the appellant.

         6. The Judge made appropriate findings concerning the complaint  to
         the Human Rights Commission at paragraph 76. ..."

10. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

11. At the beginning of the hearing, I  explained  to  the  parties  that  I
   would  need  to  consider  both  inclusion  and  exclusion  from  refugee
   protection and humanitarian protection, in reaching  a  decision  whether
   the unchallenged leave to remain under Articles 2, 3 and 8 ECHR should be
   'upgraded' to refugee protection or humanitarian protection.

Inclusion: paragraph 339K

12. As far as inclusion is concerned, the appellant has satisfied the First-
   tier Tribunal Judge that he  was  subjected  to  torture,  and  therefore
   paragraph 339K of  the  Rules  (past  persecution  or  serious  harm)  is
   relevant:

         "339K.  The  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
         persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
         persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication
         of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
         that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated."

Exclusion:  Article 1F and Article 12(2)

13. However, the exclusion question also needs  to  be  considered,  in  the
   light of the guidance given by the Supreme Court in JS (Sri Lanka), R (on
   the application of) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2010]
   UKSC 15, in particular at [33] in the opinion of Lord Brown:

         "33.          There can be no doubt, as indeed article 12(3) of the
         Qualification Directive provides, that article 1F disqualifies  not
         merely those who personally commit war crimes but also  those  "who
         instigate or otherwise participate  in  the  commission  of  [such]
         crimes". Article 12(3) does not, of course, enlarge the application
         of article 1F; it merely gives expression to what is  already  well
         understood in international law. This is  true  too  of  paragraphs
         (b), (c) and (d) of article 25(3) of the ICC Statute, each of which
         recognises that criminal responsibility is engaged by persons other
         than the person actually  committing  the  crime  (by  pulling  the
         trigger, planting the bomb or whatever)  who  himself,  of  course,
         falls within article 25(3)(a). Paragraph (b) encompasses those  who
         order, solicit or induce (in the language of article 12(3)  of  the
         Directive, "instigate") the commission of the crime; paragraph  (c)
         those  who  aid,  abet,  or  otherwise  assist  in  its  commission
         (including providing the means for this); paragraph (d)  those  who
         in any other way intentionally contribute to its commission  (paras
         (c) and (d) together equating, in the language of article 12(3)  of
         the Directive, to "otherwise participat[ing]" in the commission  of
         the crime)."

   And at [24] in the same opinion:

         "24.   The  court  below  examined  a  number  of  domestic   cases
         concerning article 1F, cases for the most part decided by the  AIT.
         To my mind the most assistance is to  be  found  in  the  Court  of
         Appeal's judgment in KJ (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of  State  for  the
         Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 292,  a  case  concerning  a  Tamil
         whose surveying and reconnaissance work in support of LTTE military
         operations enabled these more accurately to target the  Sri  Lankan
         forces. Although the appellant was never involved in  any  conflict
         causing injury or death to civilians, the AIT nevertheless held him
         disqualified from refugee protection by reference to article  1F(c)
         - it was common ground that "acts  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
         principles of the United Nations" included acts of  terrorism  such
         as the deliberate killing of civilians  -  holding  "the  appellant
         must have known the  type  of  organisation  he  was  joining,  its
         purpose and the extent to which the organisation was prepared to go
         to meet its aims."

14. I gave the parties time during the hearing day to take instructions  and
   consider the position of the  appellant  under  Article  1F  and  Article
   12(2).   There  was  no  application  for  an  adjournment  and  I  heard
   submissions from Ms Akinbolu on exclusion.  Mr Avery chose  not  to  rely
   upon exclusion, as he had not prepared the point.

Submissions

15. For the respondent Mr Avery said that he had not  prepared  to  consider
   the appeal under exclusion, and that the respondent  had  not  taken  the
   point below.  The refusal letter accepted that the appellant had been  an
   LTTE member.  He would not  rely  upon  exclusion  in  this  appeal.   As
   regards  the  HRC,  Mr  Avery  contended  that  it  could   properly   be
   distinguished from the LLRC, which had been set  up  by  the  Sri  Lankan
   government to investigate human rights abuses.  The appellant's  argument
   regarding the analogy with MP (Sri Lanka) was weak:  it  had  never  been
   stated that this appellant wished  to  give  evidence  or  speak  out  in
   future.

16. As regards the  alleged  absconding  from  release  on  bail,  Mr  Avery
   observed that the detention in question  was  one  which  the  First-tier
   Tribunal did not accept as having occurred, since it took place  in  2011
   and on the appellant's account, he had been in the United  Kingdom  since
   2010.  The evidence of pursuit  also  had  not  been  accepted,  for  the
   reasons set out in the First-tier Tribunal decision.  The  appellant  was
   not a person who could be regarded as posing a risk in  the  diaspora  or
   contacting those in Sri Lanka who  might  be  attempting  to  revive  the
   conflict.  He did not come within the GJ factors and there was no present
   risk.

17. For the appellant, in relation to exclusion, Ms Akinbolu relied  on  the
   decision of the Court of Appeal in KJ (Sri Lanka) v  Secretary  of  State
   for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 292, referred to in  the  Supreme
   Court's decision in JS. She observed that at the material time  when  the
   appellant left Sri Lanka, the LTTE was the government in the North of the
   country, and was engaged in a political struggle by  way  of  civil  war.
   The appellant had not been involved in bombing, murder of  civilians,  or
   any  non-combat  situation.   He  was  not  sufficiently  close  to   the
   leadership for terrorist activities to be individually attributed to  him
   and was,  in  fact,  no  more  than  a  foot  soldier.   She  relied,  in
   particular, on KJ at [37]-[38].  The appellant should not be  fixed  with
   any terrorist aims or activities of the LTTE. It was for  the  respondent
   to meet  the  evidential  burden  of  showing  a  prima  facie  case  for
   exclusion, which she had not sought to do.

18. Turning to the wider issues on which permission had  been  granted,  and
   to inclusion under  paragraph  339K,  Ms  Akinbolu  reminded  me  of  her
   contention that the First-tier Tribunal had  failed  to  deal  adequately
   with the appellant's having given evidence to the Sri  Lankan  HRC  about
   the abuses perpetrated against him; that on his account, he had  departed
   irregularly from Sri  Lanka,  having  been  released  from  detention  on
   reporting conditions then absconded, after reporting only twice.

19. Ms Akinbolu acknowledged that the First-tier Tribunal had  not  accepted
   the evidence of the detention in question, nor that  of  the  appellant's
   brother, given at the hearing for the first time,  that  the  Sri  Lankan
   authorities had visited his family members in Sri Lanka to ask  where  he
   was.  However, it was not disputed that the appellant had given  evidence
   to the HRC and she contended that he remained at risk on that basis.  She
   did not seek to contend that the appellant had any  future  intention  to
   give evidence or speak out against the Sri Lankan authorities, and argued
   that the reference to paragraphs [36]-[38] in the decision of  the  Court
   of Appeal in MP (Sri Lanka) was neither helpful nor  determinative.   The
   appellant would rely on the GJ categories and his past  evidence  to  the
   HRC.

Discussion

20. The appellant has protection  from  removal  by  reason  of  his  mental
   health difficulties and the suicide risk he  presents.  In  practice,  he
   will not be returned, whatever the outcome of this appeal.

21. I begin my analysis of the grounds on which  permission  to  appeal  was
   granted  by  considering  whether  this  appellant  is  included  in  the
   categories  of  person  who  may  access  international  protection  (the
   inclusion analysis).  The appellant is a  person  who  has  already  been
   subject to persecution or serious harm (he  was  badly  tortured  in  Sri
   Lanka and has both physical scarring and PTSD).  Applying paragraph  339K
   respondent must show that there are good reasons to  consider  that  such
   persecution or serious harm will not be repeated if,  hypothetically,  he
   were returned to Sri Lanka now.

22. The appellant contends that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  make
   findings of fact about whether the appellant appears on a stop list or  a
   watch list, because he absconded from the  reporting  conditions  imposed
   upon him following his alleged detention in 2011,  which  the  First-tier
   Tribunal did not accept had occurred.  That is  a  request  to  interfere
   with the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning underlying the findings of  fact
   which it made. The best analysis of when  a  Tribunal  may  interfere  on
   appeal with a finding of fact by the First-tier Tribunal remains that  at
   [90] in the judgment of Lord Justice Brooke in R (Iran)  v  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982:

         "1. Before [a Tribunal] could set aside a decision of  [the  First-
         tier Tribunal] on the grounds  of  error  of  law,  it  had  to  be
         satisfied that the correction  of  the  error  would  have  made  a
         material difference to the outcome,  or  to  the  fairness  of  the
         proceedings.  This  principle  applied  equally  to  decisions   of
         adjudicators on proportionality in  connection  with  human  rights
         issues;

         2. A finding might only be set  aside  for  error  of  law  on  the
         grounds of perversity if it was irrational or unreasonable  in  the
         Wednesbury sense,  or  one  that  was  wholly  unsupported  by  the
         evidence.

         3. A decision should not be set aside  for  inadequacy  of  reasons
         unless the adjudicator failed to identify and  record  the  matters
         that were critical to his decision on material issues,  in  such  a
         way that the IAT was unable  to  understand  why  he  reached  that
         decision.

         4. A failure without  good  reason  to  apply  a  relevant  country
         guidance decision might constitute an error of law."

23. Before interfering with  a  finding  of  fact  made  by  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, therefore, I must be satisfied that such finding  is  perverse,
   Wednesbury unreasonable, wholly unsupported  by  the  evidence,  or  that
   there is an inadequacy of reasoning such as to amount to an error of law.
    It is always open to a Judge to accept  a  credible  Chiver  core  while
   rejecting part of the account, provided that  his  reasoning  is  proper,
   intelligible and adequate.

24. The appellant did not give oral evidence  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
   his Counsel submitting that  he  was  not  fit  to  testify.   The  Judge
   therefore had only the Home Office interview and the  brother's  evidence
   to assist him in deciding  whether  the  2011  detention  occurred.   The
   appellant told the respondent, and the First-tier Tribunal accepted, that
   he left Sri Lanka on 1 October 2010, travelling  via  India,  Africa  and
   Portugal before arriving in the United  Kingdom  in  September  2013  and
   claiming asylum at the airport. He says he gave evidence to  the  HRC  in
   2008, following detentions in 1996, 2000 and 2006.  However, elsewhere in
   his Home Office interview, the appellant said one of the  detentions  had
   been in 2011 (so, after his HRC evidence and after he left Sri Lanka,  on
   his original chronology).

25. The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant's  evidence  about  the
   claimed 2011 detention was muddled  and  unsatisfactory  because  of  the
   cognitive difficulties with which he has been left, following  the  abuse
   he suffered.  The rest of the appellant's account was accepted.   In this
   appeal, the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal at [58] for  finding
   that there was no 2011 detention, no release, and no  subsequent  pursuit
   of the appellant are adequate, and are  neither  Wednesbury  unreasonable
   nor wholly unsupported by the evidence.   I  decline  to  interfere  with
   those findings.  That being the evidence, while it would have been better
   to have an express finding that the appellant does not appear on  a  stop
   list or warned list,  there  is  no  material  error  by  the  First-tier
   Tribunal in failing to conclude that he does so appear.

26. That leaves the question of the  appellant's  evidence  to  the  HRC  in
   2008, following his three detentions in 1996,  2000  and  2006,  and  the
   torture he experienced then.   Contrary to  Mr  Avery's  submission,  the
   Human Rights Commission is not distinguishable from the LLRC on the basis
   that it was not set up by the Sri Lankan  government:   it  was,  by  the
   Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka Act no 21 of 1996.

27. However, the HRC and the LLRC are qualitatively different.  I  note  the
   acceptance by Ms Akinbolu that the appellant  has  no  intention  now  of
   giving evidence or seeking to speak out if he were to be returned to  Sri
   Lanka.

28. Such evidence as the appellant gave the HRC will already  have  appeared
   in its Annual Report: its reports, which are a matter of  public  record,
   do not name individuals and there does not appear to be one for  evidence
   given in 2008.  Ms Akinbolu has not produced any HRC reports.  I  am  not
   satisfied on the evidence before me that the appellant's evidence to  the
   HRC in 2008 creates any present risk of his being regarded as  a  current
   threat by the Sri Lankan authorities.

29. The LLRC is a different matter  altogether.   It  was  a  Commission  of
   Inquiry, set up after the  conclusion  of  the  civil  war,  mandated  as
   follows:

         "To inquire and report on the following matters that may have taken
         place during the period between 21 February, 2002 and 19 May, 2009,
         namely:

              . The facts and circumstances which led to the failure of the
                ceasefire agreement operationalized on 21 February 2002 and
                the sequence of events that followed thereafter up  to  the
                19th of May, 2009.

              . Whether  any  person,  group  or  institution  directly  or
                indirectly bear responsibility in this regard;

              . The lessons we would learn  from  those  events  and  their
                attendant concern, in order to ensure that there will be no
                recurrence;

              . The methodology whereby restitution to any person  affected
                by those events or their dependants or their heirs, can  be
                affected;

              . The institutional administrative and  legislative  measures
                which need to be taken in order or prevent  any  recurrence
                of such concerns in the  future,  and  to  promote  further
                national   unity   and   the   reconciliation   among   all
                communities, and to make  any  such  other  recommendations
                with reference  to  any  of  the  matters  that  have  been
                inquired into under the terms of the Warrant."

30. In September 2010 the LLRC published interim recommendations,  including
   proposals to examine the cases of long term detainees on  a  case-by-case
   basis, to publish the names of those in detention, and to issue  released
   detainees with a certificate of discharge  so  that  they  were  not  re-
   detained. That is much more individualised, and  those  who  proposed  to
   give evidence to the LLRC could expect their names to be made public.  As
   the Upper Tribunal  stated  in  GJ,  there  was  concern  that  the  LLRC
   investigations might lead to  war  crimes  charges  against  members,  or
   former members, of the Sri Lankan government  and  Sri  Lankan  military.
   The report, published in December 2011, has not  thus  far  had  such  an
   effect.

31. I am not satisfied, on this evidence, that there now exists  a  risk  of
   persecution or serious harm for this appellant on return to Sri Lanka, on
   the basis of the grounds advanced.  There has been no submission that the
   findings under Articles 2  and  3  ECHR  of  themselves  entitle  him  to
   international  protection   under   the   Refugee   Convention   or   the
   Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC. It is not necessary,  therefore,  for
   me to proceed to consider exclusion in detail.  If I had  been  satisfied
   that there was a real risk under Article 1A or Article 12, I  would  have
   had to do so and to recall the parties to enable the respondent  to  deal
   with exclusion, but on the basis of the submissions and  evidence  before
   me, I do not need to analyse the appellant's LTTE involvement  in  detail
   or whether he is an excluded person.

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  grant  leave  to  remain  on
   human rights grounds alone is sound and I uphold it.

DECISION

33. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.


   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.



Date: 21 December 2016                  Signed     Judith AJC Gleeson

                                        Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
