
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/07833/2014
                                                               AA/13325/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18 January 2018                     |On 22 January 2018                  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     ASA
                                     ABD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Ms Wilkins, Counsel
For the respondent:     Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original Appellants.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

       1. I have anonymised the  appellants'  names  because  this  decision
          refers to their asylum claims and medical evidence  regarding  the
          second appellant ('A2').


       2. The first  appellant  ('A1')  and  A2  are  brothers.   They  have
          provided distinct accounts in support of their  respective  claims
          for asylum, but their appeals were linked because of  some  common
          features between them.  In summary, they  both  fear  the  Taliban
          for  partly  overlapping  reasons.    A2   describes   generalised
          violence  and  killings  in  his  home  area,  as  well  as  being
          frequently beaten, taking part  in  executions,  being  threatened
          with beheading and a period of detention,  during  which  time  he
          was seriously harmed.  These events  took  place  when  he  was  a
          teenager or young man.  He came to the UK and  claimed  asylum  in
          2013, when he was 21.

       3. The appellants  appeal  against  a  decision  made  by  First-tier
          Tribunal ('FTT')  Judge  Gladstone  dismissing  their  appeals  on
          protection  and  human  rights   grounds.    She   comprehensively
          rejected the appellants' account and found their evidence and  the
          evidence  relied  upon  in  support  of  their  claims,  such   as
          corroborating evidence from witnesses and a country expert  report
          to be unreliable.

Vulnerability of A2

       4. I begin this decision by considering detailed  evidence  from  the
          Medical Foundation for the  Care  of  Victims  of  Torture  ('MF')
          regarding A2's mental health.  In a report dated 27 January  2017,
          Ms Salter, A2's treating psychotherapist, describes him as  having
          engaged in the clinical  services  of  the  organisation  since  4
          September 2015.  By the time of the hearing  he  had  attended  43
          psychological  therapy  sessions.    A   consultant   psychiatrist
          diagnosed him as having PTSD and he continued to  take  medication
          such as Olanzapine and Citalopram.  He was supported by  a  mental
          health support worker in the community.


       5. The report describes A2's poor mental health in  detail  including
          specific examples over  an  extended  period  in  support  of  the
          diagnosis of PTSD.  He is described as a highly  vulnerable  young
          man,  who  has   consistently   suffered   from   flashbacks   and
          dissociative episodes, consistent with 'complex  PTSD'.   Some  of
          his symptoms appear as life threatening when he  has  been  unable
          to distinguish  between  memories  of  past  trauma  and  what  is
          actually happening.  He has suffered from  suicidal  ideation  and
          self-harming  behaviour.   Ms  Salter  concludes  the  report   by
          setting out her significant clinical concerns should he  be  asked
          questions about his history outside a clinical setting, such  that
          he is unfit to give evidence.


       6. In a letter dated 28 April 2017  to  the  Asylum  Support  Housing
          Service  in  Manchester,  Ms  Salter  summarised   A2's   clinical
          presentation  as  set  out  in  her  report  and   supported   the
          application for A1 to be housed with him.

       7. At the beginning of the hearing before me, I made it clear to  the
          parties that A2 should be treated as  a  vulnerable  appellant  in
          accordance with the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of  2010
          ('the Guidance').  I noted that the MF  evidence  was  now  dated,
          but given the significant concerns in the report,  the  fact  that
          A2 had already taken part in 43  psychotherapy  sessions  and  the
          view of Ms Salter that he would still require treatment  for  many
          years to come, it remained appropriate to continue to  regard  him
          as vulnerable.  Ms Aboni entirely agreed that it  was  appropriate
          to regard A2 as a vulnerable appellant.

SSHD's concession

       8. I did not need to hear from Ms  Wilkins  because  Ms  Aboni  quite
          properly accepted the following at the beginning of the hearing:

           i) A2 should have been treated as a vulnerable appellant by  the
              FTT;
          ii) The failure to do so meant that the FTT failed to  apply  the
              Guidance when assessing the  evidence,  and  failed  to  make
              credibility findings with the Guidance in mind;
         iii) The MF report should have been treated as  'expert  evidence'
              in accordance with 3.3 of the respondent's 2015 asylum policy
              instruction on MF reports ('the API');
          iv) The FTT failed to properly address the detailed  evidence  in
              the carefully  prepared  MF  report  regarding  A2,  and  its
              credibility assessment contained errors of law as a result;
           v) The FTT committed material errors of law in its  approach  to
              the evidence of A2;
          vi)  It  was  difficult  to  separate  these  errors   from   the
              credibility findings in relation to A1;
         vii) In the circumstances, it was appropriate  to  set  aside  the
              decision in relation to both appellants and remit the appeals
              to the FTT.

Legal framework

       9. In AM (Afghanistan) v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123,  Sir  Ernest
          Ryder, the Senior President of  Tribunals,  considered  an  appeal
          involving a young man from Afghanistan with  a  claimed  traumatic
          history.   In AM's case the psychologist offered advice as to  how
          AM  could  obtain  effective   access   to   justice   given   his
          psychological difficulties.  It was agreed  before  the  Court  of
          Appeal that insufficient steps had been taken to ensure  that  the
          proceedings were fair.  The instant case differs from  AM  because
          the clear advice  from  the  psychotherapist  here  was  that  the
          appellant was unfit to answer any questions within  a  court  room
          setting.   A2  nonetheless  remained   a   vulnerable   appellant,
          entitled to a fair assessment  of  the  evidence  adduced  on  his
          behalf in light of the relevant Guidance.  Ryder LJ said  this  in
          AM (my emphasis):


                 "30. To assist parties and tribunals a  Practice  Direction
                 'First-tier and Upper Tribunal Child, Vulnerable Adult  and
                 Sensitive Witnesses', was issued by the  Senior  President,
                 Sir  Robert  Carnwath,  with  the  agreement  of  the  Lord
                 Chancellor  on  30  October  2008.   In   addition,   joint
                 Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 was issued  by  the
                 then President of UTIAC, Blake J and the  acting  President
                 of the FtT (IAC), Judge  Arfon-Jones.  The  directions  and
                 guidance contained in them are to be followed and  for  the
                 convenience of practitioners,  they  are  annexed  to  this
                 judgment. Failure to follow them  will  most  likely  be  a
                 material error of law. They are to be found in the Annex to
                 this judgment.


                 31.  The  PD  and  the  Guidance  Note  [Guidance]  provide
                 detailed guidance on the approach  to  be  adopted  by  the
                 tribunal to an incapacitated or vulnerable person. I  agree
                 with the Lord Chancellor's submission that there  are  five
                 key features:
                       a.   the   early   identification   of   issues    of
                       vulnerability is  encouraged,  if  at  all  possible,
                       before any substantive hearing through the use  of  a
                       CMRH or pre-hearing review (Guidance [4] and [5]);
                       b. a person who is incapacitated or  vulnerable  will
                       only need  to  attend  as  a  witness  to  give  oral
                       evidence where  the  tribunal  determines  that  "the
                       evidence is necessary to enable the fair  hearing  of
                       the case and their welfare would not be prejudiced by
                       doing so" (PD [2] and Guidance [8] and [9]);
                       c. where an incapacitated or vulnerable  person  does
                       give oral evidence, detailed provision is to be  made
                       to ensure  their  welfare  is  protected  before  and
                       during the hearing  (PD  [6]  and  [7]  and  Guidance
                       [10]);
                       d. it is necessary to give special  consideration  to
                       all of the personal circumstances of an incapacitated
                       or vulnerable  person  in  assessing  their  evidence
                       (Guidance [10.2] to [15]); and
                       e.  relevant  additional  sources  of  guidance   are
                       identified   in   the   Guidance    including    from
                       international bodies (Guidance Annex A [22] to [27]).


      10. At [33] Ryder LJ observed that the emphasis on  the  determination
          of  credibility  in  an  asylum  appeal  is  such  that  there  is
          particular force in the Guidance at [13] to [15], which states  as
          follows:


                 "13.The weight to be placed upon factors  of  vulnerability
                 may differ depending on the matter under appeal, the burden
                 and standard of proof  and  whether  the  individual  is  a
                 witness or an appellant.
                 14.Consider the evidence, allowing for  possible  different
                 degrees  of  understanding  by  witnesses   and   appellant
                 compared to those are not vulnerable,  in  the  context  of
                 evidence from others associated with the appellant and  the
                 background evidence before  you.  Where  there  were  clear
                 discrepancies in the oral evidence, consider the extent  to
                 which by  mental,  psychological  or  emotional  trauma  or
                 disability; the age, vulnerability or  sensitivity  of  the
                 witness was an element  of  that  discrepancy  or  lack  of
                 clarity.
                 15.The decision should  record  whether  the  Tribunal  has
                 concluded  the  appellant  (or  a  witness)  is  a   child,
                 vulnerable or sensitive, the effect the Tribunal considered
                 the identified vulnerability had in assessing the  evidence
                 before it and  thus  whether  the  Tribunal  was  satisfied
                 whether the appellant had established his or  her  case  to
                 the relevant standard of proof. In asylum  appeals,  weight
                 should be given to objective  indications  of  risk  rather
                 than necessarily to a state of mind."

Error of law

      11. Ms Aboni was correct to make the concessions she did.  Given  that
          the respondent agrees that the decision  must  be  set  aside  and
          remitted to the FTT, I can set out my reasoning  briefly.   In  so
          doing, I recognise the FTT's decision is extremely  detailed.   It
          runs to 48 pages and contains 295 paragraphs making  wide  ranging
          adverse credibility findings.  It  is  not  necessary  for  me  to
          address each of the grounds of appeal  regarding  the  credibility
          findings or indeed the other findings made  by  the  FTT,  because
          there has been  such  a  fundamental  error  of  approach  to  the
          approach to A2, a vulnerable appellant, and  the  MF  evidence  in
          support of this, that the entire decision must be set aside.    Ms
          Aboni accepted that ground 6 (relating to the  FTT's  approach  to
          the MF report)  has  been  made  out  and  it  is  unnecessary  to
          consider the other grounds of appeal.  In particular:

              i) All the medical  evidence  pointed  in  one  direction:  A2
                 should have been treated as a vulnerable appellant  by  the
                 FTT.


             ii) The failure to do so meant that the FTT failed to apply the
                 Guidance when assessing the evidence, and therefore  failed
                 to take account of the importance of the matters set out at
                 10.3, 14 and 15 of the Guidance.   Failure  to  follow  the
                 Guidance in a case such as this  constitutes  an  error  of
                 law.

            iii) The FTT failed to properly address the detailed evidence in
                 the carefully prepared MF report regarding A2,  and  failed
                 to take into account A2's vulnerability  as  particularised
                 in the report, when making adverse credibility findings and
                 in rejecting his account of past events because of  alleged
                 inconsistencies.  The FTT "noted" the report  and  some  of
                 its contents but failed to make any clear  findings  as  to
                 whether the assessment and conclusions were  accepted.   By
                 way of example, the MF report set out a number of  possible
                 explanations  for  A2's   ability   to   provide   detailed
                 information at the time of his asylum  interview,  some  of
                 which was inconsistent to later accounts - PTSD is known to
                 fluctuate; avoidance is a core symptom  and  disclosure  of
                 his history is difficult - but the FTT  failed  to  address
                 these.  In addition, contrary to the FTT's findings,  there
                 was evidence that shortly after  the  asylum  interview  in
                 2013, Dr Farringdon recorded that A2 had PTSD symptoms.

             iv)  It  is  difficult  if  not  impossible  to   separate   or
                 compartmentalise these errors  in  approach  regarding  the
                 evidence relating to A2 from the  credibility  findings  in
                 relation to A1.  The former have inevitably been taken into
                 account when making the overall credibility  assessment  of
                 A1, given  the  overlapping  aspects  of  their  respective
                 claims.

Disposal

      12. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant  Senior  President's
          Practice Statement and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
          findings required in remaking the decision,  and  I  have  decided
          that this is an appropriate case to remit to  the  FTT.   This  is
          because completely fresh findings of fact are necessary.


      13. Ms Aboni acknowledged that the API suggests that the  case  should
          be reviewed when a MF report is provided  after  the  decision  to
          refuse asylum is made, as in this case.    Given  the  appellant's
          vulnerability, it would be very  helpful  if  the  respondent  can
          review  the  MF  evidence  already  available  and  any   relevant
          updating evidence provided by A2's solicitors, within a period  of
          three months, and in advance of a case management hearing  in  the
          FTT, which I consider to be necessary in a case such as this.

Decision

      14. The decision of the FTT involved the making of  a  material  error
          of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

      15. The appeal shall be remade by the FTT de novo.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
18 January 2018

