
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/13661/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2nd November 2018                    |On 30th November 2018               |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 Samir Zaoui
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wood (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M Davies, promulgated on 17th July 2018, following a  hearing  at
    Manchester on 4th July 2018.  In the determination, the judge dismissed
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Algeria,  and  was  born  on  1st
    February 1994.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 25th  November  2011  refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and  for
    humanitarian protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's  claim  is  that  he  left  Algeria  in  October  2010,
    travelled by boat to Italy, stayed there for six months, and then  went
    on to Belgium, before coming to the UK and  claiming  asylum.   He  had
    initially claimed he was a Libyan national.  He did not seek asylum  en
    route.  He had also claimed to be 17 years old,  maintaining  that  his
    date of birth was 1st February 1994.   He  claimed  that  he  lived  in
    Algeria with his parents and his siblings.  He said he had  never  been
    arrested in Algeria.  He had never experienced any problems in  Algeria
    due to his religion or his race.  He had also never  been  involved  in
    any political  groups  and  had  never  experienced  any  problems  for
    political reasons.  He had no medical problems.  However, he maintained
    during his screening interview that he was running  away  from  Algeria
    because of terrorism and terrorist threats, given that terrorists  have
    come  to  his  house.   He  also  claimed  that  he   feared   military
    conscription, and that if he returned to Algeria, he  would  be  killed
    for having avoided it. He said that he  received  a  military  call  up
    letter to do military service  after  he  turned  17  but  he  did  not
    respond.  He also referred to fear of the GIA.

The Judge's Findings

 4.  The  judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant's  claim  was  a  complete
    fabrication.  He had never been targeted by terrorists.  He had offered
    no credible evidence of being at risk  from  the  GIA.   He  had  never
    undertaken any political activity.  His account was wholly  implausible
    (paragraph 59).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the  judge's  approach  exhibited
    bias in the determination because  he  had  at  various  parts  of  the
    determination referred to the fact that the Appellant  had  effectively
    abused the judicial review system by launching  an  appeal  by  way  of
    judicial review, which only prolonged  matters.   This,  in  our  view,
    overlooked the fact that  the  judicial  review  application  had  been
    successful.

 7. On 13th August 2018 permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.





Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 2nd November 2018, Mr  Wood,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant  submitted  that  the  determination  by  Judge
    Davies was coloured by what  he  had  said  at  various  parts  of  his
    determination in relation to the appeal process that the Appellant  had
    engaged in.  For example, this began early (at paragraph 10)  when  the
    judge observed that, "before proceeding any further with this appeal, I
    think it is only right that I should express my disappointment  at  the
    circumstances leading to the rehearing of this appeal".   Judge  Davies
    then went to say that the Respondent had made his decision refusing the
    Appellant's claim for asylum on 25th November 2011, and  the  Appellant
    had then appealed that decision and a hearing took place before a First-
    tier Tribunal Judge with a decision on 19th January 2012.  The Tribunal
    in question was that of Judge White who had dismissed the appeal on all
    grounds (paragraph 11).

 9. Thereafter, various further applications were made,  and  Judge  Davies
    used specific language in the manner that,  "no  plausible  explanation
    has been given for decisions that have been taken at various stages  of
    the appeals process which meant that the rehearing of  the  Appellant's
    appeal was heard many years after his original  appeal  was  dismissed"
    (paragraph 12).  I have to say that this does not necessarily amount to
    a criticism of the Appellant or his legal representatives, in  the  way
    in which they launched legal appeals, which was a matter of legal right
    for them.  What the judge is here plainly stating, is  clear  from  his
    next sentence which is that, this presented the judge  with  particular
    difficulties because he had to assess the Appellant's evidence  on  the
    basis that the Appellant entered the United  Kingdom  on  10th  October
    2011, but as at the date of hearing  of  4th  July  2018,  the  country
    conditions have now undoubtedly changed.  One may properly assume  that
    this is the case because what  the  judge  was  referring  to  in  this
    respect was that "the rehearing of the  Appellant's  appeal  was  heard
    many years after his original appeal  was  dismissed"  (paragraph  12).
    Read in its entirety, therefore, this did not suggest bias on the  part
    of the judge.

10. It is true that the judge then goes on to say  in  the  next  paragraph
    that,

         "I fail to understand why  after  both  permission  to  appeal  was
         dismissed (as was an application to an  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  for
         permission  to  submit  an  application  for  judicial  review),  a
         judicial review application  was  allowed,  and  when  subsequently
         heard, the Respondent simply did not  oppose  the  application  but
         just agreed to it being remitted for rehearing" (paragraph 13).

11. Whilst I accept that it would have been altogether better for the judge
    not to have expressed himself in this way at all, what is clear is that
    the judge is simply expressing his difficulty as a Tribunal of fact now
    in relation to what he has to determine.  This is clear once again from
    the next sentence which is that, "I consider the system  that  operates
    within the Tribunal system that has caused delays such as in this  case
    is deeply regrettable and should not be allowed to occur".

12.  Mr  Wood  proceeded  to  then  take  me  to  the  final  part  of  the
    determination, (where the  judge  states  at  paragraph  63)  that  the
    Appellant had:

         "Fabricated his claim for  asylum.   That  fabrication  is  further
         compounded by the fact that he stepped up this  deception  after  a
         period of many years, both in  seeking  permission  to  appeal  the
         original decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge White, when  seeking
         permission for judicial review, and when making a  judicial  review
         application.  In my view, the Appellant  has  abused  the  judicial
         system operating in England and Wales" (paragraph 63).

13. For his part, Mr McVeety submitted that the use of the word "abuse  the
    judicial system" was regrettable and perhaps language that should  best
    have been avoided, but the judge had already made his findings  earlier
    on at paragraph 59 where he had dismissed the essential aspects of  the
    Appellant's claim by reaching clear findings of fact, in a manner  that
    was unrelated to his  exasperation  with  the  length  of  the  appeals
    proceed that had put the judge in a position where he now had  to  make
    findings of fact in relation to events that had taken place many  years
    before.

14. In his reply, Mr Wood submitted that what one had here was a High Court
    decision, a decision by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin, a position adopted
    by Mr McVeety who had not opposed the application for judicial  review,
    leading to a Consent Order thereafter, and yet the judge was expressing
    himself in these terms.  This was quite unfortunate, and it  was  bound
    to have coloured the approach of the judge to his findings of fact.

No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law, such that I should set aside the
    decision and remake the decision (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007).   My
    reasons are as follows.

16. First, whilst I accept that  the  way  in  which  the  judge  expresses
    himself is unfortunate, particularly at paragraph 63, where  he  states
    that "the Appellant has abused the judicial system operating in England
    and Wales", the fact remains that the judge had  already  earlier  made
    his findings of fact in relation to the Appellant's claim.  He had done
    so at paragraph 59.  He had made it clear that the Appellant was  never
    targeted by terrorists.  The Appellant had offered no credible evidence
    as to why he would be targeted now.  He was not at risk of the GIA.  He
    had never undertaken any political activity in Algeria.  Even if he had
    initially been targeted in the way he claims,  the  fact  remains  that
    they did not pursue him further, and this "indicates they had no  long-
    standing interest in him."

17. The judge states that:

         "It is clear that the Appellant  was  able  to  remain  in  Algeria
         without any difficulty after the incident which  he  claims  caused
         him to fear persecution.  That again is a clear indication that  he
         left Algeria for reasons not connected with his fear of  terrorists
         or the Algerian authorities" (paragraph 59).

18. It is difficult to see how this conclusion would not in any event  have
    been open to the judge without the overlay  of  his  expressed  concern
    over the delays that had been caused by the appeals process.

19. I accept that it is not for the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal to say
    whether a judicial review application should have been  made,  when  he
    states that, "I fail to understand why, after both permission to appeal
    was dismissed (as was an application to an Upper  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    for permission  to  submit  an  application  for  judicial  review),  a
    judicial application was allowed ..."  (paragraph  13).   However,  the
    essential question is whether this  goes  to  the  materiality  of  the
    decision made by the judge.

20. Having considered the matter, I find that it does not.

21. There is no error of law.

Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law.

23. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd November 2018







