










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13257/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 15  June 2017                 |On: 27 June 2017                         |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                                    [R B]
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield, counsel (instructed by Gurney Harden
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant appeals with leave against the decision  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal promulgated on 6 January  2017,  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the respondent's decision to refuse his  asylum,  humanitarian
      protection and human rights claims.


   2. In granting permission  to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford
      stated that it is arguable that the  Tribunal  erred  in  refusing  an
      adjournment application given that the respondent had failed to follow
      the ADI and reconsider in  the  light  of  the  medico-legal  reports.
      Moreover, there had been  a  failure  to  make  findings  on  material
      aspects of the claim including the appellant's detention and  torture,
      ongoing adverse interest  in  his  family  from  the  authorities  and
      whether there was a warrant for his arrest. It was also arguable  that
      the Judge failed to give adequate reasons for attaching  only  limited
      weight to the Helen Bamber Report. Further, the Judge arguably  failed
      to apply the guidance in GJ and Others (Post Civil War: Returnees) Sri
      Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 and failed to give  adequate  consideration
      to matters raised by the appellant under Article 3  and  8,  including
      his suicide risk.


   3. The respondent in her Rule 24 response did not oppose the  application
      for permission to appeal.


   4. At the hearing, Ms Ahmad conceded at the outset that  there  had  been
      material errors of law for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the  grant  of
      permission following the grounds of appeal.


   5. Both parties submitted that  in  the  circumstances,  the  appropriate
      order was to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard
      de novo.


   6. I have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
      regarding the remitting of an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
      fresh decision. I am satisfied in the circumstances that the appellant
      has not had a full opportunity for his case to be properly put to  the
      First-tier Tribunal.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and the decision is set aside. I remit the  case  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to  be  made  before  another
      Judge.


      No anonymity direction is made.


















      Signed                             Date:  27 June 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer







