
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13094/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14 January 2019                      |On 31 May 2019                      |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                     h b
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimons, Counsel, instructed by Hammersmith
& Fulham
     Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal was first before me on 27 July 2018, when in  an  Error  of
    Law Decision given orally immediately following the hearing  which  was
    subsequently sent to the parties in writing, I set out  the  background
    to this current hearing.  Of necessity, much of what  I  said  in  that
    decision will now be repeated below.

 2. The appellant is a national of Iran who was born in September 1994.  He
    claims to have entered this country in or around November 2010 when  he
    was  16  years  old  and  he  claimed  asylum  in  January  2011.   His
    application for asylum was refused in April 2011  but  he  was  granted
    discretionary leave as an  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking  child  until
    March 2012.  He then made an application for further leave on 16  March
    2012 when was when he was about  17�.   I  presume  that  it  had  been
    anticipated that this would be decided when he  was  an  adult  in  the
    usual way with such applications.

 3. Unfortunately by the time of the hearing before me in  July  2018,  his
    application and now subsequent appeals  had  been  going  on  for  some
    years.  The respondent took a long time to  consider  his  application,
    eventually writing to  him  in  October  2015  advising  him  that  his
    application had been refused  and  giving  reasons  for  that  refusal.
    Subsequently, he appealed  against  this  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and his appeal was heard by Immigration Judge Barker at Hatton
    Cross on 24 June 2016 but Judge Barker dismissed his appeal.  Then  the
    appellant applied for  permission  to  appeal  against  Judge  Barker's
    decision and although he was initially refused permission,  he  renewed
    that application before the Upper Tribunal and in a decision  dated  10
    March 2017 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  The error  of  law  hearing  then  came  before  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Black on 26 April 2017; although she preserved  all  the
    adverse credibility findings which had been made  by  Judge  Barker  in
    relation to the account which had been relied on by  the  appellant  as
    the factual basis for his claim, in a decision  promulgated  on  5  May
    2017, she nonetheless concluded that there had been a material error of
    law in Judge Barker's decision, which it is not necessary  to  go  into
    for the purposes of this decision.  The result was that the appeal  was
    remitted back  for  rehearing  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that
    rehearing was before First-tier Tribunal Judge Miles  again  at  Hatton
    Cross on 22 January 2018.

 4. In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 1 February  2018  Judge  Miles
    again dismissed the appellant's appeal, but the appellant  was  granted
    permission to appeal  against  this  decision  also,  permission  being
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington on 12 June 2018.  In her very
    concise reasons, Judge Rimington stated as follows:

         "It is arguable that the judge failed to apply the correct standard
         of proof and arguably erred  in  law  in  the  speculation  of  the
         Iranian government's approach".

 5. She added that "All grounds are arguable".

 6. The position was accordingly that there was again an appeal before this
    Tribunal in respect of a decision which  had  been  made  nearly  three
    years earlier in 2015 with regard to an application that had been  made
    three years before then in 2012, so we were then over six years on from
    when the original application had been made.

 7. The facts were in a relatively  narrow  compass.   It  was  now  common
    ground, because the findings of Judge Black to  this  effect  had  been
    retained, that the appellant's original claim lacked credibility  in  a
    number of respects and so that claim no longer formed the basis of  the
    appellant's current case.  Judge Miles made certain  findings  included
    amongst which were that if the applicant was the age that he says he is
    and he exited Iran illegally, one of the consequences of his not  being
    in Iran is that he was not  available  to  undertake  military  service
    which had he been in Iran he would have been required to undertake.

 8. The appellant's current case, as advanced before Judge Miles,  is  that
    he would be at risk on return to  Iran  because  of  a  combination  of
    factors.  The most important is that he would be  treated  as  a  draft
    evader and because of this would be at  risk  of  being  imprisoned  on
    return to Iran.  This factor is linked with the second factor which  is
    that he had exited that country illegally.  The effect of that  is,  it
    was argued, that he would almost certainly be questioned on return  and
    would be likely to be interrogated  and  that  interrogation  would  of
    itself result in his incarceration for some period of time.   He  would
    also, it was argued, be at  risk  of  imprisonment  by  reason  of  his
    evasion of military service.  An  additional  factor  that  was  argued
    before Judge Miles was that he would be treated more  harshly  than  he
    otherwise might be (even though the first two factors alone  would  put
    him at real risk) because of his Azeri  ethnicity.   There  were  other
    subsidiary factors that were said to evidence the  risk  the  appellant
    would face on return, such as that his position would be looked at more
    closely because he would be returning from London  which  was  a  known
    centre of dissent against the Iranian regime.

 9. I did not have to consider all of these matters in detail save  insofar
    as they were relevant to my  consideration  of  whether  there  been  a
    material error in Judge Miles' decision.  One of the grounds of  appeal
    was that the  judge  in  effect,  as  Judge  Rimington  considered  was
    arguable, failed to apply the correct standard of proof.   Although  it
    is right to say that at paragraph 9.1, when considering the burden  and
    standard of proof, the judge stated,  correctly,  that  "the  appellant
    must establish that he will be at real  risk  of  persecution,  serious
    harm under Rule 339C HC 395, or treatment in breach  of  his  protected
    human rights if he were now to return to Iran", it was  submitted  that
    it is clear from the manner in which he set out his  findings  that  he
    did not in fact adopt this standard of proof.

10. This was particularly said to be the  case  with  regard  to  what  the
    consequences would be to the appellant by returning as somebody who had
    left the country illegally and who had thereby evaded  his  obligations
    to undertake military service.

11. There had been expert evidence submitted on behalf of the appellant  by
    Dr Kakhki and there had also been before the judge  the  Home  Office's
    "Country Policy and Information Note - Iran: Military service  (October
    2016)" which had been issued on 24 October 2016.  At  paragraph  10.12,
    having set out  certain of the factors involved, Judge Miles said this:



         "He is also liable for military service and on the agreed objective
         evidence and expert report, will be treated as  a  deserter  rather
         than a person who has evaded such  service.   In  my  judgment  the
         background evidence indicates that the more common penalty for such
         a person would be for him to be required to undertake the period of
         service that is appropriate for his age rather than for there to be
         an additional prosecution and resultant risk of prison or  military
         detention".

12. What Judge Miles then went on to state, which is part of  the  judgment
    that is said to indicate that he applied the wrong standard  of  proof,
    was as follows:

         "While it is of course possible that the authorities may  view  his
         case more seriously because of his illegal exit and ethnicity it is
         equally arguable, in my judgment, that they may  also  decide  that
         enlisting a young and fit healthy male into the military  would  be
         an appropriate remedy and also a preferable option  at  this  time,
         given that the army is engaged in  operations  in  Syria,  together
         with  the  fact  that  this  appellant  has  not  deserted  in  the
         conventional sense but was simply  out  of  the  country  when  his
         liability for service arose".

13. Judge Miles then, in the same paragraph, said that:

         "In the particular circumstances of this case,  the  likelihood  of
         the appellant facing persecution or treatment in breach of  Article
         3 ECHR is a possibility rather than a real risk and on  that  basis
         therefore the appellant does not qualify for protection either as a
         refugee or on human rights grounds".

14. I noted in my earlier decision that it was necessary  when  considering
    the statements by the judge to have regard to what is contained  within
    the  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  referred  to  above.   At
    paragraph 7.1.1 of this Note which specifically deals with "evasion and
    desertion" it is said as follows:

         "If a person  does  not  report  to  the  authorities  within  this
         timeframe, he is considered a draft evader or objector.   There  is
         no alternative civilian service in Iran.   Conscientious  objection
         is not accepted under Iranian law.  The evasion of military service
         is punishable under Article 40 of the Armed  Forces  Penal  Law  by
         imprisonment of six months to two years, or  an  extension  of  the
         service". [My emphasis].

15.  At   paragraph   7.2.1,   when   considering   the   "consequence   of
    evasion/desertion" an extract is set out from an old (April 2009) Joint
    Fact-Finding Mission Report of the Danish Immigration Service  and  the
    Danish Refugee Council, which had stated as follows:

         "A person who deserts from the  army  will  have  to  continue  the
         military service upon return,  if  he  is  under  the  age  of  40.
         Individuals who are over the age of 40 will  not  be  asked  to  do
         military service.  If a person has deserted or evaded the  military
         service and returns to Iran after the age of 40, he will receive  a
         financial punishment and possibly imprisonment.  This is subject to
         arbitrary ruling".

16. Then at 7.2.2 an extract is set out  from  the  December  2013  General
    Official Report of the Netherlands Ministry of  Foreign  Affairs  which
    had noted as follows:

         "Young men from the age of 18 who are called for  military  service
         but do not present themselves to the authorities are considered  as
         draft evaders.  There is no alternative military  service  in  Iran
         and conscientious objection is not  recognised.  Draft  evasion  is
         liable for prosecution.  [Again, my emphasis] ... If the draftee is
         absent for longer than three months during peace time  (or  fifteen
         days during war), the military service  will  be  extended  by  six
         months.  Longer draft evasion (one year during peace or two  months
         during war) may result in criminal proceedings  before  a  military
         court.  [Again, my emphasis]".

17. It is noted at 7.2.5 of this Note that:

         "Middle East Eye reported that: 'Between 30,000 and  35,000  people
         have already been  arrested  this  year  for  attempting  to  dodge
         military  service,  [General  Moussa  Kamali,  chief   conscription
         officer for  the  Iranian  armed  forces]  said.  'The  process  of
         identifying and arresting fugitives will be intensified this  year'
         ".

18. On behalf of the appellant it was argued that certainly on the basis of
    this Note there was at the very least a serious argument that could  be
    made  that  this  appellant  would  face  a  real,  as  opposed  to   a
    theoretical, risk of being imprisoned on  his  return,  because  he  is
    somebody who not only left Iran illegally (which is not now in dispute)
    but he is also someone who very well may be regarded as a draft  evader
    and the respondent's own Note suggests that such people do have a  real
    risk of receiving a sentence of imprisonment in  consequence  of  that.
    With  regard  to  the  consequences  of  somebody  being  sentenced  to
    imprisonment in Iran, reference is made  (and  this  is  common  ground
    between the parties, as it must be) to what was stated by this Tribunal
    in the country guidance case of SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum
    seeker) Iran CG [2016[ UKUT 00308, at paragraph 25 as follows:

         "25.     We should say at this point that we have no hesitation  in
             agreeing with the submissions of Mr Mills  that  the  evidence
             shows a real risk of persecution/ill-treatment  in  breach  of
             Article 3 for a  person  who  is  imprisoned  in  Iran.   This
             appears to be common ground.  In his skeleton, Mr Mills quotes
             from  paragraph  3.17.13  of  the   respondent's   Operational
             Guidance  Note:  'As  conditions  in  prisons  and   detention
             facilities are harsh and potentially life-threatening in Iran,
             they are likely to reach the Article 3 threshold'".

19. In other words, in this  case  if  there  is  a  real  risk  that  this
    appellant would be imprisoned because he was prosecuted  and  sentenced
    to imprisonment for draft evasion, then he must be regarded as somebody
    who would be at risk of facing ill-treatment in breach of Article 3  by
    reason of such imprisonment.

20. It was in that context that this Tribunal considered whether or not the
    standard of proof applied by Judge Miles was arguably incorrect.

21. Although Mr Melvin submitted on behalf  of  the  respondent  that  this
    Tribunal should look at the decision holistically and  that  the  judge
    was in effect finding - by reference to  what  was  said  at  paragraph
    10.12 that the risk was "a possibility rather than a real risk" -  that
    the risk was not sufficiently high to amount to what might  be  defined
    as a "real risk", I considered that this is not what came  across  from
    the wording that he actually used.  The judge found  that  it  was  "of
    course possible that the authorities may view his case  more  seriously
    because of his illegal exit and ethnicity".  He did not say  that  this
    was just a remote possibility.  What he went on to say was that "it  is
    equally arguable" in his judgment that they could decide that it was an
    appropriate remedy to make him serve in the army.  That  suggests  that
    the standard of proof which the judge was applying was the  balance  of
    probabilities rather than asking himself the question of whether  there
    would be a "real risk", especially as the decision is  entirely  silent
    with regard to the extracts from the respondent's  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note referred to above.

22. I considered that this was a material error, because the real  question
    that should have been asked by the judge was not whether or not it  was
    more likely than not that the appellant would  avoid  imprisonment  but
    whether there was a real risk that he would be imprisoned.  It  may  be
    that that was the question which the judge was  intending  to  ask  but
    that is not apparent from the reasoning set out within the decision and
    accordingly I concluded that the decision must be re-made.

23. Because I was concerned that this appeal had already been remitted once
    and that this was the second time permission to appeal had been granted
    (and indeed the second time this Tribunal had found there to have  been
    an error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal)  and  also
    this appeal was by that time three years old and was in  respect  of  a
    decision made over six years ago, and that the facts were not really in
    dispute (it being now accepted first that the appellant's original core
    account was not credible, secondly that he had exited  Iran  illegally,
    and thirdly, that in consequence he has avoided or  not  complied  with
    his obligations to undertake military service) I considered that rather
    than remit this appeal  yet  again  for  rehearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal it would be in the interests of justice to retain this  appeal
    in the Upper Tribunal.  I gave directions as to the time in  which  the
    appellant was to serve updated evidence, if so  advised,  and  for  the
    respondent if he chose to serve further evidence  in  reply,  following
    which the appeal was to  be  listed  for  a  CMR  before  me.   Further
    evidence was subsequently served on behalf of the  appellant,  but  the
    respondent chose not to submit further evidence in  response  following
    which the appeal was listed before me for hearing on 14 January 2019.

24. I heard this appeal on that date, that is 14  January  2019,  following
    which I considered the representations which had  been  made,  together
    with all the evidence which had been  put  before  me,  and  reached  a
    provisional decision.  Regrettably, the  file  was  mislaid  before  my
    decision was perfected, but the decision which I provisionally  reached
    has not altered.   The  file  having  now  been  located,  I  have  now
    perfected that decision for promulgation.  The Tribunal  apologises  to
    the parties for the delay.



The Hearing

25. I heard submissions on behalf of both parties and  the  appellant  also
    relied on a thorough and detailed  skeleton  argument  which  had  been
    settled by Ms Fitzsimons the previous day.   The  appellant  relied  in
    particular on the expert reports prepared on his behalf by Dr Fatah and
    Dr Kakhki.

26. The appellant's case, in summary, was that  he  would  be  at  risk  on
    return to Iran because of a combination of three  factors;  these  were
    first that he had exited illegally, secondly, that he would or could be
    treated as having evaded the draft, and thirdly, because of  his  Azeri
    ethnicity.  At the outset, it was accepted on behalf of the respondent,
    very fairly, that if there was a  real  risk  of  the  appellant  being
    imprisoned on return, that would carry with it a risk of Article 3 ill-
    treatment.  Accordingly, the issue before this Tribunal was whether  as
    a result of the combination of the three factors relied upon on  behalf
    of the appellant, he would be at risk of imprisonment on return.

Appellant's Submissions

27.  The appellant was a 24 year old male, of Azeri ethnicity.  He had left
    Iran in November 2010 aged 16 and had remained in the  UK  ever  since.
    It was accepted that the appellant's claim to asylum on  the  basis  of
    distribution of leaflets had been  rejected  by  the  Tribunal  and  no
    attempt was being made within this hearing to challenge that finding.

28. Reliance was placed within the skeleton  argument  on  the  two  expert
    reports and also on the  respondent's  Country  Information  which  was
    dated October 2016.

29. The Iranian regime could be volatile and unpredictable, and this should
    always be borne in mind when considering the expert  evidence  in  this
    case.  Both Dr Kakhki and Dr Fatah were acknowledged experts  on  Iran.
    Dr Kakhki was a practising attorney in Iran who held a  PhD  in  Middle
    Eastern Politics in Law from Durham University.  He had given  evidence
    before the Upper Tribunal in SB (risk on return-illegal exit)  Iran  CG
    [2009] UKAIT 00053 and also SSH and HR  (illegal  exit:  failed  asylum
    seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC).  Dr Fatah's expertise  is  set
    out at the beginning of his  report,  and  includes  the  following  at
    paragraph 5:

         "Since 2000, I have produced over 2,000 expert reports, which  have
         been commissioned for and cited in a number of immigration appeals,
         as well as family and criminal cases.  In  the  same  timeframe,  I
         have examined a large number of people from the Middle  East  whose
         nationality, native language,  ethnicity,  place  of  residence  is
         disputed, and have examined thousands of documents  from  the  MENA
         region.   In  addition  to  my  deep  knowledge  of  the   region's
         administrative  and   bureaucratic   cultures,   my   multi-lingual
         proficiencies  allow  me  to  understand,  interpret  and  evaluate
         official documents in the Middle East and prove me to be ideal  for
         the task.  This extensive skill-set has enabled me  to  produce  my
         own methodology of document authentications".

    His CV is clearly impressive, and  the  respondent  does  not  seek  to
    suggest that either Dr Fatah or Dr Kakhki  lack  either  the  necessary
    experience or expertise to give expert evidence.   Their  reports  must
    accordingly be regarded by this Tribunal with appropriate respect.

30. It was acknowledged on behalf of the appellant that on current  country
    guidance a person returning to Iran would not be at risk merely because
    he or she was a failed asylum seeker.  In the skeleton  argument  which
    she had  prepared, Ms Fitzsimons at paragraph 17 set out the head  note
    to this effect of SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker)  Iran
    CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC), as follows:

         "(a) An Iranian male whom it is sought to return to Iran, who  does
             not possess a  passport,  will  be  returnable  on  a  laissez
             passer, which he can obtain from the Iranian Embassy on  proof
             of identity and nationality.

         (b)      An Iranian male in respect of whom no adverse interest has
             previously been manifested by the Iranian State does not  face
             a real risk of persecution/breach of his Article 3  rights  on
             return to Iran on account of having left Iran illegally and/or
             being a failed asylum seeker.  No such risk exists at the time
             of questioning on return to Iran nor after the facts (i.e.  of
             illegal exit and being  a  failed  asylum  seeker)  have  been
             established.  In particular, there  is  not  a  real  risk  of
             prosecution leading to imprisonment."

31.  However, it is submitted on behalf of the  appellant  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal did recognise that in individual cases a Tribunal  would  have
    to assess the individual facts specific to that case  and  ask  whether
    there was anything in the history of the individual in  question  which
    might lead to him being at risk.  In this  case  it  was  suggested  on
    behalf of the appellant there was a reasonable likelihood that he would
    be questioned on arrival back in Iran because  he  would  be  returning
    from London having been in the UK for a lengthy period  of  nine  years
    and also because  he  had,  by  not  being  present  in  Iran,  avoided
    conscription.  In SSH and HR, in which Dr Kakhki's  evidence  had  been
    relied upon by the Tribunal, the Tribunal had accepted (at paragraph 9)
    "that a person who returned  to  Iran  on  a  laissez  passer  will  be
    questioned" and the Tribunal had accepted "that this is  likely  to  be
    the case".

32. Dr Kakhki in his report had noted the suspicion felt towards activities
    in London by the Iranian authorities and reference is also made in  the
    skeleton argument at paragraph 17 to the head note of SA (Iranian Arabs-
    no general risk) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 41(IAC)  in  which  reference  was
    made to the Iranian state "[regarding] London as a centre of separatist
    activity".

33. Dr Kakhki had noted within his report that desertion was  (technically)
    punishable by imprisonment, and had also referred  to  all  boys  being
    liable to conscription, although in  answer  to  a  question  from  the
    Tribunal, Ms Fitzsimons was obliged to acknowledge that  there  was  no
    example given in either expert report of  any  specific  case  where  a
    person who had not commenced his draft at the appropriate age had  been
    treated as a deserter.  Ms Fitzsimons asked the Tribunal to  note  that
    Dr Fatah had suggested that it was very difficult to  get  evidence  on
    this, because the Iranian regime is a very secretive one, and that both
    experts had indicated  that  the  appellant's  failure  to  attend  his
    conscription at the appropriate age could be treated as evasion of  the
    draft or desertion.

34. Ms Fitzsimons emphasised that  Dr  Kakhki  had  been  regarded  by  the
    Tribunal in SSH and HR as having  been  of  assistance  and  asked  the
    Tribunal to note that  in  the  penultimate  paragraph  of  his  report
    effectively he had stated that at least one of  the  possibilities  was
    that the appellant on return could be treated as having deserted and be
    sent to prison.  Iran was a closed regime, she submitted, and  operates
    in a way that makes it very difficult for experts  to  give  definitive
    advice.  Both experts were mindful of their task which  was  to  assess
    whether there was a real risk, and it should be noted that Dr Fatah was
    especially cautious as to how he advances his opinions.

35. Dr Fatah's report was an extremely balanced one, because  he  indicated
    that although being of Azeri ethnicity might be an  additional  factor,
    of itself this would not lead to persecution.

36. At page 12 of his report, Dr Fatah had set  out  certain  accepted  and
    uncontroversial facts, such as that (at  paragraph  73)  the  mandatory
    military service in Iran had been extended from 21 months to 24  months
    and was compulsory for all Iranian males over 18.  It  was  also  noted
    (at paragraph 75) that, as reported  in  The  Guardian,  "Some  wealthy
    Iranians pay to get out of their military service; some pay doctors  to
    give a medical reason for their inability to join the  army  for  their
    mandatory service".

37. At paragraph 76 Dr Fatah noted that "It is reported that  all  Iranians
    must report for military service within the year after graduation"  and
    that "failure to report means an extra three to six months  of  service
    on top of the 24 months".

38. Ms Fitzimons then drew the Tribunal's attention to paragraphs 88 and 89
    of Dr Fatah's report in which it was stated in the first six months  of
    2016 it had been reported that 35,000 people were arrested for "dodging
    the draft" and that "moreover, in one month, over 10,000 people applied
    to pay fines rather than be conscripted".  In the following  paragraph,
    paragraph 89 it is stated that  "It  was  reported  that  an  estimated
    35,000 people had been arrested between January 2016 and June 2016  for
    evading  military  service",  although  this  appears  just  to  be   a
    repetition of what had been  stated  in  the  previous  paragraph.   In
    answer to a question from the Tribunal as  to  whether  there  was  any
    report of anybody having been sent to prison for evasion of the  draft,
    Ms Fitzsimons referred to paragraph 91 of Dr Fatah's report,  in  which
    it was stated as follows:

         "91. Moreover, it is understood that each military camp in Iran has
             its own detention centre.  My associate has communicated  with
             an  Iranian  who  has  completed  their  compulsory   military
             service.  This person stated that  alongside  the  six  months
             additional service, draft evaders may  be  detained  at  these
             camps depending on their individual behaviour".

    It was noted by the Tribunal that this statement  was  very  unspecific
    and that Dr Fatah had refrained in his report from giving any  example,
    even second-hand of anybody who had been said  to  have  actually  been
    detained because of evasion of the draft.

39. With regard to whether or not the appellant had exited  illegally,  the
    Tribunal noted that this appellant had had  a  passport  and  that  the
    highest that this risk had been put by Dr Kakhki was  that  this  might
    lead to a risk.  Ms Fitzsimons accepted that she could not rely on  any
    specific evidence of an individual being imprisoned for  illegal  exit,
    but asked the Tribunal always  to  remember  that  Iran  was  a  closed
    society in which all sorts of things could happen which we did not know
    about.  The Tribunal had to have in mind that there was a low  standard
    of proof required in Article 3 cases.  Both  experts  and  the  country
    information pointed to general difficulties within Iran.  If  a  person
    did not attend for his call up, there would be a  real  risk  of  being
    considered as a draft evader, in consequence of which there would  then
    be a real risk of being imprisoned.  When one considered also that this
    appellant had exited illegally, had been in London for nine  years  and
    was returning from the UK and was of Azeri ethnicity, taking all  these
    factors together there was a real risk that  he  would  be  imprisoned.
    Although this was a difficult case, nonetheless given the low  standard
    of proof required in such a case, this appeal should be allowed.

Respondent's Submissions

40. It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that this appellant  would
    not be at risk.  If  one  looked  at  the  country  guidance  given  in
    particular in SSH and HR, none of the factors relied upon on behalf  of
    the appellant would be sufficient to put him at risk.  There had to  be
    something else.  While the respondent would  accept  that  the  Iranian
    regime is paranoid, and makes sporadic attempts at targeting groups  of
    people, the people who are targeted are people  who  are  considered  a
    threat, which this appellant is not.

41. The Tribunal should note that none of the experts answered the question
    as to whether someone who happens to be a draft  avoider  would  be  at
    risk because of this reason.  While a person might be at risk if  there
    was a specific reason, such as a person claiming to be opposed to  war,
    that was not the present case.  There had  been  a  finding  that  this
    appellant had not engaged in any previous activity against the  regime.
    In these circumstances he failed to show even to the lower standard  of
    proof that he would be at risk on return.

42. Although Dr Fatah in his report (at paragraphs 88 and 89) had  referred
    to the arrest of 35,000 draft evaders, there was  no  evidence  of  the
    imprisonment of any one of them.  Neither of the experts  had  provided
    sufficient evidence to establish that there was a  real  risk  that  on
    return he would be perceived as a draft evader or that he would  be  at
    any real risk of imprisonment on return.

43. In reply, Ms Fitzsimons on behalf of the appellant asked  the  Tribunal
    to note that Dr Fatah had raised the possibility of the appellant being
    sent to a military camp, and that if he was, this would also lead to  a
    breach of his Article 3 rights.  Ms Cunha  accepted  that  imprisonment
    within military detention would reach the Article 3 threshold, although
    she did not accept that there was a real risk that this would happen.

44. As a final point, although the experts had not been able  to  refer  to
    any specific example of someone having  been  put  into  detention  for
    avoidance or evasion  of  the  draft,  nonetheless,  this  was  a  real
    category of risk, and not just theoretical.

Discussion

45. It is common ground that this appeal should be allowed if this Tribunal
    concludes on the evidence before it that there is a real, as opposed to
    a theoretical, risk of the appellant being imprisoned on return.  It is
    accepted that there is a theoretical  risk,  because  the  penalty  for
    draft evasion does or can  include  imprisonment.   The  real  question
    therefore is whether this risk is more than just theoretical.

46. The expert reports are remarkably unspecific.  It is acknowledged  that
    the age for compulsory military service is 18 for boys, when of  course
    this appellant was not within Iran but even on a theoretical level,  it
    would not seem that this appellant is particularly at risk.  I refer to
    what is said by Dr Kakhki at page 30 of his report as follows:

         "Due to closed-net of Iranian society, detailed  information  about
         the punishment of draft  evaders  and  deserters  is  difficult  to
         obtain.  According to one source, draft evaders and  deserters  are
         particularly susceptible to face punishment if they  have  deserted
         for political reasons, if they have been politically active in  the
         past or if they have deserted previously during the war with Iraq".

47. What is most notable in this case  is  that  it  is  clear  (given  the
    previous findings with regard to this appellant) that the appellant did
    not desert for political reasons, that  he  had  not  been  politically
    active in the past and that he had not deserted previously  during  the
    war with Iraq.

48. Dr Kakhki then goes on to  express  his  opinion  that  this  appellant
    "would be required to complete his military service" and adds that this
    would be "with the risk of facing extra service or being imprisoned due
    to the late commencement of  his  service".   He  also  refers  to  how
    military officials "may integrate persecutory treatment when allocating
    tasks for him to complete under his military service  obligations"  and
    so on, and gives examples of  persecutory  treatment  "such  as  forced
    labour and serving in deprived, hostile areas as a result of  his  past
    behaviour".

49. This Tribunal must place weight on the  findings  of  the  Tribunal  at
    paragraph 23 of the current country guidance case of SSH and HR, having
    regard to Dr Kakhki's evidence in that case:

         "23.  ....  In our view the evidence  does  not  establish  that  a
         failed asylum seeker who had left Iran illegally would be subjected
         on return to a period of detention or questioning such  that  there
         is a real risk of Article 3 ill-treatment.   The  evidence  in  our
         view shows no more than that they will be questioned, and  that  if
         there are any  particular  concerns  arising  from  their  previous
         activities either in Iran or in the  United  Kingdom  or  whichever
         country they are returned from, then  there  would  be  a  risk  of
         further questioning, detention  and  potential  ill-treatment.   In
         this regard it is relevant to return to Dr Kakhki's evidence in re-
         examination where he said that the  treatment  they  would  receive
         would depend on their individual case.   If  they  co-operated  and
         accepted that they left illegally and claimed  asylum  abroad  then
         there would be no reason for ill-treatment, and  questioning  would
         be for a fairly brief period.  That seems  to  us  to  sum  up  the
         position well, and as a consequence we conclude that a person  with
         no history other than that of being a failed asylum seeker who  had
         exited illegally and who could be expected to tell the  truth  when
         questioned would not face a real risk of ill-treatment  during  the
         period of questioning at the airport.  We should add that we see no
         reason to doubt Dr Kakhki's evidence that there is a special  court
         at or near the airport which considers the cases of  returnees  but
         the evidence does not show a real risk of ill-treatment  in  breach
         of Article 3 amounting to persecution as a consequence of attending
         at the court."

50. The difficulty with regarding any "risk" that the appellant might  face
    as real as opposed to theoretical is that neither expert does more than
    speculate as to the possibility of risk.  It is particularly  difficult
    when assessing Dr Kakhki's opinion, just cited at paragraph  48  above,
    that military officials "may integrate persecutory treatment" and so on
    "as a result of his past behaviour"  to  understand  how  this  opinion
    could relate to this appellant.  There  has,  as  already  noted,  been
    absolutely nothing about this appellant's past behaviour which would or
    could be reasonably likely to cause this appellant to  be  singled  out
    for persecutory treatment.  He has not previously criticised the regime
    (his claim to have distributed leaflets having been dismissed, even  to
    the lower standard of proof) and absent such behaviour there  does  not
    appear to be any substantive basis for concluding that  this  appellant
    would face  a  real,  as  opposed  to  a  theoretical,  risk  of  being
    imprisoned or  otherwise  persecuted  on  return.   There  might  be  a
    possibility of his being obliged to serve an extra period  in  military
    service (although even this arguably is a  theoretical  rather  than  a
    real risk) or to pay a fine, but the  one  uncontradicted  fact  within
    this appeal is that neither of these  acknowledged  experts,  who  have
    extensive connections within Iran, have been able to point to a  single
    instance of a person being imprisoned either  for  draft  avoidance  or
    draft evasion.  It is highly unlikely, were this to  be  a  common,  or
    even an occasional occurrence, that word of such  treatment  would  not
    have leaked out to at least one of the informants who give  information
    to these experts.

51. In these circumstances, it is simply impossible to  conclude,  even  to
    the lower standard of proof that there is any real risk, as opposed  to
    a theoretical risk, of this appellant  being  imprisoned  or  otherwise
    being subjected to persecutory treatment in the event that he were  now
    to be returned to Iran.

Decision

52. For this reason, this appeal must be dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Dated: 24 May 2019




















