
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13249/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Date Sent                  |
|On 10th October 2013                            |On 23rd October 2013       |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                  MISS M K
                         (anonymity direction given)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M. Symes, Counsel instructed on behalf of Luqmani
                    Thompson and Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe.


 2. This appeal is subject to an anonymity  direction  that  no  report  or
    other publication of these proceedings or any part  or  parts  of  them
    shall name or directly or indirectly identify the claimant.   Reference
    to the claimant may be by use of her initials but not by name.  Failure
    by any person, body or institution  whether  corporate  or  incorporate
    (for the avoidance of doubt to include either party to this appeal)  to
    comply with this direction may lead to  a  contempt  of  court.    This
    direction shall continue in force until the Upper Tribunal (IAC) or  an
    appropriate court lifts or varies it.

The Background

 3. The Appellant left Zimbabwe on 3rd October 2002 and arrived in  the  UK
    on 4th October having been granted leave to enter as  a  visitor.   She
    subsequently applied for leave to remain as a  student  and  leave  was
    granted from 2003 until 2009.  On 28th September 2009, she applied  for
    further leave to remain on a post-study visa which  was  granted  until
    11th October 2011.  An application was made for asylum on 13th October.

 4. In a notice of  immigration  decision  dated  17th  November  2011  the
    Respondent  refused  that  application.   Her  appeal  was   heard   by
    Immigration Judge Perry on 6th January 2012 and was dismissed.

 5. As set out at paragraph 60 of the  determination  the  following  facts
    were accepted by the Respondent; that  the  Appellant's  father  was  a
    teacher and as such was a target for ZANU-PF youths. There had  been  a
    number of violent incidents that had occurred in Zimbabwe including the
    family being subjected to violence in 2002 when the  home  was  smashed
    and the family subjected to violence.   The  police  "did  nothing"  in
    relation to the attacks at the family  home  in  Harare.  There  was  a
    further attack upon the family home in 2003, culminating in  a  serious
    sexual assault of rape upon the Appellant's sister and after the family
    had moved to escape harassment, the Appellant's parents were  subjected
    to an arson attack in Murewa in 2009.

 6. The Immigration Judge, whilst noting that  "teachers  are  targeted  in
    2011" reached the conclusion that the Appellant would not  be  at  risk
    upon return to Zimbabwe as there had been nothing  in  her  account  to
    show that she had been an activist or member of the MDC and that  there
    was nothing in the Appellant's past or present  activities  that  would
    support her assertion that she was a "perceived supporter of the  MDC".
    At paragraph 63, the Immigration Judge rejected any  link  between  the
    Appellant being perceived as a supporter of the MDC and to  her  father
    who had been beaten up by ZANU-PF youths  because  he  was  accused  of
    teaching MDC policies.  The judge found  this  to  be  a  "distant  and
    tenuous link" that she would  be  perceived  to  be  an  MDC  supporter
    because her father was attacked for  the  reason  that  he  taught  MDC
    policies.  The  judge  found  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's father was a member or supporter of  the  MDC  or  that  he
    taught MDC policies.

 7. When considering risk on return,  he  found  that  there  was  no  risk
    arising from her political profile because he had not  found  that  she
    had any profile that would place her at risk.  He found that she  would
    not be viewed as a MDC sympathiser and that she would not  be  at  risk
    merely because she had been in the UK since 2003 as she would  be  able
    to demonstrate that she had been in the UK legally as  a  student.   He
    did not find that she would come to the attention of  the  authorities.
    Thus he dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds.

 8. He also considered Article 8 in that determination at paragraphs  72-75
    and reached the conclusion that on the facts as presented in this case,
    that  there  was  no  dependency,  either   emotional   or   financial,
    demonstrated by the evidence in relation to her family  life  with  her
    sister who did not attend the hearing.  As regards her private life, he
    accepted that she had been in the United Kingdom since October 2002 and
    had studied and worked in  the  United  Kingdom,  but  found  that  her
    removal would be proportionate as the extent of her  private  life  had
    not been substantial and was one that could be continued  in  Zimbabwe.
    He found that she would be able to seek  work  and  resume  friendships
    with people that she had grown  up  within  Zimbabwe  and  whilst  that
    private life may be different it would remain the same in all essential
    respects, thus he dismissed the appeal under Article 8.

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Brunnen granted permission for the following reasons:

         "(i) The grounds on which permission to  appeal  is  sought  argued
             that the judge failed to take account of  the  fact  that  the
             Appellant, who is from Zimbabwe, is the daughter of a  teacher
             and that she and her family have previously  suffered  several
             attacks by ZANU-PF supporters.

         (ii) In paragraph 60 of the determination the judge noted  that  it
             was accepted the Appellant's father was  a  teacher  and  that
             teachers were subject to attack in 2011.  It was also accepted
             that the family had suffered attacks in 2002, 2003 and 2009.

         (iii)    It is arguable that the judge misapprehended the  evidence
             and the country guidance given in EM [2011] UKUT 98 in finding
             at paragraph 62 and 65 of the  determination  because  neither
             the Appellant nor her family  had  in  fact  been  politically
             active in support of the MDC they would  not  be  at  risk  of
             being perceived as MDC supporters.  It is  arguable  that  the
             judge did not take account of the evidence that  teachers  and
             their families are being perceived in  this  way  in  Zimbabwe
             irrespective  of  whether  they  have  been  fact   to   being
             politically active.  It is also arguably inconsistent with the
             judge's  statement  at  paragraph  63   that   'teachers   are
             vulnerable even in 2011'.  The judge gave no consideration  to
             the implications of that vulnerability for the safety  of  the
             Appellant and arguably failed in  this  respect  to  make  any
             finding on a relevant issue.  It is arguable to  that  if  the
             judge had no equated actual and perceived involvement with the
             MDC he might have come to a different conclusion as to whether
             the Appellant would be at risk on return not withstanding  the
             points in paragraph 66 as to her long absence in Zimbabwe.

         (iv) The grounds refer also to the judge's reasons for finding that
             removal would not breach the Appellant's right to receipt  for
             her private life and argued that he failed to take account  of
             a letter from her employer.  Article 8 does  not  protect  and
             right to work.  I do not consider that this letter could  have
             had any material effects on the outcome.   However  I  do  not
             refuse permission to argue this ground."

10. At a hearing before the Upper Tribunal panel  (Judge  Coker  and  Judge
    Reeds) the Appellant was represented by Mr Jones and the  Secretary  of
    State by Ms Holmes.  The  panel  heard  submissions  from  the  parties
    concerning the issues set out in  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to
    appeal the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  following  the
    hearing a decision was promulgated setting out the nature of the  error
    of law found by the panel and the consequential directions.  The  panel
    reached the following conclusions as to the error of law:

         "11. We have concluded that there is a material error of law in the
             determination of  the  Immigration  Judge  regarding  risk  on
             return to Zimbabwe.   The  accepted  facts  were  set  out  at
             Paragraph  60  of  the  judge's  determination.   Whilst   the
             Immigration Judge noted that the profile and occupation of the
             Appellant's father and that serious incidents  of  persecution
             had taken place,  the  judge  did  not  take  account  of  the
             evidence that teachers and their family members are  perceived
             to have links to the MDC  irrespective  of  whether  they  are
             politically active themselves.

         12. We are satisfied that the Judge failed to assess the  risk  in
             the light of the totality of the  evidence  and  his  findings
             including the past persecution, that her father was a  teacher
             and perceived to be a supporter of the MDC, the  rape  of  the
             sister, the arson attack, the relevance of and  weight  to  be
             placed on the time between adverse  incidents  and  since  the
             last incident, but rather considered it  solely  in  terms  of
             whether her father was a member of the MDC and the risks  that
             attached to that.

         13. We find no error of law in the  conclusions  that  he  reached
             when considering Article 8 of the ECHR.  In our judgment,  the
             Immigration Judge had little evidence before him in respect of
             Article 8 and indeed at paragraph 72 of the determination,  he
             noted that the skeleton argument had made no reference of  any
             significance to the Appellant's rights in relation  to  family
             life or private life. Notwithstanding  that,  the  Immigration
             Judge considered the Appellant's right to respect  for  family
             and private life.   We  find  that  the  conclusions  that  he
             reached on the evidence and set out at paragraph 73 to 75 were
             conclusions that were open for  him  to  make  on  the  little
             evidence that he was presented with. There were no submissions
             made by Mr Jones drawing our attention to any factors that may
             have been overlooked or misinterpreted or elaborating  on  the
             grounds upon  which  permission  had  been  granted.   We  are
             satisfied that the Judge reached a sustainable decision on the
             basis of the evidence before him and thus find no error of law
             in the Immigration Judge's  assessment  of  the  issues  under
             Article 8 of the ECHR.

         14. At the outset of the hearing we informed the parties that  the
             country  guidance  decision  in  EM  and  Others   (returnees)
             Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC) had been quashed by the Court
             of Appeal in the decision of JG (Zimbabwe) and  CM  (Zimbabwe)
             13th June 2012 .

         15. It was agreed between the parties, and on the stated intention
             to submit further evidence, that we should adjourn the hearing
             and for the Tribunal to issue directions.

         16. We therefore preserve the findings of  the  Immigration  Judge
             with regard to the  findings  set  out  at  paragraph  60  but
             consider that it is appropriate  that  the  appeal  proceed  a
             further hearing to consider further evidence  and  submissions
             concerning the risk of return to the Appellant in the light of
             the issues raised.

         17. The case shall be relisted as a resumed hearing in  accordance
             with the directions given. "


11. Following the notification of the panel's decision concerning the error
    of law, the matter was not listed for a resumed hearing until September
    2012 by which time the Appellant had changed her legal representatives.
     It appears that there was some delay in obtaining the Appellant's case
    file and the necessary papers.

The resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

12. This is a resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal.   At  the  hearing
    the Appellant was represented by Mr Symes, Counsel, and  the  Secretary
    of State by Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer.  For the purposes of
    this hearing, and in accordance with the directions issued by the Upper
    Tribunal, a bundle of documentation had been presented on behalf of the
    Appellant and the previous documentation that had been before the First-
    tier Tribunal was helpfully consolidated into  one  core  bundle.   The
    bundle numbers pages 1 to 215 and includes within it the documents that
    were before the  First-tier  Tribunal  including  screening  interview,
    substantive interview record, decision letter of 17th November 2011 and
    also documentation that had been produced on behalf  of  the  Appellant
    including a letter from her father dated 30th October 2011, a series of
    certificates concerning  her  educational  qualifications  and  witness
    statements dated 22nd November 2011 and 2nd December 2011.  The  bundle
    also contains the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated
    on 16th January 2012 and the documentation relating to the  proceedings
    before the Upper Tribunal.

13. As to other documentation that was not before the First-tier  Tribunal,
    that is dealt with at pages 115 onwards.  That consists  of  background
    material from an IRIN report (8th June 2012), extracts from the  South-
    West Radio Africa (September 2012), extract ZimOnline February 2012 and
    extract  Zim  Diaspora  dated  November  2010.   There  is  also  other
    background material of more recent origin in the bundle  including  the
    US State Department Report 19th  April  2013,  extract  from  Voice  of
    America 29th July 2013, extract from  African  Union  dated  26th  July
    2013, International Crisis Group Report 29th July 2013,  extracts  from
    Agence France 1st August  2013,  extract  from  BBC  5th  August  2013,
    extract from Amnesty 6th August  2013,  IPS  News  Agency  report  12th
    August 2013 and an extract from the BBC 16th August 2013.   As  regards
    updated evidence  from  the  Appellant,  there  is  a  further  witness
    statement dated 30th August 2013 and  a  letter  from  the  Appellant's
    mother dated 24th July exhibited at page 179.

14. As can be seen from the trial bundle, much of the  Respondent's  bundle
    is replicated there.  For the avoidance  of  doubt,  the  Secretary  of
    State relied upon the original bundle that had been produced on  behalf
    of  the  Respondent  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    No   further
    documentation has been produced on behalf of the Secretary of State for
    the purposes of this appeal.

15. The bundle contained information that had not been  placed  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and there was no dispute between the  parties  that
    that material should not be admitted pursuant to Rule 15(2A)  and  thus
    formed part of the evidence that was put before the Upper Tribunal.

16. The Appellant  also  gave  oral  evidence.   She  adopted  the  witness
    statements referred to in the preceding paragraphs as her  evidence-in-
    chief and confirmed that she had read those statements, had  understood
    them and the contents of them were true when she made them.  There  was
    no further oral evidence-in-chief.

17. In cross-examination Mr Avery asked the Appellant  about  her  account.
    In particular she was asked to clarify the incidents and  the  date  of
    them that had occurred to her family in Zimbabwe.  In  particular,  she
    had referred in her statement  to  a  most  recent  incident  that  had
    occurred to her father in November 2012 and she was asked if there  had
    been any other incident save that one.  She confirmed that she had said
    in her statement that in March that they  had  been  forced  to  attend
    rallies.  It was put to her that between 2009 and November  2012  there
    had been no incidents of harm to her parents.  The Appellant said  that
    between that period, there had been destruction  to  the  property  and
    crops and there had been times when people had come  and  removed  them
    from the house and torturing them making them go outside.   When  asked
    to clarify when the house was burned (referring to her earlier  account
    of destruction of the property) she said in  2009.   When  asked  about
    when the crops were destroyed, the Appellant could not give a date  but
    stated it had been "after they had been to the house and burnt it  they
    still kept coming back".  When asked to be more specific, she could not
    give any further dates or explanatory evidence.

18. Mr Avery referred the Appellant to the letter  written  by  her  mother
    (page 179 of the bundle).  It was put to the  Appellant  that  in  that
    letter there was no  reference  to  the  Appellant  being  of  interest
    specifically.   The  Appellant  stated  that   "they   always   mention
    everything.  They know it is the children".  When asked  why  that  had
    not been put in the statement, she stated that she was  asked  to  tell
    the court about what had happened during the sexual attack.  It was put
    to her that there was no mention in the letter (from her  mother)  that
    they had threatened the Appellant.  She said "It is an  ongoing  thing.
    She had said it was not safe for me".  It was put to her that if  there
    had been a threat to her it was likely that her mother would have  said
    so.  The Appellant responded by saying "It  is  always  about  father's
    connections and where you children are.  When  looking  at  the  family
    they put us all together.  That's when it becomes a target".

19. The Appellant was asked that if her family had been targeted for such a
    significant period why they had  not  left  the  area?   The  Appellant
    stated that they did not have the means to  leave  the  area  and  that
    "Zimbabwe is a small country, they don't have  the  funds,  they  don't
    have the knowledge to be somewhere safe".  It was put to her that  both
    she and her sister could help them financially.  The Appellant  refuted
    this suggestion stating that she was not working  and  had  not  worked
    since 2011 when she left her job at John Lewis.  She said that even  if
    she had had the money in 2009 there had been nowhere  that  the  family
    could go to as they would be "known in the next city".  When  asked  if
    she had discussed it with them she said that she had not stating  "they
    know that every city they will be known".  It was put to her that  that
    was an odd position and that in those circumstances it would be open to
    try something.  She responded by stating that it was well-known that if
    a family moved away from Harare they would  still  have  the  problems.
    She said they had attempted to move but the danger had  followed  them.
    She confirmed that the family had moved from Harare to  an  area  where
    ZANU-PF were active.  When asked why they would do so  knowing  of  the
    problems, the Appellant stated that this was "the best option they had.
     They had ties and a place away.  There was a lot of  ZANU-PF  activity
    going on there  and  since  they  had  been  there  problems  had  been
    ongoing".

20. She confirmed in her oral evidence that she had no involvement  in  the
    MDC nor did her father have any involvement in the MDC and that it  was
    an assumption on the behalf of others based on his past employment as a
    teacher.  Against that background she was asked why she  would  have  a
    problem returning if her father had no involvement in the  MDC  and  if
    she lived in an area that was not her home area.   She  was  asked  why
    would they seek her elsewhere in Zimbabwe?  The Appellant  stated  "The
    perception is not dead.  They are pursuing our family.  I still have to
    be MK.  I can be traced back to my father and there is  a  danger  that
    they will locate me.  I am still linked to my family".

21. There was no re-examination.  In answer to questions from  myself,  she
    confirmed that when the family left Harare they  had  sold  the  house.
    They did not move immediately because it took a while for them to  sell
    the house and they had rented it out at first.   The  money  that  they
    obtained from the sale of the  house  they  used  to  help  her  sister
    financially and to build up the property that they had moved  to.   She
    confirmed that her father was no longer a teacher  and  had  gone  into
    retirement in 2004.  She did not know her father's date  of  birth  but
    thought he was 73 or 74.  As to her circumstances, she  confirmed  that
    she had not worked since she had the job with John Lewis in 2011.  That
    employment  was  as  an  events  organiser  and  carrying  out  general
    administrative duties.

22. At the conclusion of the evidence I heard submissions from each of  the
    parties.  Mr Avery on behalf of the Secretary of State relied upon  the
    refusal letter notwithstanding its age.  He submitted  that  there  was
    still some relevance to that document.  He  submitted  that  the  first
    question the Tribunal would have to consider was  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant was giving a truthful account concerning events  in  Zimbabwe
    by reference to the most recent events.  He submitted that there was  a
    significant degree of vagueness about the events that had occurred  and
    that was surprising given the nature of them.  Her evidence  concerning
    events that had happened in Zimbabwe post 2009 were not set out in  any
    statements.  With regard to the letter from her  father  in  2011,  its
    contents are non specific and covered a long period of  time  including
    the period when the family lived in Harare.  There would be  no  reason
    why people would ask about his  daughter  in  2011.   The  more  recent
    letter from her mother, the contents when they were considered  do  not
    suggest a direct interest in the Appellant from the  authorities  given
    that she has been in the United Kingdom for  a  substantial  period  of
    time.  The account given  by  the  Appellant  concerning  her  family's
    difficulties, the issue remained as to why the  family  themselves  had
    not relocated.  The evidence from the Appellant was that the harassment
    and targeting of the family had gone on for  a  substantial  period  of
    time from the ZANU-PF yet they had moved from Harare  to  another  area
    which had strong ZANU-PF connections.  When they  had  sold  the  home,
    there was no answer to the question  as  to  why  they  had  not  moved
    elsewhere.  Why the family still remained in that area, given its ZANU-
    PF connections and the events that had been  said  to  occur  was  also
    puzzling.  It did not seem to  be  logical  or  credible.   He  further
    submitted that there was no interest in the Appellant and  that  was  a
    point that was hard to take seriously and  was  not  supported  in  the
    recent evidence via the letter.

23. He submitted that there would be no reason why the Appellant  would  be
    restricted to that area and that the issue of internal relocation was a
    real  one.   The  Appellant  had  good  qualifications  and  employment
    experience thus she could relocate  to  a  different  part  of  Harare,
    obtain employment and live independently.   It  is  not  credible  that
    anyone would individually be looking for this Appellant given  the  low
    profile of her family and  it  was  not  reasonably  likely  that  such
    interest would extend outside an area where her father  is  known.   In
    the circumstances of this case, the Appellant could relocate.  There is
    extensive case law relating to Zimbabwe  showing  that  the  conditions
    have improved considerably and certainly  since  the  previous  set  of
    elections.   The  violence  associated  with  the  elections  has  been
    remarkably low given the history of Zimbabwe.  The MDC has given up its
    challenge to  the  election  results  (see  the  documentation  in  the
    Appellant's bundle).

24. When considering the country guidance relating to teachers (see MN) the
    Appellant is not a teacher.  In fact her father is no longer a  teacher
    and it is difficult to see why anyone would have any  interest  in  her
    upon return.

25. In respect of the skeleton argument produced by Mr  Symes,  whilst  the
    family home has been sold in Harare there is no reason  why  she  could
    not go back to Harare itself or within an area it being a  large  city.
    The country guidance of CM confirmed that that  would  be  a  realistic
    option to relocate  to.   Contrary  to  the  submissions  made  in  the
    skeleton argument, Mr Avery stated that it remained a  submission  that
    the Appellant would be able to find work, support herself, and that she
    would not be  restricted  to  relocation  to  an  area  where  she  had
    previously lived.  Thus he invited the Tribunal to dismiss the appeal.

26. Mr Symes relied upon the helpful skeleton argument that he produced  in
    advance of the hearing.  The skeleton argument set out past history and
    the previous appeal hearings.  At  paragraphs  12  to  17  it  set  out
    country guidance and at paragraphs 18 to  20  dealt  with  the  factual
    basis of her claim.  Paragraphs 21 to 24 dealt with the risks faced  by
    the Appellant at the airport based on the evidence in her  case.   That
    part of the skeleton argument submitted that as she was a person  whose
    father had suffered serious harm  as  a  result  of  imputed  political
    opinion as an MDC supporter based on his role as a school  teacher  and
    that risks he faced were exacerbated  by  suspicions  that  his  family
    abroad remitted funds to the MDC, as a family member of such  a  person
    she would be at risk given her association and that would  be  revealed
    under interrogation at the airport on return.  It  was  submitted  that
    there "may well  be  some  institutional  memory  of  these  suspicions
    capable of featuring in official records".   It was  further  submitted
    that given "serious harm and threats directed towards the Appellant  in
    the past, there was a presumption of its  repetition  by  reference  to
    339K of the Immigration Rules".  Paragraphs 27 to  29  dealt  with  the
    issue of internal relocation.   Within  those  paragraphs  the  general
    thrust of them but particularised was that internal relocation was  not
    available to this Appellant for the reasons advanced at paragraph 29.

27. Mr Symes also made the following oral  submissions.   As  to  the  past
    events, he submitted that she had given a credible  account  and  there
    was nothing implausible about the  events  recounted.   Concerning  the
    "geographical filter" there was a real risk  of  persecution  of  those
    living in a ZANU-PF area thus the account given has  some  plausibility
    about it.  Whilst it has been stated on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State the family would have moved if  those  events  had  occurred,  Mr
    Symes submitted that they were elderly  and  preferred  to  take  their
    chance in an area known to them.  He submitted that there was  evidence
    given by the Appellant in her interview (question 37) concerning  money
    that she had sent from the UK and that that placed her at risk.

28. When looking at the risk, he invited the Tribunal to take into  account
    339K of the Immigration Rules  concerning  past  persecution  and  that
    objectively she met the test.

29. He submitted that the issue came down to one of  relocation.   In  this
    respect he invited the Tribunal to  consider  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement in which it is said that she had clear links by her  name  to
    her father and that this did not apply to her sister living in Zimbabwe
    who had married and therefore had a different  name  and  was  able  to
    subsume herself within Zimbabwean society.  In addition her accent  has
    a London lilt and she would stand out in the context of a country where
    money was scarce and also in the light of her length of residence.   As
    to the point made by Mr Avery concerning the prospects  of  employment,
    the point made by the Appellant in her statement was  that  working  in
    the hospitality industry such as in hotels in Harare there are a number
    of people who would act as an informant and inform  on  this  Appellant
    and from that she would receive adverse attention.  The same  would  be
    true of rented accommodation that a check would be made and that  would
    lead her to being connected to her father.  She would not  be  able  to
    join her sister and would be at risk of the militia who are  active  in
    Harare.  In general internal relocation would  be  unavailable  to  the
    Appellant because of danger but also because it would be unduly  harsh.
    She would not  be  able  to  survive  as  a  street  vendor  given  her
    characteristics.  Thus she had demonstrated that she would be  at  real
    risk of persecution or serious harm upon return to Zimbabwe.

30. I reserved my determination.





The Legal Framework

Burden and Standard of Proof

31. The burden of proof rests on the Appellant to prove  her  case  on  the
    lower standard of a reasonable degree of likelihood, which I take to be
    the same as "substantial grounds for believing" or "real risk".   Where
    below I refer to 'risk' or 'real risk' this is to be understood  as  an
    abbreviated way of identifying: (1) whether on return there is a  well-
    founded fear of being persecuted under Refugee Convention; (2)  whether
    on return there are substantial grounds for  believing  that  a  person
    would face a real risk of suffering serious harm within the meaning  of
    paragraph 339C of the amended Immigration Rules;  and  (3)  whether  on
    return there are substantial grounds for believing that a person  would
    face a real risk of being exposed to a real risk of treatment  contrary
    to Article 3 of ECHR.  I have to consider the  evidence  in  the  round
    and, so far as the assessment of the  Appellant's  case  is  concerned,
    place it in the context of all of the background evidence.

Internal Relocation

32. Of particular relevance in this case is paragraph 339O headed "Internal
    Relocation".  This states:


         "i.      The Secretary of State will not make:


             (a)     a grant of asylum if in part of the country of origin
                  a person will  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of  being
                  persecuted and the person can reasonably  be  expected  to
                  stay in that part of the country; or


             (b)    a grant of humanitarian protection if in part  of  the
                  country of return a person would not face a real  risk  of
                  suffering serious harm, and the person can  reasonably  be
                  expected to stay in that part of the country.


         ii.       In examining whether a part of the country of  origin  or
             country of return meets the requirements in i.  the  Secretary
             of State, when making his decision on whether to grant  asylum
             or humanitarian protection, will have regard  to  the  general
             circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to
             the personal circumstances of the person.


         iii.     It applies notwithstanding technical obstacles  to  return
             to the country of origin or country of return."

33. In considering the proper approach to the issue of internal  relocation
    I have also to apply the principles set out by the House  of  Lords  in
    Januzi [2006] UKHL 5  (which  adopts  the  criteria  now  contained  in
    paragraph 339O but also contains more detailed guidance) and AH (Sudan)
    [2007] UKHL 49.

34. In Januzi their Lordships held that the test for whether  it  would  be
    unreasonable for an asylum seeker to relocate to a  safe  haven  within
    his own country, was not whether the quality of life  there  failed  to
    meet the basic norms  of  civil,  political  and  socio-economic  human
    rights, but whether he would face conditions such as utter  destitution
    or exposure to cruel or inhuman treatment, threatening his  most  basic
    human rights.  There was no presumption that when persecution  emanated
    from agents of the state or where the state encouraged or  connived  in
    that persecution by others, there could be no  viable  internal  flight
    option.  The greater the power of the  state  over  all  parts  of  the
    asylum seeker's country the less viable such an  option  would  be  and
    vice versa.

35. In AH (Sudan) their Lordships  repeated  that  the  test  to  determine
    whether internal relocation was available was as  set  out  in  Januzi,
    namely whether it was reasonable to expect the Appellant to relocate or
    whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so.   The  'unduly
    harsh' test did not require conditions in the place  of  relocation  to
    reach the Article 3 ECHR level.  The enquiry was to be directed to  the
    situation of the particular Appellant, whose age,  gender,  experience,
    health, skills and family ties might all be very relevant.   Cases  had
    to  be  assessed  holistically  with  specific  reference  to  personal
    circumstances, including past persecution or fear thereof in family and
    social relationships.


36. In assessing risk to an appellant whose family  members  have  suffered
    persecution or serious harm it is also  important to bear in  mind  the
    principles set  out  at  Recital 27  of  the  Qualification  Direction
    2004/83/EC that:

         "(Family members, merely due to their relation to the refugee, will
         normally be vulnerable to acts of persecution in such a manner that
         could be the basis for refugee status)".

37. I have also had regard to the circumstances  of  the  individual  where
    that person has already been subject to persecution or serious harm and
    therefore falls into the category of persons to whom to  Rule 339K  of
    the Immigration Rules applies mirroring Article 4 of the Qualification
    Directive.  That Rule is in the following terms:

         "The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution  or
         serious harm, or to direct threats of  such  persecution  and  such
         harm, will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well
         founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm,
         unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution  or
         serious harm will not be repeated".

Findings of fact and analysis of the evidence:

38. The starting point for an assessment of risk are the findings  of  fact
    made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  have  been  preserved.   Those
    findings are set out in the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Perry at paragraph 60.  They are as follows.   The  Appellant's  father
    was a teacher and had been a target for ZANU-PF youths.  In  July  2002
    the family was subjected to violence when the Appellant was attacked at
    the family home by ZANU-PF supporters who forced  their  way  into  the
    house and sought to force themselves on the Appellant and  her  sister,
    beating up their father when he intervened.  The police did nothing  to
    help when the matter was reported to  them.   The  Appellant  took  the
    opportunity to leave Zimbabwe and entered the United Kingdom on a visit
    visa.  In  January  2003  the  family  home  was  attacked  by  ZANU-PF
    supporters who wrecked the house contents and beat her father.   It  is
    asserted that they questioned her parents  about  her  whereabouts  and
    accused her of being sponsored  by  the  MDC  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  In February 2003 ZANU-PF supporters returned and her sister S
    was the subject of a serious sexual assault.  She left the home area in
    2004.  In 2009, after the  Appellant's  parents  moved  to  Murewa  the
    family home was set on fire and the kitchen was burned.

39.   Those are the preserved findings that are set out at paragraph 60  of
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.  It  is  plain  from  the
    determination that the judge rejected some of the facts advanced by the
    Appellant as the basis for her asylum claim.  That was in respect of  a
    letter sent by the Appellant's father dated 30th October 2011 in  which
    the judge considered at paragraphs  64  and  68  of  the  determination
    noting that she did not find  it  credible  that  ZANU-PF  youths  were
    "looking and asking for the whereabouts of my daughter MK".  The  judge
    did not find her father's reference to the visit of  youths  in  Murewa
    and their interest being in the Appellant  being  either  plausible  or
    credible.

40. It is submitted in the skeleton  argument  at  paragraph  19  that  the
    finding of the First-tier Tribunal that the father's evidence that  she
    was at a continued risk is not credible  is  a  finding  that  must  be
    revisited by the Upper Tribunal.  For the purposes of this hearing, and
    as a result of the directions given, I have heard further evidence from
    the Appellant including evidence of an updated nature  dealing  with  a
    further incident that she asserts has occurred in November 2012 and for
    the Appellant to give further evidence generally concerning  the  issue
    of risk to her arising out of the profile she asserts her father has in
    Zimbabwe which is imputed to her.  Her evidence has been the subject of
    cross-examination by Mr Avery on behalf of the Respondent  and  I  have
    set out earlier his submissions concerning the nature of her  evidence.
    Therefore I am required to make further findings of fact based  on  the
    evidence I have heard and also to consider the context of the  evidence
    as a whole when making  an  assessment  of  the  risks  faced  to  this
    Appellant.

41. The first incident relates to 2002 and is set against the background of
    the Appellant's father's  occupation  as  a  teacher.   The  background
    material relating to teachers  and  problems  that  they  have  met  in
    Zimbabwe is set out in the refusal letter at paragraphs 50 to 63.   The
    background evidence was also summarised by the Upper  Tribunal  in  the
    most   recent   country   guidance   decision    of    NN    (Teachers;
    Matabeleland/Bulawayo: risk) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00198 (IAC)  where
    the Tribunal at paragraph 33 onwards summarised the development of  the
    guidance relating to teachers in Zimbabwe as  conditions  have  changed
    for the better or for the worse.  They then went  on  to  consider  the
    current  country  evidence  and  the  fresh  evidence  upon  which  the
    Appellant  had  relied  in  the  appeal.   It  is  apparent  from  that
    background material referred  to  by  the  Tribunal  and  also  by  the
    Secretary of State that teachers in recent years have been the  subject
    of attacks in Zimbabwe and were targeted in postelection violence as  a
    result of their occupation and by being linked to the MDC.

42.  It is plain from the circumstances of the attack  in  2002,  which  is
    accepted, that it  arose  as  a  result  of  the  Appellant's  father's
    occupation.  It cannot be said that the incident arose because  of  the
    Appellant's profile per se nor can it be said that it was  due  to  any
    links with the United Kingdom because  at  that  stage  she  was  still
    resident in Zimbabwe.  There was also an incident in January 2003 where
    the home was attacked by ZANU-PF supporters and her father was attacked
    and in February 2003 the  Appellant's  sister  was  the  subject  of  a
    serious sexual assault.  The family remained there for  a  period  post
    2003.  According to the oral evidence given by the  Appellant  at  this
    hearing there were problems in selling the house that were caused  also
    by renting it out and it took a period of  six  months  before  a  sale
    could be achieved.  The Appellant's parents  moved  to  Murewa  in  May
    2004.

43. I have considered the evidence concerning the period between  May  2004
    to 2009.  Having considered the evidence as a whole, I have reached the
    conclusion that there were no incidents of any significance  that  took
    place between May 2004 and the incident that occurred in 2009.  I  have
    reached that conclusion for the following reasons:-

          a)   The evidence contained in the  Appellant's  statement  (22nd
             November 2011) was that harassment  had  continued  throughout
             the years and in 2009 their home  was  set  on  fire  and  the
             kitchen  was  burnt  (paragraph  8).   When  interviewed   the
             Appellant  was  asked  about  the  events  in  Murewa  and  in
             particular, whether apart from verbal harassment  her  parents
             faced any other persecutory harm.  The Appellant replied  that
             they had but the biggest was in 2009 when the place was set on
             fire calling them traitors and getting money  sent  over  from
             the UK (see question 37).  However the questions continued and
             at question 40 she was asked "You have told  me  of  the  2009
             event.  What else happened to your parents between 2004-2009?"
              The reply was "Yes ZANU-PF set fire to  the  crop  of  maize.
             Another time he was beaten.   There  were  so  many  incidents
             going on from 2009 up to this date".   A careful consideration
             of those questions in the interview between questions  37  and
             40 relates solely to the period between 2004 and 2009.  Whilst
             I would accept that during that period there was likely to  be
             harassment and verbal abuse as claimed given  that  they  were
             living in a ZANU-PF area, I am not satisfied that the  account
             given by the Appellant in her oral  evidence  before  me  that
             during  this  time  there  were  many  incidents,  up  to   15
             incidents, which she described as "constant persecution"  that
             was "almost like a patrol" is not consistent with the  account
             that she gave when interviewed in 2011.

          b)   I do not find that there is  a  reasonable  likelihood  that
             they would have remained between 2004 and 2009  in  Murewa  if
             they had been the subject of "constant persecution" in the way
             that the Appellant described in her oral evidence  before  me.
             During this period of time they had access to funds as it  was
             the period of time when the Appellant was  a  student  in  the
             United Kingdom.  They had sold their family property and  thus
             if they had been subjected to such persecution I am  satisfied
             that there is a reasonable likelihood  that  they  would  have
             taken the opportunity to move to a different place.

          c) I also take into account that in cross-examination as noted by
             Mr Avery in his  submissions,  she  was  unable  to  give  any
             specific examples or dates  in  her  evidence  concerning  the
             period between 2004 and 2009.

44.   I now turn to the incident that occurred in  2009  where  the  family
    home was set alight and the kitchen was burned.  It  is  common  ground
    that  the  Respondent  accepted  that  that  incident  occurred.    The
    background evidence relevant to that period of time  demonstrates  that
    ZANU-PF  militias  operated  as  "de  facto  enforcers"  of  government
    policies and had committed assault, torture, rape, extralegal evictions
    and extralegal executions without fear of punishment, the incidence  of
    these abuses increased significantly in 2008 and continued, though at a
    decreased rate, in 2009".  (See Freedom  in  the  World  2010  Zimbabwe
    covering events in 2009).

45.   I have considered the background to this incident.  As set out in the
    preceding paragraphs, I have not found that there were any incidents of
    significance between 2004 and 2009 but from the evidence  would  accept
    that in the light of  the  background  material  that  the  Appellant's
    parents were reasonably likely to be the subject  of  some  harassment,
    verbal abuse and that their crops may have been destroyed, however I do
    not accept the level described by the Appellant  that  the  Appellant's
    parents suffered during this period "constant persecution" in the light
    of her vague and non specific evidence before me and the fact  that  it
    is not consistent with the Appellant's family remaining  in  that  area
    for such a significant period of time.  Whilst it has been argued by Mr
    Symes that this was her family home, they did obtain the proceeds which
    were not spent on purchasing a new home according  to  the  Appellant's
    oral evidence, but to assist in the rebuilding of their  old  home  and
    could have used the proceeds to move elsewhere or  at  the  very  least
    join their other daughter who was living in another part of Zimbabwe at
    the time.

46. The Appellant's father retired from teaching in 2004.  When considering
    the Appellant's factual account, it has been submitted on behalf of the
    Appellant that part of the circumstances that gave  rise  to  the  risk
    related to the Appellant's absence and the assertion that it  had  been
    said they were receiving remittances or money from the United Kingdom.

47.  I have considered the evidence in respect of this as relevant  to  the
    incident that occurred in  2009.   In  interview  it  was  put  to  the
    Appellant that when ZANU-PF supporters came to the house and  they  had
    accused her parents of receiving money from the UK, it was put  to  her
    how would ZANU-PF in Murewa know that she was in  the  United  Kingdom?
    The Appellant gave an explanation as follows:-

         "They ask where are your children?  My parents  say  they  disowned
         us.  The  same  things  in  Harare  can  travel.   They  have  good
         communication.  I am not sure how they do it."

    It is plain from the explanation that she gave in interview  concerning
    the events in 2002 and 2003 that the ZANU-PF supporters in Harare  knew
    that she had gone to the United Kingdom  because  the  information  had
    probably been given to them from the neighbours (see interview).  It is
    also plain from the evidence before  me  that  those  involved  in  the
    incidents in Harare and in Murewa have not been identified or given any
    type of description; whether they were part of the same group,  whether
    they were the same individuals.  They have only ever been described  in
    terms as "ZANU-PF supporters" (see interview) or "ZANU-PF youths"  (see
    letter at F1).  Against that background I do not find that it has  been
    substantiated to the lower standard that these people involved were any
    linked, homogenous group  with  any  significant  personal  profile  or
    characteristics.  It has not even  been  demonstrated  that  they  were
    linked by any common theme, other  than  loosely  being  identified  as
    "Zanu -PF supporters" or even knew each other.

48. I do not accept that information from 2002 / 2003 travelled from Harare
    to Murewa in the way asserted by this Appellant.  I have  reached  that
    conclusion for a number of reasons.  The geographical distance  between
    Harare and Murewa would preclude that as being reasonably likely and as
    to the lack of profile of those concerned, either  on  the  basis  that
    they knew each other or that they would relay information  of  such  an
    age.  The Appellant had not been in Zimbabwe since  2003  and  had  not
    moved with them to Murewa in 2004.  There has been nothing suggested in
    the evidence before me to demonstrate that the local ZANU-PF in  Murewa
    would even be aware of her previous presence or  the  circumstances  of
    the 2002/2003 attack.  I find that the  circumstances  of  the  earlier
    incident  can  be  distinguished  because  the  account  given  by  the
    Appellant is that neighbours  in  the  area  have  told  local  ZANU-PF
    supporters/youths that the Appellant had gone to the United Kingdom.  I
    do not find that  there  is  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the  same
    neighbours would inform unidentified  ZANU-PF  supporters  who  live  a
    significant geographical distance away  following  such  a  significant
    time lapse of an incident in 2002 to 2003.  I find that that  stretches
    credulity.

49.  I have also considered the period from 2009 until November  2012.   The
    Appellant made her claim for asylum on 13th October 2011 having been in
    the United Kingdom since 2002.  By reason of that application  she  was
    interviewed by the  Respondent.   The  interview  took  place  on  28th
    October 2011.  She was asked at that time when she had last  spoken  to
    her parents and she said "about four  weeks  ago"  (question  57).   At
    question 58 she was asked about the current situation for her  parents.
    She said "they live day to day.  They don't know what tomorrow will be.
     We are a Christian family and we leave things in God's hands and  pray
    we will be OK".  There was no reference to any incidents  occurring  at
    the date or at the time of the interview in October 2011  dealing  with
    events post the 2009 incident in Murewa.  This  was  a  point  made  on
    behalf of the Respondent in the refusal letter at paragraph 69 where it
    made reference to the incident occurring in 2009 but that  her  parents
    had remained in Zimbabwe.  The Respondent noted that it was now  nearly
    2012 and that it had not been stated on  the  Appellant's  behalf  that
    anything else had occurred during that period.  The Appellant responded
    to that assertion in a  document  entitled  "comments  on  the  refusal
    letter" dated 2nd December 2011  which  was  adopted  as  part  of  her
    evidence.  She says this:-

         "At no point in interview did I say they were peaceful.  My parents
         still live in fear.  They don't want to  tell  me  about  incidents
         that occur."

    I have considered the evidence about this period of time  and  what  is
    said by the Appellant.  I do not accept that  if  there  had  been  any
    incidents that the Appellant would not  have  made  reference  to  them
    either in her interview or in her  statement,  particularly  that  that
    dealt with the comments made in the refusal letter.  The purpose of her
    family recounting incidents to the Appellant would be  to  ensure  that
    she knew what was happening in Zimbabwe so that she did not return  and
    put herself at risk.  I find that there is a reasonable likelihood that
    if any incidents had occurred post 2009 that  her  parents  would  have
    told her about those events to ensure her safety.  In the  letter  that
    her father sent on 30th October 2011 (see F1) there are  no  references
    to any incidents that occurred to them  nor  are  there  any  incidents
    referred to in her witness statement.  The evidence before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at the hearing that took place on 6th January  2012  also
    makes no reference to any other incidents post 2009.

  50. It is against that background that I have considered the  letter  sent
      by the Appellant's father on 30th October 2011 (F1)  the  contents  of
      which the First-tier Tribunal did not find to be credible.  As set out
      in the skeleton argument this evidence requires further assessment  in
      the light of the evidence as a whole.

  51.   From my analysis  of  the  evidence  earlier,  there  have  been  no
      incidents described by the Appellant or particularised that took place
      following the incident in 2009 until 2012.  The last incident that she
      relied upon during her asylum claim which was heard by the  First-tier
      Tribunal in January 2012 related to the incident in 2009.  Whilst  the
      skeleton argument refers to the interview at question 40 as  providing
      evidence that there were events that occurred post the 2009  incident,
      I find that that submission misreads the answer and the way  that  the
      question was framed.  It is plain from reading question 40,  both  the
      question and the answer, that the interviewer was  asking  about  what
      had happened specifically between 2004 and 2009 the previous questions
      relating to the incidents  that  occurred  between  that  period  (see
      question 37).  The Appellant had been answering questions in  relation
      to the period 2004 and 2009.  Nonetheless for the reasons that I  have
      given earlier I reject the Appellant's account that during this period
      of time the family were subjected to "constant persecution" as I  find
      that none of the incidents have been particularised, her evidence  was
      unimpressive and vague concerning those  incidents  when  asked  about
      them in cross-examination.

  52.  Furthermore her statement  at  paragraph  8  gave  no  indication  of
      further incidents concerning family members in Murewa and  there  were
      no references to any incidents that had taken place in the letter from
      her father dated 30th October 2011.  As Mr Avery submits,  the  letter
      dealt with historical incidents  in  Harare  but  not  to  any  recent
      events.  The issue that arises from that letter  relates  to  personal
      risk to this Appellant.  The contents of the letter refer  to  ZANU-PF
      youths coming to look and asking for the whereabouts of the Appellant.
       I have set  that  letter  against  the  findings  that  I  have  made
      concerning the  earlier  periods.   I  do  not  accept  that  in  2011
      unidentified  ZANU-PF  youths  would  have  been  searching  for   the
      whereabouts of the Appellant.  There is no  credible  evidence  before
      the Tribunal as to how these unidentified ZANU-PF youths or supporters
      either knew of her existence nor how they would know that she had gone
      to the  United  Kingdom.   The  explanation  given  by  the  Appellant
      previously was  that  the  neighbours  in  Harare  had  told  them  by
      reference to the events in  2002  and  2003,  however  when  asked  to
      account in her interview as to how ZANU-PF would know in  Murewa  that
      she had gone to the United Kingdom the only explanation that she could
      give is that the news travels.  I have found that to be an implausible
      event given the geographical distance between Harare  and  Murewa  and
      the time lapse of the events  in  2002/2003  and  the  next  event  of
      significance in 2009.  I do not find that it is plausible or  credible
      that in 2011 the ZANU-PF were specifically asking where this Appellant
      was.  It is significant that in the  letter  it  only  identifies  the
      Appellant and although there is another daughter in the United Kingdom
      there is no reference to her nor is there any reference to  a  further
      daughter who lives in Zimbabwe.  There has  been  no  evidence  before
      this Tribunal to link those individuals in Harare with any individuals
      in Murewa, indeed they have not been described in any  way  whatsoever
      but just given a basic description as  "ZANU-PF  youths"  or  "ZANU-PF
      supporters".  There is also no reason given for their interest in her.
       Thus I reject that evidence and do not find that there have been  any
      attempts to locate this Appellant whilst she has been  in  the  United
      Kingdom or any interest shown in her whilst her parents have  been  in
      Murewa from 2004 to date.

  53. Having considered the evidence in its totality,  I  reject  the  claim
      that it is a ZANU-PF suspicion that family members were a conduit  for
      remittances from  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  this  was  a  major
      exacerbating factor.  I do not find that that has been demonstrated by
      the evidence when viewed as a whole for the reasons that  I  have  set
      out earlier.

  54.   It is now asserted that a further incident occurred in November 2012
      which is a significant period of time since  the  last  incident  that
      occurred in 2009.  The circumstances are set out  in  the  Appellant's
      most recent witness statement and by a letter that  was  sent  by  the
      Appellant's mother.  It is asserted by the Appellant that in  November
      2012 her father was attacked by a group of men who were members of the
      militia and had carried out a serious sexual assault upon  her  father
      (see paragraph 14 of the statement).   It  is  said  that  during  the
      telephone call in which this was  relayed  to  the  Appellant  by  her
      mother, her sister Ruth who was also present  in  the  United  Kingdom
      heard the contents of the telephone  call  (see  paragraph  20).   The
      letter in support of this is from the Appellant's mother at page  179.
      It consists of a letter dated 24th July 2013 and  reports  the  attack
      from "ZANU-PF".  The letter refers to  the  attack  that  happened  in
      November whereby it is said they:-

         "Forced their way into our home destroying our property and beating
         us both which resulted in the sexual attack on my husband, to  this
         day my husband has not  recovered  from  this  attack  and  remains
         unable to talk about it.  ... This area continues to  be  a  strong
         area for ZANU-PF and it would be impossible to hide her".

    The letter asks that the United Kingdom  allow  for  the  Appellant  to
    remain here for her safety.

  55. Mr Avery on behalf of the Respondent has submitted  that  the  account
      given by the Appellant is one that has been lacking in credibility and
      that she has not told the truth concerning events in Zimbabwe.  I have
      had to consider the circumstances of this  incident  set  against  the
      background which I have referred to in the preceding paragraphs.

  56.   In summary I have found that after the  incidents  in  2002  /  2003
      there were no incidents of any significance between 2004 and 2009 when
      the parents were in Murewa.  It  is  common  ground  that  the  family
      suffered an arson attack in 2009.  When  set  against  the  background
      evidence of events in 2008 and 2009  there  is  support  for  such  an
      incident occurring.  I did not find that there  had  been  any  cogent
      evidence that there were any incidents between 2009 and  the  incident
      that was said to have occurred in  2012  based  on  the  evidence  the
      Appellant gave herself in her interview and that that was given before
      the First-tier Tribunal.  Therefore there has been a significant lapse
      of time as the last incident was in  2009  where  there  has  been  no
      interest in the Appellant's parents despite living in a  ZANU-PF  area
      and having been in former  employment  as  a  teacher.   There  is  no
      corroboration of the 2012 incident save for the letter written by  her
      mother which may be  seen  as  self-serving  and  not  supporting  the
      incident from any other reliable source.  There is no medical evidence
      produced nor has the Appellant's sister, who witnessed  the  telephone
      call being made and the contents of it,  provided  neither  a  witness
      statement nor attended court  to  give  evidence  about  it.   It  was
      observed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge that her sister Ruth had not
      given evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  despite  her  having
      produced a letter claiming that the Appellant's life was  at  risk  if
      she returned to Zimbabwe (see paragraph 69 of the First-tier  Tribunal
      determination).  There has been no explanation as to  why  her  sister
      who heard the telephone call and could give evidence as  to  what  was
      said has not  given  evidence  before  this  Tribunal  or  provided  a
      statement.

  57.   I have not been  referred  to  any  background  evidence  concerning
      Murewa and any events in November 2012 which would give rise  to  such
      an incident of such severity,  save  that  it  has  been  asserted  in
      general terms that Murewa is a ZANU-PF area.  Thus the lack of support
      for such a serious allegation, given the  significant  time  that  has
      elapsed between incidents and the timing of this  recent  incident  in
      the current proceedings gives rise to concern. I  have  also  had  the
      opportunity to hear evidence from the Appellant who  has  given  vague
      and unimpressive evidence. When asked about  her  mothers  letter  and
      that there was no reference to her being at risk  or  threatened  with
      harm, she said  "  they  always  mention  everything;  they  know  the
      children are here". She also claimed in her oral evidence that  "  the
      perception is not dead... they are  pursuing  our  family."  When  set
      against the history as I have set out above, I do not accept that  her
      evidence as credible that the unnamed individuals  are  "pursuing  the
      family".

  58.   I therefore do not find that the burden of proof has been discharged
      by the Appellant to demonstrate that there is a reasonable  likelihood
      that the incident in November 2012 occurred in the way described.

  59. Even if I accepted that an incident  occurred   in  November  2012,  I
      would have to consider it in the light of the findings set  out  above
      and I would have to  consider  the  circumstances  that  surround  it.
      There is no reference  made  to  the  Appellant  specifically  or  her
      whereabouts in connection with her presence  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      There is no reference in the evidence before me that those responsible
      have any interest in the Appellant nor is there any direct interest in
      her from the authorities.

  60. I have considered the most  recent  background  evidence  relating  to
      Zimbabwe.  The Upper Tribunal  in  the  decision  of  CM  (EM  country
      guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 59 (IAC) refers  to  the
      earlier litigation but noted that the country guidance in EM has  been
      reinstated by the publication in January 2013 of  CM.   This  had  the
      effect of replacing (and displacing) the country guidance in RN making
      clear not just that the country guidance in EM was re-established  but
      bringing that guidance up-to-date to the extent that the scope of that
      hearing permitted.  Whilst CM has not been designated in its  entirety
      as a country guidance case, what CM has to say about the  position  in
      Zimbabwe  as  at  October  2012  whilst  not  comprehensive  and   not
      authoritative country guidance, is worthy of note.   As  the  Tribunal
      has stated in NN (Teachers: Matabeleland/Bulawayo: risk)  Zimbabwe  CG
      [2013] UKUT 00198, the position  was  not  found  to  have  materially
      altered since the period under consideration in EM.

  61. It is convenient to set out here the current country  guidance,  which
      is CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059.
      The case was added to the country guidance list on 1st February  2013,
      after the date of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal.  It  is  head
      noted as follows:

         "(1)     There is no general duty of disclosure on the Secretary of
             State in asylum appeals generally or Country Guidance cases in
             particular. The extent of the Secretary of State's  obligation
             is set out in R v SSHD ex p Kerrouche No 1 [1997] Imm AR  610,
             as explained in R (ota Cindo) v IAT [2002] EWHC  246  (Admin);
             namely, that  she  must  not  knowingly  mislead  a  court  or
             tribunal by omission of material that was known  or  ought  to
             have been known to her.

         (2)  The Country Guidance given by the Tribunal in  EM  and  Others
             (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC) on  the  position
             in Zimbabwe as at the end of January 2011 was not vitiated  in
             any respect by the use made of anonymous evidence from certain
             sources in the  Secretary  of  State's  Fact  Finding  Mission
             report of 2010. The Tribunal was entitled to find  that  there
             had been a durable change since  RN  (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG
             [2008] UKAIT 00083.  The  Country  Guidance  in  EM  does  not
             require to be amended, as regards the position at  that  time,
             in the light of -

             (a)  the disclosure by the Secretary of State of  any  of  the
                  materials subsequently disclosed in response to the orders
                  of the Court of  Appeal  and  related  directions  of  the
                  Tribunal in the current proceedings; or

             (b)  any fresh  material  adduced  by  the  parties  in  those
                  proceedings that might have a bearing on the  position  at
                  that time.

         (3)  The only  change  to  the  EM  Country  Guidance  that  it  is
             necessary to make as regards the position as  at  the  end  of
             January 2011 arises from the judgments in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012]
             UKSC 38. The EM Country Guidance is, accordingly, re-stated as
             follows (with the change underlined in paragraph (5) below):

             (1)      As a general  matter,  there  is  significantly  less
                  politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe, compared  with
                  the situation considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular,
                  the evidence does not show that, as a general matter,  the
                  return of a failed asylum seeker from the United  Kingdom,
                  having no significant MDC profile, would  result  in  that
                  person facing a real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty
                  to the ZANU-PF.

             (2)  The position is, however, likely to be otherwise  in  the
                  case of a person without  ZANU-PF  connections,  returning
                  from the United Kingdom after a significant absence  to  a
                  rural area of Zimbabwe, other than Matabeleland  North  or
                  Matabeleland  South.  Such  a  person  may  well  find  it
                  difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to serious
                  ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF authority  figures  and  those
                  they control.  The adverse attention may  well  involve  a
                  requirement to demonstrate loyalty to  ZANU-PF,  with  the
                  prospect of serious harm in the event of failure.  Persons
                  who have shown themselves not to be favourably disposed to
                  ZANU-PF are entitled to international protection,  whether
                  or not they could and would do whatever might be necessary
                  to demonstrate such loyalty (RT (Zimbabwe)).

             (3)  The situation is not uniform across  the  relevant  rural
                  areas  and  there  may  be  reasons   why   a   particular
                  individual, although at  first  sight  appearing  to  fall
                  within the category described in the preceding  paragraph,
                  in reality does not do so. For example, the evidence might
                  disclose  that,  in  the  home  village,   ZANU-PF   power
                  structures or other means of coercion are weak or absent.

             (4)      In general, a returnee from  the  United  Kingdom  to
                  rural Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South  is  highly
                  unlikely  to  face  significant  difficulty  from  ZANU-PF
                  elements, including  the  security  forces,  even  if  the
                  returnee is a MDC  member  or  supporter.  A  person  may,
                  however, be able to show that his or her village  or  area
                  is one that, unusually, is under the  sway  of  a  ZANU-PF
                  chief, or the like.

             (5)  A returnee to Harare will in general face no  significant
                  difficulties, if going to a low-density or  medium-density
                  area. Whilst the socio-economic situation in  high-density
                  areas is more challenging, in  general  a  person  without
                  ZANU-PF connections will  not  face  significant  problems
                  there (including a "loyalty test"), unless he or she has a
                  significant MDC profile, which might cause him or  her  to
                  feature on a list of those  targeted  for  harassment,  or
                  would otherwise engage in political activities  likely  to
                  attract the adverse attention  of  ZANU-PF,  or  would  be
                  reasonably likely to engage in such activities, but for  a
                  fear of thereby coming to the adverse attention  of  ZANU-
                  PF.

             (6)      A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not suffer the
                  adverse  attention  of  ZANU-PF,  including  the  security
                  forces, even if he or she has a significant MDC profile.

             (7)      The issue of what is a person's home for the purposes
                  of internal relocation is to be decided  as  a  matter  of
                  fact and is not necessarily to be determined by  reference
                  to the place a person from Zimbabwe regards as his or  her
                  rural homeland. As a general matter, it is unlikely that a
                  person with a well-founded fear of persecution in a  major
                  urban centre such as Harare will have  a  viable  internal
                  relocation alternative to a  rural  area  in  the  Eastern
                  provinces. Relocation to Matabeleland (including Bulawayo)
                  may be negated by discrimination, where  the  returnee  is
                  Shona.

             (8)  Internal relocation  from  a  rural  area  to  Harare  or
                  (subject to what  we  have  just  said)  Bulawayo  is,  in
                  general,   more   realistic;   but   the    socio-economic
                  circumstances in which persons are  reasonably  likely  to
                  find themselves will need to be considered,  in  order  to
                  determine whether it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh
                  to expect them to relocate.

             (9)  The economy of Zimbabwe has markedly improved  since  the
                  period considered in RN. The replacement of the Zimbabwean
                  currency by the US dollar and the South African  rand  has
                  ended the recent hyperinflation. The availability of  food
                  and other goods in shops has likewise improved, as has the
                  availability  of  utilities  in  Harare.  Although   these
                  improvements are not being felt by everyone, with  15%  of
                  the population still requiring food  aid,  there  has  not
                  been any deterioration in the humanitarian situation since
                  late 2008. Zimbabwe has a large informal economy,  ranging
                  from  street  traders  to  home-based  enterprises,  which
                  (depending on the circumstances) returnees may be expected
                  to enter.

             (10)     As was the position in RN, those who are or have been
                  teachers require to have their  cases  determined  on  the
                  basis that  this  fact  places  them  in  an  enhanced  or
                  heightened risk category, the significance of  which  will
                  need to be assessed on an individual basis.

             (11)     In  certain  cases,  persons  found  to  be seriously
                  lacking in credibility may properly be found as  a  result
                  to have failed to show a reasonable  likelihood  (a)  that
                  they would not,  in  fact,  be  regarded,  on  return,  as
                  aligned  with  ZANU-PF  and/or  (b)  that  they  would  be
                  returning to a socio-economic  milieu  in  which  problems
                  with  ZANU-PF  will  arise.  This  important   point   was
                  identified in RN ... and remains valid.

         (4)  In the course of deciding CM's appeal,  the  present  Tribunal
             has made an assessment of certain  general  matters  regarding
             Zimbabwe as at  October  2012.  As  a  result,  the  following
             country information may be of  assistance  to  decision-makers
             and judges. It is, however, not Country  Guidance  within  the
             scope of Practice Direction 12 and is based on evidence  which
             neither party claimed to be comprehensive:

             (a)  The picture presented by the fresh  evidence  as  to  the
                  general position  of  politically  motivated  violence  in
                  Zimbabwe as  at  October  2012  does  not  differ  in  any
                  material respect from the Country Guidance in EM.

             (b)  Elections are due to be held in 2013; but it  is  unclear
                  when.

             (c)  In the light of the evidence regarding the activities  of
                  Chipangano,  judicial-fact  finders  may   need   to   pay
                  particular regard to whether a person, who  is  reasonably
                  likely to go to Mbare or a neighbouring high density  area
                  of Harare, will come to  the  adverse  attention  of  that
                  group; in particular, if he or she is reasonably likely to
                  have to find employment of a kind that Chipangano seeks to
                  control or otherwise exploit  for  economic,  rather  than
                  political, reasons."

  62. In CM,  the  panel  considered  the  level  of  politically  motivated
      violence and human rights violations in  Zimbabwe  between  paragraphs
      192 and 195 and found that overall the  evidence  has  to  a  downward
      trend of politically motivated human rights violence  in  Zimbabwe  is
      cogent.

The background evidence before the Upper Tribunal:

  63. Much of the background evidence referred to in the Appellant's  bundle
      relates to historical problems for those employed as teachers  and  in
      particular the run-up to the June  2008  Presidential  Elections  (see
      page 123 of the Appellant's bundle).  The article is  written  in  the
      context of what might happen in view of the  elections  that  had  not
      occurred at the date that the article was written.

  64. The Tribunal in CM at paragraph 237 stated this:-

         "... No one can rule out a resumption of some politically motivated
         violence when elections are called, there is  no  inevitability  or
         even probability that elections will see a complete  repetition  of
         the actions taken in 2008."

  65. The Tribunal were right to take that view and it is common ground that
      the elections did not lead to the type of violence that had been  seen
      previously in 2008.  An article in the Appellant's bundle  (page  181)
      relates to the African Union who "have expressed appreciation for  the
      peace that has prevailed in the run-up to  the  Zimbabwean  harmonised
      elections to be held on July 31st".   Whilst  the  article  refers  to
      concerns about people not being registered to vote, it is  plain  from
      that document that the position regarding the run-up to the  elections
      appeared to be in the  main  trouble-free.   That  compares  with  the
      International Crisis Group article (see page 183) which  compares  the
      situation  as  to  what  they  thought  would  happen.   At  page  193
      (Appellant's bundle article dated 1st August 2013) it  refers  to  the
      high turn out across the country for the elections since the polls  of
      2008 and notes "there were no reports of widespread violence this time
      round despite the fierce rhetoric of the campaign" (see  page  197  of
      Appellant's bundle).  At page 195 of the Appellant's bundle it  states
      "at least it was peaceful" was the risk assessment of one Harare based
      diplomat  after  the  Presidential  Elections.   The  result  of   the
      elections meant that  President  Mugabe  began  his  seventh  term  in
      office; ZANU-PF won two thirds of the seats in Parliament and took 61%
      of the vote.

  66. Set against that material, there is some evidence of supporters of the
      MDC being attacked (see page 197) the article refers to eleven  people
      claiming to have been attacked in a township who sought refuge in  the
      MDC headquarters.  The article goes on to state that  the  MDC  itself
      would not be able to control  its  angry  supporters  if  such  events
      continued.  At page 198 it was recorded that women political activists
      told Amnesty International that they were threatened with violence  in
      the Mukumbwa district and page 201 refers to reports  of  intimidation
      of 38 supporters who served as polling agents and electors  forced  to
      leave homes in Mbare.  The thrust of the  background  evidence  placed
      before this Tribunal from the Appellant's bundle demonstrates that the
      politically motivated violence that had been seen in 2008 did not,  in
      the main, occur in the elections either  to  the  run-up  to  them  or
      during or after the elections in July 2013.   Whilst  there  are  some
      reports which I have referred to of some incidents, it  has  not  been
      demonstrated that such violence has been widespread or  in  the  terms
      that it has occurred before in Zimbabwe.

Conclusions:

  67. I now turn to the individualised risk to this Appellant in  the  light
      of the findings of fact  I  have  set  out,  including  the  preserved
      findings. I take into account the principles set out at Recital 27  of
      the QD in respect of family members and also Rule 339K but I find that
      in this Appellant's case that there are  no good reasons  to  consider
      that any persecution or serious harm would be repeated for the reasons
      given below. The first risk identified by Mr Symes relates to the risk
      at the airport.  The risk at the airport must be assessed in the light
      of the findings of fact this Tribunal  has  made  in  respect  of  any
      profile that she may have.  The Appellant left Harare when she was  17
      thus she has never  voted  when  in  Zimbabwe  (confirmed  by  her  at
      question 5 of the interview).  She has no political connections of her
      own to the MDC and she is  not  someone  in  the  past  who  has  been
      identified as an opponent of the Mugabe regime.   Furthermore  it  has
      not been demonstrated  that  her  father  has  been  involved  in  any
      political activity.  Her case is based on political opinion imputed to
      her by reason of her father's past employment.  It  is  common  ground
      that he retired from teaching in 2004.  Whilst it could be  said  that
      he had a local profile, there is no evidence before the Tribunal  that
      his profile had any significance beyond that area.   I  have  rejected
      the assertion and the evidence that during any attack in  Murewa  that
      the Appellant's whereabouts had been referred to at that  time  or  at
      any other.

  68. The country guidance case dealing with the risk at the point of return
      remains HS (Returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007]  UKAIT  00941
      in which the Tribunal found that the process  of  screening  returning
      passengers is an intelligence led process and the CIO  will  generally
      have identified from the passenger manifest  in  advance,  based  upon
      such intelligence those passengers in  whom  they  have  any  possible
      interest.  The fact of having made  an  asylum  claim  abroad  is  not
      something in itself that  would  give  rise  to  adverse  interest  on
      return.  At paragraphs 264 and 266 the Tribunal said:-

         "The CIO  has  taken  over  responsibility  for  the  operation  of
         immigration control at Harare Airport and Immigration Officers  are
         being replaced by CIO officers.  We accept also  that  one  of  the
         purposes of the CIO in monitoring arrivals at  the  airport  is  to
         identify those who are thought to be, for whatever reason,  enemies
         of the regime.  The aim is to detect those of interest  because  of
         an adverse military or criminal profile.  The  main  focus  of  the
         operation is to identify those  who  may  be  of  adverse  interest
         remains those who are perceived to be politically active in support
         of the opposition.  That anyone perceived to be a threat  to  or  a
         critic of the regime will attract interest also ... We have set out
         the evidence that indicates in whom the CIO has an interest.   This
         will be those in respect of whom there is any reason to suspect  an
         adverse  political,  criminal  or  military  profile  of  the  type
         identified  in  AA  (2).   In  addition,  those  perceived  to   be
         associated with what have come to be identified  as  civil  society
         organisations may attract adverse interest as critics of the regime
         (and see paragraph 282)."

  69. In CM (as cited) the Tribunal held that the fresh  evidence  regarding
      the position at the point of return does not indicate any increase  in
      risk since the country guidance was given in HS.  On the contrary, the
      available evidence is that  the  treatment  of  those  who  have  been
      returned to Harare Airport since 2007 and the absence of any  reliable
      evidence of risk there  means  that  there  is  no  justification  for
      extending the scope of who might be regarded by  the  CIO  as  an  MDC
      activist.

  70. When applied to the facts of this case, I do not find that it has been
      demonstrated that the Appellant will face any interest upon return  to
      Zimbabwe at the airport.  She has  no  adverse  military  or  criminal
      profile nor is she likely to be perceived to be politically active  in
      support of the opposition.  She has  no  association  with  any  civil
      society organisations that may attract adverse interest as a critic of
      the regime.  Whilst it is submitted that  as  a  family  member  of  a
      former school teacher, and  that  there  may  be  some  "institutional
      memory" of such a suspicion capable of featuring in "official records"
      there is no evidence before me that in 2002 or 2003  any  such  record
      was kept of the incident that occurred or that there is any record  of
      the Appellant being the daughter of a former  teacher.   There  is  no
      evidence that the Appellant's father  had  any  links  with  the  MDC,
      indeed to the contrary.  Whilst the assertion is made on the basis  of
      it being imputed to him as a result of his  employment,  there  is  no
      evidence before me that it is reasonably likely that  someone  in  the
      Appellant's position would be at risk at the airport.  I find that the
      likelihood is that she will be able to enter Zimbabwe and pass through
      the airport freely with no interest being shown in her.   There  is  a
      suggestion in the Appellant's evidence  that  the  fact  that  she  is
      returning from the United Kingdom after a long absence that  returnees
      are viewed by some with suspicion.  However this has  been  known  for
      some time and all such evidence was considered by the Tribunal in both
      EM and CM and found there was no reason to amend  the  conclusion  set
      out in HS.

  71. In light of the Appellant's profile  that  I  have  set  out  and  her
      particular characteristics based on the findings of fact made by  this
      Tribunal, I find that she has  failed  to  demonstrate  to  the  lower
      standard that she would be at risk on return at the airport.  I do not
      find that there is any reasonable likelihood that she would be  unable
      to pass through  the  airport  without  difficulty.   I  find  to  the
      contrary that she will be able to do so.

  72.  I now turn to risk beyond  the  airport  applying  the  "geographical
      filter".  I  have  considered  the  risk  on  return  to  Murewa   (in
      Mashonaland East) where the Appellant's parents reside.  The  findings
      of fact that I have made including the preserved findings set out that
      the Appellant's parents moved there in May 2004.  Between May 2004  to
      2009  whilst  there  might  have  been  some  isolated  incidents   of
      harassment, the Appellant has not discharged the burden  upon  her  to
      show that there were any incidents of significance between  those  two
      dates.  There was an incident in 2009 whereby the house was set alight
      and the kitchen was burned.  Post 2009 until November 2012 there is no
      cogent evidence that there have been any further ongoing  difficulties
      despite  the  Appellant's  parents'  claim  that  this  is  a  ZANU-PF
      stronghold (see F2, the letter written  by  the  Appellant's  father).
      The Appellant has never lived in Murewa with her family and whilst she
      suffered an incident in 2002 that was a significant time ago, over ten
      years, and those who were responsible have not been identified in  any
      material way whatsoever but have been loosely identified  as  "ZANU-PF
      youths" or "ZANU-PF supporters".  It has not  been  demonstrated  that
      the attack in 2002/2003 upon the family was linked to  any  attack  in
      2009 as it had not been  demonstrated  credibly  how  those  living  a
      significant geographical location and distance away from Murewa  would
      have known that any incident had occurred previously  or  the  reasons
      for it.  Furthermore the letter written by the  mother  in  July  2013
      makes no reference to those responsible (if that incident did in  fact
      occur) would have any interest in the Appellant and no direct interest
      was referred to in the letter or the account of the incident that  was
      said to have taken place in November 2012.  I therefore  do  not  find
      that she has discharged the burden on her to show that she would be at
      risk of harm in Murewa.

  73. Even if I were to find that she would be at risk in Murewa I  consider
      that it has not been demonstrated that she would be at risk of harm in
      Harare, which is where she has lived previously  and  that  she  could
      relocate there.  The background material demonstrates that  Harare  is
      situated in Mashonaland East Province and has 1.6 million  inhabitants
      with 2.8 million living in its metropolitan area.  It comprises  of  a
      number of districts including Harare East which is the  opposite  side
      of Mafakose, Epworth, Mbare,  Budirio,  Highfield  and  Glennora.  The
      background evidence concerning the suburbs of Harare was considered in
      the decision of CM (as cited).  At paragraph 218, the  evidence  heard
      by the Tribunal was described as thus:-

         "As a returnee to, at worst, a medium  density  suburb  Harare,  he
         would not be at risk of persecution or serious harm.   Mr  Mavhinga
         conceded that he is not aware of a single incident in low or medium
         density parts of the city  and  this  picture  is  consistent  with
         Professor  Ranger's  evidence  in  October  2011,   summarised   at
         paragraph 128 of EM (and see also paragraph 100 of EM, the evidence
         of witness 77).  There is  no  reported  evidence  suggesting  that
         areas such as Hatfield can be  compared  to  townships,  let  alone
         Mbare, in respect of security."

  74. The position  of  Hatfield  is  described  at  paragraph  234  in  the
      following terms:-

         "Whether Hatfield is regarded as a  low  or  as  a  medium  density
         suburb of Harare, it is certainly not a high density one and it  is
         not a place where there is any  reliable  evidence  of  significant
         Chipangano activity or any other maligned presence  that  could  be
         properly said to give rise to a real risk of CM facing an RN  style
         loyalty challenge.  There is no credible evidence that CM would  be
         forced through economic necessity to seek work outside Hatfield, so
         as to come into contact with Chipangano."

    Thus the Tribunal concluded in CM at head note (5):-

         "A  returnee  to  Harare  will  in  general  face  no   significant
         difficulties, if going to a  low-density  or  medium-density  area.
         Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas  is  more
         challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
         not face significant problems there (including a  "loyalty  test"),
         unless he or she has a significant MDC profile, which  might  cause
         him or her to feature on a list of those targeted  for  harassment,
         or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract
         the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely  to
         engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF."

  75. There is no cogent evidence  before  this  Tribunal  that  the  former
      family home in Mafakose in Harare is in a ZANU-PF dominated area.  The
      evidence put forward in the skeleton argument (see  paragraph  27)  is
      based on what she said in interview, namely "It was ZANU-PF  who  were
      in control".   That  referred  to  the  period  in  2002  which  is  a
      significant time ago and there was nothing to substantiate or  support
      the fact that the area that she lived in formerly, Mafakose in Harare,
      was ZANU-PF held either then or now.

  76. The Appellant's paternal uncle lived in Glennora, a suburb of  Harare.
      There is no evidence before this Tribunal that he has been at risk  at
      any time whilst living in Glennora either on account  of  his  brother
      being a teacher or by reference to his family name (see question 35 of
      the interview).

  77. Whilst it is accepted there was historic interest in her in 2002  that
      was at a time when her father lived with her and was in employment  as
      a teacher.  The  incident  has  to  be  seen  against  the  background
      evidence at that time.  It cannot be said that the  incident  occurred
      because she was "the schoolteacher's expatriate daughter"  because  at
      that time she had not left Zimbabwe.  I have rejected the  claim  made
      that there was any interest shown  in  her  after  she  left  for  the
      reasons that I have given earlier.

  78. There is no evidence before me to support the assertion  made  in  the
      skeleton argument that someone with a "London accent" will stand  out.
      Zimbabwe has been a country where there has been large  upheaval  with
      movement both out of Zimbabwe and into Zimbabwe as well as within  the
      country itself.  It is a country that has  a  long  tradition  of  its
      young people travelling  abroad  for  purposes  of  education  or  for
      employment prospects.  The fact that the Appellant would be  returning
      to Harare, its capital, or within its suburbs having been resident  in
      the United Kingdom would not by itself be a risk factor on  the  facts
      of her case.

  79. It has been submitted also that she could not  live  in  Harare  as  a
      result of the group known as the Chipangano.  The Tribunal in CM dealt
      with the issue of the Chipangano  at  paragraphs  196  onwards.   They
      summarise the evidence at paragraphs  196  and  197  and  reached  the
      conclusion at 198 that after weighing the evidence, the Chipangano:-

         "Has been responsible for acts of violence and intimidation outside
         Mbare on limited occasions and largely in neighbouring  suburbs  as
         Epsworth and Highfield.  The backlash in September 2012 shows  that
         the professed allegiance to ZANU-PF was not sufficient to  insulate
         Chipangano from a crackdown on their activities.   There  is  scant
         evidence that Chipangano has any significant range or influence  in
         low or medium density suburbs of Harare, and their forays into  the
         centre of the town are infrequent.  Notwithstanding the  consistent
         claims of directional control by ZANU-PF, we find that the evidence
         falls short of showing that Chipangano is  an  arm  of  the  party,
         capable of being deployed at will to  further  ZANU-PF  ends.   ...
         Overall  Chipangano's  criminal  activities,  no  doubt   cause   a
         considerable anxiety in high density suburbs in Harare, have not on
         the evidence, led to a significant rise in the  overall  number  of
         human rights violations in the city."

  80. At paragraph 200 of CM the  Tribunal  gave  further  consideration  to
      Chipangano's activities and that they may be a cause:-

         "Of difficulty for a person returning or otherwise going  to  Mbara
         from the United Kingdom, who is reasonably likely to have  to  seek
         employment of such a kind as to encounter Chipangano "touts" or the
         like.  However we do not consider that any such difficulties can be
         said as a general matter  to  have  any  actual  imputed  political
         element, in the sense that Chipangano will be hostile to the person
         in question because he or she is  viewed  as  having  a  particular
         political  affiliation.   In  particular,  there  is  no   credible
         evidence to show  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  Chipangano  will
         impose on the person a political loyalty test or challenge."

  81.  In  that  context  applied  to  this   Appellant,   her   background,
      qualifications and employment  history  does  not  give  rise  to  the
      assertion that she would be likely to encounter Chipangano touts.  She
      is not likely to wish to obtain work in the markets nor  as  a  street
      trader in the informal sector.  I reject the submission made that  she
      would be in danger in Harare or that relocation (or return)  would  be
      unduly harsh for her.  The time that  she  has  spent  in  the  United
      Kingdom has led to the Appellant amassing a number  of  qualifications
      in different areas.  In January 2004 she obtained a certificate having
      successfully completed  an  "Introducing  Dementia  Training  Course".
      Also  in  2004  she  obtained  results  in   Business   and   Business
      Environment, Marketing, Finance Business Planning and Human Resources.
        She  completed  an  Access  Course  in  Applied  Sciences  in   Food
      Microbiology and Nutrition (see page 34) and was awarded 27 credits at
      level 7, 54 credits at level 3.  She successfully completed the Access
      Course on 19th August 2005.  After that she  completed  a  Diploma  in
      Hotel Management including Marketing, Business, Food Hygiene,  Tourism
      and Global Hospitality (see  page  78)  and  also  holds  an  Advanced
      Diploma in Hotel Management awarded on 9th October 2008.  On 26th June
      2009 she was awarded a Bachelor of Arts (2nd Class)  in  International
      Hospitality   and   Tourism   from   Bournemouth   University.   These
      qualifications  would  assist  her  in  re-establishing   herself   in
      Zimbabwe.

  82.   I do not accept the submission made that she would  be  required  to
      undertake employment as a street trader in the informal  sector  based
      against that catalogue of qualifications in  a  number  of  areas.   I
      further reject the submission made that if she  worked  in  the  hotel
      industry that would be work which would put her at the "constant  risk
      of coming across ZANU-PF informers".  The evidence in support of  such
      a claim comes from the Appellant herself who has not been resident  in
      Zimbabwe since  2002.   On  the  profile  that  she  has,  it  is  not
      reasonably likely that any ZANU-PF supporter would have reason to have
      any interest in her as she has no political profile of her own  and  I
      have not found that any political  profile  imputed  to  her  via  her
      father's past employment as a teacher that ended in 2004 and  did  not
      follow her to Murewa for the reasons that I have given,  would  likely
      to be known in 2013.

  83. She also has a sister who lives in Budiriro, a surburb of Harare  (see
      Question 67 of the interview). It is claimed by the Appellant that she
      has now left to live in South Africa due to threats made to her. There
      is no evidence in support of this change of residence.  Nor  is  there
      any explanatory evidence as to why she should now leave  after  having
      lived in Harare for a significant period of time and in the  light  of
      the  background  evidence  that  demonstrates  that  historically  the
      violence and threats are at their lowest. Consequently I do not accept
      that she has discharged the burden of proof on her to demonstrate that
      her sister has left Zimbabwe.

  84. In the light of her family links with Harare including her  uncle  who
      was resident there in a suburb of Harare throughout the  trouble  that
      was said to have occurred in respect of her father, the fact that  she
      would be returning after a significant absence but would be  returning
      in the light of having obtained qualifications  and  experience  in  a
      number of different fields which would equip her with the  ability  to
      obtain employment, does not demonstrate in my judgment that  it  would
      be unduly harsh for her to return there.

  85. It would also be open to her to relocate to Mutare  where  her  sister
      lives. The Appellant's sister  resides  there  with  her  husband  and
      despite the incidents that occurred in 2003 has remained in  Zimbabwe.
      It is not said that her sister has suffered any attacks by  reason  of
      her  relationship  with  her  father  or  arising  from  his  previous
      employment as a teacher.  The reasons advanced as to why she could not
      join her sister in Mutare which is described as  the  "fourth  biggest
      urban centre" in Zimbabwe (see page 87) is based on a claim  that  the
      Chipangano militia is hostile towards MDC supporters and that there is
      evidence  of  Chipangano  activity  outside  Harare  in  Mutare   (see
      paragraph 29(e) of the skeleton argument).  Mutare is in the  province
      of Manicaland.  It is 132.61  miles  from  Harare  and  is  the  third
      largest city in Zimbabwe.  It has an urban population of 188, 243  and
      260,567 rural population.  It is submitted in  the  skeleton  argument
      that there was evidence of war veterans and ZANU-PF militia locally in
      Mutare which would cause problems (see page  120  of  the  Appellant's
      bundle).  The article relied upon refers to teachers at three  schools
      in Mutasa South who were forced to take positions within  the  ZANU-PF
      structures to become branch secretaries.  It  refers  to  them  having
      summoned 45 teachers from the area.  However the article  also  states
      that some teachers told the authors of the report that  they  declined
      the positions and it is recorded that "they told us they now  live  in
      fear and only take comfort in the fact that they don't reside  in  the
      area (Mutasa South).  Most of them live in Mutare and commute to  work
      every day".  Thus the thrust of the article  refers  to  problems  for
      teachers living in Mutasa South but not in relation  to  the  area  of
      Mutare which is where the  Appellant's  sister  lives.   There  is  no
      evidence before me that the Appellant's sister who has lived there for
      a period of time has been subjected to any interest in her arising out
      of her father's former profession.  It is advanced on  behalf  of  the
      Appellant that is because her sister  has  changed  her  name  through
      marriage.  I do not accept that.  I do not find that  the  Appellant's
      name is likely to be of any interest to  those  living  in  that  area
      whatsoever.  It has not been demonstrated  that  any  ZANU-PF  in  the
      Mutare area would know of the Appellant's father's  former  profession
      nor that the Appellant was  linked  to  him.   There  is  no  credible
      evidence before me that the Appellant's father's profile was such that
      it would be known throughout Zimbabwe and I reject the  evidence  that
      she gave orally that her family including herself  were  being  sought
      throughout Zimbabwe.  There is no reason for anyone to inform  on  the
      Appellant; she would be joining her sister who has continued  to  live
      in Zimbabwe without harm.   It  has  not  been  demonstrated  for  any
      credible reason that she could not live with her sister in Mutare.


Decision

  86. For the foregoing reasons, I do not find that it had been demonstrated
      that the Appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution upon  return
      to Zimbabwe and thus her appeal does not succeed.  The decision of the
      First-tier Tribunal disclosed the making of  an  error  of  law.   The
      decision is set aside.  The decision is remade as follows:-

    The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date:


 Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
