
 [pic]


The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA136432015





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th April 2017                           |On 6th July 2017              |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                     EP

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

     Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:

For the Appellant: Dr Mynott, Counsel, instructed by IAS Manchester.
For the Respondent:  Mrs M.Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Albania born in October 1992. She made
      a claim for protection in June 2014. Her child, born in September
      2014, is a dependent. She claimed to have arrived by lorry from Italy
      in June 2014.


   2. She claimed she was from a poor farming family in Albania. She lived
      with her parents and two sisters. Her mother and sister became unwell.
      When her sister was in hospital in May 2013 she met a man called B. He
      befriended her and they exchanged telephone numbers. He was Albanian
      and told her he was living in Italy.

   3. Her father could not afford her sister's medical treatment and
      borrowed money. In June 2013 her father told her she was to marry the
      village leader by way of repayment. She did not want to do this and
      attempted self-harm.

   4. In September 2013 she made contact with B and sought his help. She
      decided to go with him to Italy. She had her own passport and using
      money from her mother she walked for several hours to another town
      where she caught a bus. She and B then flew to Milan, Italy.

   5. In Italy B took her to his friend A's house. B left after a week never
      to return. A then raped her and she was made to work as a prostitute,
      sharing a room with two other girls.

   6. She attempted self-harm and in April 2014 was transferred to another
      house. In June 2014 she managed to escape. She obtained a lift in a
      lorry travelling to England.


   7. The basis of the claim was she was a member of a particular social
      group, namely the victim of slavery; that she would be at risk of a
      forced marriage; and that she was at risk because of a historical
      blood feud concerning her uncle.


   The refusal


   8. The respondent accepted that she was a national of Albania. However,
      her claims were not considered to be true.


   9. A referral had been made to the National Referral mechanism. The
      Competent Authority concluded she was not the victim of human
      trafficking on the basis of a negative credibility finding. The
      respondent also rejected her trafficking claim on credibility grounds.
      Her claim of being forced into marriage was considered to be
      inconsistent. When interviewed she said the man who lent her father
      money did not want repayment but wanted her. However, in her witness
      statement she said it was when he demanded the return of his money
      that her father came up with a solution that he marry her. She had
      referred to an ancient blood feud involving her uncle. The respondent
      found the claim lacked details. In any event, the country information
      indicated that females are immune from such feuds.


  10. The respondent went on to consider in the alternative the question of
      sufficiency of protection. This involved consideration of the
      individual circumstances and the conclusion was the appellant could
      access adequate protection. It was also considered reasonable to
      expect the appellant relocate to avoid any localised difficulties: for
      instance, to the city of Tirana. The country information indicated
      there were support organisations that could assist. The respondent
      referred to section 55 and the best interests of the child and pointed
      out that mainstream education and healthcare was available in Albania,
      albeit not necessarily to the same standard as in the United Kingdom.

The First tier Tribunal

  11. Her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Malik and was
      dismissed. There was medical evidence from a consultant psychiatrist
      to the effect that the appellant was suffering from post-traumatic
      stress disorder. The judge accepted that she may well be suffering
      from depression and post-traumatic stress disorder but did not
      attribute this to her claim.


  12. Her credibility was rejected. She said she did not have her own mobile
      phone but had made contact with B using her father's mobile phone when
      he was asleep. However, in her statement she had said that B
      telephoned her. This was not considered credible given her claim that
      her father was very strict.

  13. Delay in the chronology was highlighted. She said she learnt of the
      forced marriage in early June 2013 but did not contact B until
      September and did not leave home until December. The judge did not
      find it credible she would have waited so long.

  14. Given her claim she was from a small village and was not allowed out
      her having a passport called into question her credibility. She
      claimed she obtained this in order to vote in local elections for
      which she would receive payment. However, she been issued with an
      identity card on 11 March 2010 and elections where held in 2012 and
      2013. Consequently, there was no need for a passport issued in August
      2013. The judge concluded that her departure was pre planned and not
      in haste to avoid a forced marriage as she claimed. Consequently, the
      judge did not find that she was in genuine fear of her own family.

  15. Her claim of being forced into prostitution in Italy was rejected. The
      judge noted that her child was born in September 2014 and it was not
      considered credible if she was to be trafficked that her pregnancy
      would have been allowed or that it could come to term. The judge did
      not find her claimed escape from traffickers credible.

  16. The appellant referred to her mental state and self-harm by cutting
      herself. However, the judge said there was no medical evidence to
      support this and the doctor had checked her wrist for scarring.

The Upper Tribunal

  17. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable that the
      judge erred in consideration of the medical evidence submitted. The
      post-traumatic stress disorder diagnosed could have been caused by
      what the appellant said had happened to her. Permission was also
      granted on the other grounds advanced: namely, how the judge dealt
      with the evidence in relation to the telephone contact with B and her
      passport. It was also argued that the judge, having formed a negative
      view of the appellant's credibility about events in Albania allowed
      this to infect the assessment of her claims about events in Italy and
      her subsequent escape.


  18. The respondent made a rule 24 response opposing the appeal and
      submitting that the judge self-directed appropriately. It was
      contended that the medical report submitted was not determinative of
      the claim and the judge's approach to the claim was appropriate.

  19. At hearing, Dr Mynott, for the appellant, dealt with the medical
      report submitted. I was provided with a copy of the Court of Appeal
      decision of this Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367. The adjudicator in that
      claim had not found the account credible. Part of the appellant's case
      was a medical report to establish scarring. The argument advanced was
      at the adjudicator had appraised the evidence in a piecemeal manner
      and addressed the medical evidence only after rejecting the central
      aspects of the claim. Lord Justice Wilson at paragraph 24 said:

         ... A fact finder must not reach his or her conclusion before
         surveying all the evidence relevant thereto.


    Whilst accepting that decisions on credibility are a matter for the
    judicial fact-finder and experts cannot usurp this function, Lord
    Justice Wilson went on to say:


         ...What, however, they can offer, is a factual context in which it
         may be necessary for the fact finder to survey the allegations
         placed before him; and such context may prove a crucial aid to the
         decision whether or not to accept the truth of them. What the fact-
         finder doors at his peril is to reach a conclusion by reference
         only to the appellant's evidence and then, if it be negative, to
         ask whether the conclusion should be shifted by the expert
         evidence.

  20.  Dr Mynott submitted that the immigration judge appeared to have used
      too high a standard in considering this report. The medical report
      said that the post-traumatic stress finding was diagnostic of the fact
      the appellant had sustained trauma. He submitted that the decision
      suggested the judge had not taken the proper approach to the medical
      evidence and he referred me to paragraph 35 of the decision.


  21. He argued that insufficient weight was attached to the medical report
      and the consequences for the appellant on being returned. The
      appellant would be returning with her child and as an unmarried mother
      she would be vulnerable given the culture of Albania with its code of
      honour.

  22. The presenting officer, Mrs Aboni, relied upon the rule 24 response.
      She submitted there was no material error in the decision and the
      challenge amounted to mere disagreement with the conclusion reached.
      She submitted the judge correctly considered all of the evidence,
      including the psychiatric report. Notably, there was nothing to
      suggest the judge had treated this simply as an add on, having already
      reached a conclusion. The judge accepted that whilst she may suffer
      from depression this was not persuasive as to the core of the claim.
      The judge give adequate reasons were not finding her credible
      especially in relation to her claim of being forced into marriage.
      There was no scarring of her wrist despite her claim of self-harm. The
      passport was significant in relation to her claim of fleeing from a
      forced marriage. There were numerous adverse credibility points which
      impacted upon the claim that she had been trafficked for prostitution.
      The judge had the benefit of the report from the competent authority.
      In light of this the judge was entitled to find the appellant and her
      child could return to Albania. The issue of her being a single mother
      was considered by the judge at paragraph 37 of the decision.


  23. Both representatives were in agreement that if I did find material
      error of law the appropriate course was for the matter to be remitted
      for a rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

Consideration.

  24. I have considered the decision of First-tier Judge Malik in the round
      and focused upon the specific aspects challenged. The principal
      challenge relates to the medical evidence submitted and this is
      highlighted in the grant of leave. There has been no challenge to the
      accuracy of the detailed account of the appellant's claim set out by
      the judge and the respondent's reasons for refusal at paragraph 10 to
      31. At paragraph 35 onwards the judge prefaces their findings by
      stating they have looked at the evidence in the round. Simply stating
      this, whilst indicating an awareness of the correct approach, requires
      investigation in light of the challenge made to see if it has been put
      into practice.


  25. At paragraph 35 the judge refers to the findings of the Competent
      Authority made on the balance of probabilities. The judge went on to
      make their own assessment about the claim of sexual exploitation. At
      35(i) the judge refers to the medical report. The doctor concluded she
      was suffering from severe depression/PTSD. The doctor felt this
      indicated she had suffered significant trauma in the past. In ways
      this is a non sequitur because post-traumatic mean something traumatic
      has happened in the past.

  26. The doctor was of the view that she genuinely presented with mental
      health problems. The judge concludes whilst the appellant may well
      suffer from the diagnoses made it did not emanate from the account
      given. Thus, the judge was prepared to accept the diagnoses but not
      the suggested cause. In the case of physical injuries the doctor can
      give a more specific view on cause in line with the Istanbul protocol.
      However their scope is more limited in respect of mental health
      issues. They can analyse the history and treatment given and the
      presentation. In the present case the doctor is indicating she
      genuinely presents with post-traumatic stress disorder meaning
      something traumatic had happened in the past. The doctor cannot say
      what the trauma was and relating this to the claim is part of the
      judge's fact-finding.

  27. The judge in considering the report referred to looking at the
      evidence in the round and reminded themselves of the lower standard of
      proof. I find it clear from the comments made by the judge that they
      have self-directed themselves on the correct lower standard of proof
      and the need to look at the evidence in the round. In conclusion, I do
      not find it established that the judge applied the wrong standard of
      proof or that they had already made up their mind when considering the
      report. I do not see how the judge can be faulted for not giving an
      alternative basis for the trauma. To do so would most likely amount
      speculation. At paragraph 37 the judge has considered any possible
      vulnerability on return because of her mental health irrespective of
      the cause. The judge proceeded to give valid reasons why she could be
      returned including the fact there is health care in Albania.

  28. The judge deals with her telephone contact with B at 35(ii) and
      concludes in the factor against the appellant in the credibility
      assessment. It has been suggested on behalf of the appellant the judge
      misunderstood the evidence presented and that the appellant had her
      own mobile phone which were subsequently confiscated. It was only then
      that she took to using her father's phone. Whether the appellant had
      her own phone was a factual matter for the judge to decide based on
      the evidence. Notably, at paragraph 97 onwards of her substantive
      interview she said she did not have a phone but used her father's when
      he was sleeping to contact B. This same point was made by the judge of
      the first-tier tribunal who refuse leave to appeal.

  29. The judge was entitled to consider the fact the appellant had her own
      passport given her claim family circumstances. This is dealt with at
      paragraph 35(iii) and I find no fault with the judges reasoning
      ultimately: this was a matter for the judge in the credibility
      assessment.

  30. The detailed grounds elsewhere in my view amount to an attempt to
      reopen the appeal. The judge has set out the factors taken into
      account in reaching the negative credibility findings. Multiple
      shortcomings have been referred to. The judge has emphasised the claim
      has been looked at in the round in this evaluation. The decision
      comprehensively deals with all issues arising .It is my conclusion a
      material error of law has not been established on any of the arguments
      advanced.

Decision.

No material error of law has been demonstrated in the decision of First-
tier Judge Malik. Consequently, that decision dismissing the appeal shall
stand.



 Deputy Judge Farrelly

4th June 2017




