
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13510/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th October, 2016                |On 14th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                     AE
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins of Counsel, instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Anonymity direction.

The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction.  I  see  no  reason  to
interfere with it.  Failure by  any  person,  body  or  institution  whether
corporate or unincorporated (for the avoidance of doubt including any  party
to this appeal) to comply with  this  direction  may  lead  to  contempt  of
court.


Background to the appeal.

1.   The appellant, AE, is a national  of  Albania,  born  on  7th  January,
    1993.  On 12th August, 2014, she claimed asylum in the  United  Kingdom
    on the basis that she was a victim of modern slavery.   The  respondent
    refused the application on 27th November, 2015, and it was against that
    decision that the appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   Her
    appeal was heard on 19th  May,  2016  at  Hatton  Cross  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge MacKenzie.

Basis for the Appellant's claim

2.   The basis of the  appellant's  claim  was  that,  having  grown  up  in
    Albania with her parents and three brothers, she started a relationship
    with Artur [P], an Albanian, who told the appellant that  he  lived  in
    Italy.  The appellant's father is described by her as  being  a  Muslim
    and a fanatic.  He saw the appellant and Artur together  and  when  she
    arrived home her father assaulted her with a belt.  The  following  day
    she left home and travelled to Italy with Artur.

3.   Having arrived in Italy, she and Artur stayed in a hotel in Torino  for
    a week.  One day while they were out walking, a car pulled up and after
    Artur spoke to the male occupants: the appellant was forced to get into
    the car.  Artur told her "I'm sorry I don't have any money".   She  was
    taken to a house some 40 minutes away where other girls were working as
    a prostitute and forced to work as a prostitute.

Respondent's view of credibility

4.   It is relevant that the respondent accepted  that  the  appellant  came
    from Albania and it was also accepted that she was the victim of modern
    slavery.  In paragraph 25  of  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter,  the
    respondent noted that the appellant had remained coherent and plausible
    with regard to material facts as the core  of  her  claim  and  claimed
    asylum at the first opportunity.   She  concluded  that  the  appellant
    should be given the benefit of the doubt  that  she  had  rejected  her
    arranged marriage and had been the victim of slavery.

The First Tier Tribunal Judge's decision

5.   The judge considered and quoted part of  the  Country  Information  and
    Guidance Report on Albania: Trafficking,  dated  9th  September,  2015.
    She also referred to the U.S. State Department Report on Trafficking in
    Persons dated 2014, and considered guidance of the Upper Tribunal in TD
    and AD (Trafficked women)(CG) [2016]  UKUT  92  (IAC)  and  AM  and  BM
    (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC).   The  judge  found
    that although the appellant is vulnerable, the evidence before her  did
    not show that the appellant would not be able to  access  support  when
    she returned to Albania.  She did not agree with  submissions  made  on
    behalf of the appellant that  the  system  of  protection  and  support
    available to victims of trafficking returned to Albania was lacking  to
    the extent that the appellant should be recognised as a  refugee.   The
    judge specifically states that the objective evidence does not  support
    the appellant's claim that she would be at risk in a shelter,  or  that
    she would be at risk of persecution on leaving a shelter.

6.   The judge noted that bribery remained a problem in  Albania,  but  this
    was not considered to be a general objective risk to all women entering
    the NRM or support mechanism in place in Albania.  The  judge  reminded
    herself that there was no requirement for the appellant to provide  any
    corroboration  for  part  of  her  claim,  but  pointed  out  that  the
    appellant's statement that her traffickers, "had important  connections
    with Albania including the authorities" was speculative.  She  went  on
    to say that she found, applying the objective evidence before her, that
    efforts made by the authorities to improve  protection  for  trafficked
    women, would be sufficient to ensure that the appellant was not at risk
    of persecution because of her membership of a particular  social  group
    on her return.  As to the risk of the appellant being  targeted  again,
    the judge found that if the appellant was in a shelter this  would  not
    be the case.

7.   The judge went on to find that the appellant had lodged her GP  medical
    records, which showed  that  she  attended  for  regular  non-emergency
    consultations with her GP,  who  made  detailed  notes  confirming  her
    clinical  presentation  and  medical  care.   In  addition  to  ongoing
    treatment for anxiety and depression she  has  routinely  attended  for
    other medical issues.  The judge was  satisfied  that  the  appellant's
    general medical practitioner had closely monitored the appellant's mood
    and paid attention to any risk of self-harm.  The  appellant  had  been
    referred to St Mary's Sexual Health Centre and had been  given  contact
    details where she could self-refer for counselling.  The judge rejected
    the suggestion made by the appellant's Counsel that the  appellant  had
    been let down by the respondent and others.  The judge found  that  the
    appellant's anxiety and  depression  could  be  treated  adequately  in
    "Angola".  Elsewhere reference is made to the appellant leaving  Angola
    and being able to internally relocate within "Angola".   However,  when
    the determination is read as a whole I  am  satisfied  that  these  are
    clearly  uncorrected  typing   errors   and   the   Immigration   Judge
    demonstrates that she was clearly  aware  that  she  was  dealing  with
    someone from Albania who was going  to  be  returned  to  Albania.   Mr
    Collins made no submission on the point.

8.   The judge said that the appellant had demonstrated that she is  capable
    and resourceful, in terms of accessing  support  while  in  the  United
    Kingdom, having formed links with a church and working as  a  volunteer
    for a food programme.  The country information report referred to there
    being government programmes to assist the reintegration of  victims  of
    trafficking and the judge found that she was not persuaded, to the  low
    standard, that the appellant would be unable to cope and  would  be  at
    risk of persecution when she left the shelter.

9.   The judge considered the question of the  appellant's  father  and  the
    risk he posed at paragraph 50 of the  determination,  where  she  found
    that the appellant would be  able  to  relocate  internally.   She  was
    satisfied by the objective evidence that the authorities would be  able
    to offer effective protection to the appellant if she chose to live  in
    Tirana.  She noted that the appellant had not approached the police  in
    Albania following assault upon her by her father, but instead had  left
    the country the following day.

10.   The  judge  dismissed  the   appellant's   appeal.    The   appellant,
    dissatisfied with the  determination,  sought  and  obtained  leave  to
    appeal.

The hearing before me

11.  At the hearing before me today, Mr Collins told me that  he  relied  on
    paragraph 6 of his original application for leave to appeal,  where  he
    pointed  out  that  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter   accepted   the
    appellant's claim in full and it was,  therefore,  irrational  for  the
    judge to find that the appellant was "speculative" when she referred to
    the gang that trafficked her having "important connections with Albania
    including with the authorities" at paragraph 39 of  the  determination.
    He suggested that this was an error of law.

12.  Mr Collins also reminded me that the appellant's  father  had  attacked
    the appellant.  He had been violent towards  her  and  was  a  fanatic.
    Were the appellant to return to Albania, it is  likely  that  he  would
    further attack the appellant, Mr  Collins  suggested.   The  judge  had
    failed to consider this.

13.  He pointed out that if the  appellant  were  returned  to  Albania  she
    would not be  returning  voluntarily  and  it  would  be  necessary  to
    consider whether it would be  reasonable  on  her  part  not  to  avail
    herself of the Albanian NRM option.  He relied on paragraph 148  of  TD
    and AD.  The judge had simply not dealt with this point.

14.  Mr Collins submitted that there was no adequate assessment of the  risk
    of the appellant being re-trafficked, given her accepted vulnerability.



15.  I pointed out to Mr Collins that it appeared  that  the  appellant  was
    trafficked from Italy, not from Albania, because she said that she left
    Albania with her boyfriend following the attack upon her by her father.
     It appears that she was trafficked in Italy when she was picked up  by
    youths in a car.  In her asylum interview she referred to having stayed
    in Italy in a hotel with Artur  and  he  said  that  he  was  going  to
    organise a surprise party and would introduce her to his family.  After
    the first week she had been out walking with Artur in one of  the  town
    they were staying in.  Three men in a car came and Artur went to  speak
    to them.  The three men grabbed her and put her into the car.  She said
    she told Artur what was happening,  "the  answer  I  got  was  'I  need
    money'".  It is not clear from what the appellant said that  Artur  was
    part of the gang or that he had in some way colluded with the gang.  He
    might, for example, simply have meant that he had no money to  be  able
    to give to the gang to prevent her being  snatched  away.   Mr  Collins
    suggested that the "appeal should go back to the First Tier  for  these
    matters to be clarified."

16.  Additionally, Mr  Collins  suggested  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider whether the appellant  might  qualify  under  the  Immigration
    Rules for leave under Article 8, relying  on  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).
    He suggested that the judge's comments were flawed and  overlooked  the
    fact that when the appellant left Albania, she  was  still  part  of  a
    family unit.  The appellant may have been familiar with  the  language,
    culture and traditions.  He urged me to find an error  of  law  and  to
    either remit the hearing to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  completely
    fresh hearing, or alternatively, to retain  the  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

17.  On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr  Harrison  relied  on  a  brief
    Rule 24 response in which it was suggested that the judge had  properly
    applied country guidance and reached conclusions she  was  entitled  to
    reach.  The grounds amounted  to  nothing  further  than  a  series  of
    disagreements.  The judge considered the risk  of  re-trafficking,  but
    found that the claim had not been made out, given  that  the  appellant
    would be able to access support on her return. I reserved my decision.

18.  I do not accept that there is any error at paragraph 39 of the  judge's
    determination.  The appellant had given no reasons  for  claiming  that
    her traffickers had important connections with Albania,  including  the
    authorities, but in any event, the judge said that even if her gang  or
    the appellant's father did have such connections, on the basis  of  the
    objective evidence before her, the efforts made by the  authorities  to
    improve protection for trafficked women would be sufficient  to  ensure
    that the appellant was not  at  risk  of  persecution  because  of  her
    membership of a particular social group.

19.  In paragraph 39 the judge deals with the risk posed by the gang and  by
    her father.  In paragraph 40 the judge finds that if the appellant were
    to be in a shelter there would be no risk of her being  targeted  again
    by the smugglers.  I accept that the judge has not  considered  whether
    it would be reasonable on her part not to avail herself of the Albanian
    NRM option and to this limited extent I find that the judge  has  erred
    in law.  Whether or not it is a material error is another matter, which
    I shall consider below.

20.  As to the risk of the appellant being  re-targeted,  I  do  not  accept
    that the judge erred.  She was entitled on  her  findings  and  on  the
    objective evidence before her to conclude that there would be  no  risk
    if the appellant were in a shelter.  The judge also noted and  accepted
    that women living on their own in Albania are  likely  to  be  socially
    distinct but she noted that in TD and AD such discrimination and stigma
    did not amount  to  serious  harm.   The  judge  also  found  that  any
    difficulties the appellant might face as  a  single  woman  in  Albania
    would not amount to persecution.

21.  I have found that the judge erred in law by  not  addressing  the  fact
    that the appellant would not be returning to  Albania  voluntarily  and
    addressing whether or not it would be reasonable on  the  part  of  the
    appellant not to avail herself of the Albanian NRM  option.   Reference
    was made in the grounds to paragraph 148 of TD and AD.  The  assistance
    includes reference to a shelter.  It does not seem to me to be  at  all
    unreasonable for the appellant to avail herself  of  the  Albanian  NRM
    option.  The judge commented upon the appellant's  resourcefulness  and
    there is no reason to think that she would be unable to feel secure  in
    such a shelter.

22.  Referring again to paragraph 276ADE,  I  believe  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to note that the appellant had shown resilience in coping with
    having no contact with her family in this country (where she  has  only
    been since 11th August 2014) where the language, culture and traditions
    are different from those of her own country of  origin  and  has  shown
    resilience in engaging with regular medical care with her GP, making  a
    connection with her local church and in  establishing  friendships.   I
    believe also that the judge was entitled to  find  that  the  appellant
    would be able to engage with and benefit  from  the  support  that  the
    judge found would  be  available  to  the  appellant  as  a  victim  of
    trafficking on her return to Albania.  She  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant would be at any increased risk of trafficking when  she  left
    her shelter as a result of her anxiety  and  depression  and  concluded
    that the appellant would be able to access all appropriate medical care
    in Albania.  She concluded that difficulties which the appellant  might
    face on return of discrimination and stigma would not amount  to  "very
    significant obstacles" such as to satisfy the requirements of paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi)."  That was a finding open to her.

23.  To sum up, I have found that the judge did err in failing  to  consider
    whether if the  appellant  were  returned  to  Albania  otherwise  than
    voluntarily whether it would be reasonable on her  part  not  to  avail
    herself of the Albanian NRM option. I have concluded in  the  light  of
    what the appellant has said at paragraphs 56, 57 and 58 (and alluded to
    elsewhere in the determination) that it would not be reasonable on  the
    part of the appellant not to avail herself of the Albanian  NRM  option
    on her return to Albania.  Such error  was  not,  therefore,  material.
    On all other challenges  I  find,  for  the  reasons  I  have  set  out
    extensively in this determination, that the judge did not err in law.

24.  In making her determination, the First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not
    materially err in law.  I uphold her decision; the  appellant's  appeal
    is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


TO THE RESPONDENT - FEE AWARD

There is no fee order.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
