

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/13555/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20 April, 2017                         |  On 3 May, 2017                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                           ms janet banwo ashokeji
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In Person - Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was  born  on  17th  January,
    1976.

2.   The appellant claimed to have entered the United Kingdom unlawfully  on
    1st January, 2005.  She made a number of applications to regularise her
    stay,  all  of  which  were  refused.   Finally,  the  appellant   made
    application for asylum on 21st January, 2015.  The  respondent  refused
    that application in a refusal letter dated  1st  December,  2015.   The
    appellant appealed that decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  her
    appeal was heard in Manchester by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lever  on
    8th October, 2016.

3.   In a determination  promulgated  on  1st  November  2016,  Judge  Lever
    carefully considered all the documentary evidence and oral evidence  he
    heard and concluded that there was, "no credibility whatsoever  in  the
    appellant's  claim".   He  found  that  it  was  entirely  lacking   in
    credibility to suggest that, if returned to Nigeria, she would  face  a
    realistic risk of coming into contact with those she  claimed  who  had
    trafficked her, or her agent.

4.   In referring to the appellant's witness statement she made  in  support
    of her asylum claim the judge said:-

         "The somewhat dramatic contents of the witness statement would have
         required it to be treated with an element of caution but I need not
         do so, nor do I need to consider the perfectly valid findings  made
         by the respondent in the refusal letter.  The simple answer is that
         the appellant has accepted that the witness statement she  made  in
         support of and the basis  of  her  claim  for  asylum  is  a  false
         statement."

5.   The judge also recorded that the appellant  accepted  that  information
    she provided in an earlier application for an EEA  residence  card  was
    also a false application.

6.   In respect of the appellant's  asylum  claim  the  judge  concluded  at
    paragraph 26:

         "I  have  no  hesitation  in  finding  there  is  not  a  shred  of
         credibility attaching to the appellant's various claims  and  there
         is no risk of persecution either  for  a  Convention  reason  or  a
         breach of her protected rights under the ECHR if she is returned to
         Nigeria.  The Home Office refusal letter is a lengthy and  detailed
         letter that deals with each and every aspect of  her  asylum  claim
         and having  considered  the  evidence  carefully  I  endorse  those
         findings made by the respondent."

7.   The judge then went on to consider the appellant's Article 8 claim  and
    was satisfied that she did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM  of
    Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC  395,  as  amended  ("the
    Immigration Rules").  He noted that she did not meet  the  requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) and did not accept,  for  the  purposes  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) that there would be  significant  obstacles  to
    the appellant returning to Nigeria, a country where she has  lived  for
    the majority of her life; she speaks both Yoruba and  English  and  has
    both immediate and extended family living in that country.   There  was
    no evidence before him that the appellant could not live with a  member
    of that family or  extended  family  or  with  friends  until  she  had
    resettled in Nigeria and the fact that she was returning with  a  child
    did not in itself, or in the circumstances of this  case,  provide  any
    further significant obstacles to her integration back into Nigeria.

8.   The judge found that there was  nothing  about  the  appellant  or  her
    circumstances which could properly give him cause to allow her  Article
    8 claim outwith the Immigration Rules.  He considered Section 55 of the
    Borders Act 2009 and noted that the appellant's son was  born  on  17th
    January, 2007 and had been living in the United Kingdom for  more  than
    seven years.

9.   He noted that from 2008 the appellant made a number of applications  to
    regularise her stay which had all  been  refused  and  which  were  all
    without merit.   He  considered  Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  and
    acknowledged that the appellant's son was born and had  lived  all  his
    life in the United Kingdom.  He noted from the documentary evidence the
    child  appeared  to  be  doing  well  at  school  and  there  were   no
    abnormalities or concerns in his education or upbringing and nothing to
    indicate that a change of school or environment would necessarily cause
    any serious problems.

10.  The appellant's father was  said  to  be  Nigerian  and  the  appellant
    converses with her son in  both  English  and  Yoruba.   There  was  no
    evidence before the judge to suggest that the appellant's son would not
    obtain  an  education  in  Nigeria  and  no  evidence  to  support  the
    assumption that education in the United  Kingdom  was  necessarily  any
    better than that available to the appellant's son  in  Nigeria.   There
    were no health issues and again nothing to suggest that any  healthcare
    issues the appellant or her son have could not be properly addressed in
    Nigeria.

11.  The appellant has two other children living in Nigeria  and  the  judge
    thought it important that the appellant's son should if  possible  have
    contact with and the friendship of those  stepsiblings.   He  concluded
    that the best interests of the appellant's son were to  go  to  Nigeria
    with his  mother.   He  concluded  that  such  a  requirement  was  not
    unreasonable within the terms  of  Section  117.   He  noted  that  the
    appellant would no doubt vehemently disagree with his view but that  it
    was clear that she was looking at her circumstances for her own  needs,
    rather than more altruistically considering the best  way  forward  for
    her child.  He dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds, found  that  the
    appellant was not entitled to humanitarian protection and dismissed the
    appellant's appeal based on her human rights.  The appellant sought and
    obtained permission to appeal.

12.  Her grounds of appeal are as follows:-

         "My son was born in the UK and is 9 years old.   He  will  turn  10
         next month and can register as British.  The judge  has  failed  to
         attach sufficient weight to the time my son has  spent  in  the  UK
         above the age of 7.


         The judge has mentioned the Home Office delay but not  assessed  it
         as a factor in balancing when assessing reasonableness.


         The judge has only considered factors going towards why it would be
         reasonable for my son to leave but none why he should  stay.   This
         is a material error of law."

13.  At  the  hearing  before  me  the  appellant  said  that  she  did  not
    understand English.  Fortunately a Yoruba interpreter had been  booked.
    I ensured that she and he both understood each other.  I  explained  to
    the appellant the purpose of today's hearing.  She confirmed to me that
    she understood its purpose.  I asked her if she had any questions of me
    and she replied that she had none.  I asked her if there  was  anything
    she wanted to say to me and she told me  that  there  was  nothing.   I
    reminded her that this was her opportunity to persuade  me  that  there
    were errors of law in the judge's determination.   She  replied  saying
    that she was asking for compassion.  Her child was born in  the  United
    Kingdom, he is 10 years old, his name is D and  he  was  born  on  17th
    January, 2007.  His father is absent.  His father left  when  D  was  6
    months old.  D has never heard his father's voice.  The appellant  said
    that she had had no contact with D's father since D was 6  months  old.
    D's father is a Nigerian.

14.  The appellant confirmed that she speaks to her son using mainly  Yoruba
    which he understands but, she pointed out, he does  not  speak  Yoruba.
    She told me, however, that she understands him.

15.  I again asked the appellant  if  she  could  please  tell  me  why  she
    thought the judge had erred in his  decision.   She  replied  that  her
    lawyer told her that her case had been dismissed but that she  had  the
    right of appeal.  She told me she asked for compassion.

16.  Mr Harrison told me that the determination was full  and  comprehensive
    and clearly considered all the evidence.  It made a finding that it was
    reasonable for the child to relocate to Nigeria with his  mother.   The
    judge was clearly alert to the  child's  length  of  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom  and  his  degree  of  integration  but  there  were  no
    unreasonable barriers  to  informing  a  private  and  family  life  in
    Nigeria.  The first named appellant's use of deception not once but  on
    several occasions was a notable factor.

17.  The appellant said that it was not correct that she would  do  anything
    to remain in the United Kingdom.  She just  wanted  to  regularise  her
    stay.  She confirmed that she put  forward  false  information  in  her
    asylum  claim.   She  also  confirmed  that  she  put   forward   false
    information in an application for an EEA  residence  card.   She  again
    asked that she shown compassion.

18.  I reserved my determination.

19.  I have carefully read the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lever.   It  is  a  very  thorough  and  detailed   determination   and
    demonstrates that the  judge  carefully  considered  all  the  evidence
    placed before him before making his finding that it was reasonable  for
    the appellant's child to relocate to Nigeria with his mother.   He  had
    before him  the  appellant's  substantial  bundle,  together  with  the
    respondent's  bundle  comprising  immigration  history,  the  documents
    listed at Folios A to C and the Secretary of  State's  refusal  letter.
    The judge made a careful note of the appellant's oral evidence,  during
    which the appellant confirmed that her prior witness statement speaking
    of the death of her sister was false and the entire  witness  statement
    untrue.  The judge also noted that  the  appellant  accepted  that  the
    application she made in 2008 for an EEA  residence  card  was  a  false
    application.   Having  considered  all  the  evidence  he  reached  the
    conclusion that  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum  was  lacking  in
    credibility and that there was no  real  risk  of  the  appellant  ever
    coming into contact with either or both of those individuals  who,  she
    claimed, had been responsible for her being trafficked.  In  dismissing
    the appellant's Article 8 claim there appears to have been no  evidence
    before the judge which could have led him to believe that  there  would
    be any significant obstacles to the appellant returning to Nigeria.  He
    noted that she still had family and extended family and friends  living
    in Nigeria but she speaks both English and  Yoruba  and  that  she  has
    spent the majority of her life in that country.  Similarly,  the  judge
    was entitled to find that there was nothing about the appellant or  her
    circumstances which could properly allow him to allow  the  appellant's
    Article 8 appeal outwith the Immigration Rules.

20.  The judge went on to consider Section 55 of the 2009  Act  and  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act.

21.  The judge noted that the  education  documents  in  evidence  disclosed
    nothing dramatic and that D appeared to be doing well, has  the  normal
    interests, friendships and social skills that majority of  children  of
    his age  exhibit.   He  also  speaks  English  and  some  Yoruba,  both
    languages spoken in Nigeria, he has two  stepsiblings  in  Nigeria.   I
    believe that he has taken fully into account all  the  evidence  before
    him and that he was perfectly entitled to conclude in the circumstances
    that it would not be unreasonable to expect the  appellant's  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom in company with his mother and  to  return  to
    her home country of Nigeria.

22.  I have concluded that the making of  the  determination  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lever did not involve the making of an error of law.   I
    uphold the judge's determination.  The  appellant's  asylum  appeal  is
    dismissed.  The appellant's humanitarian protection appeal is dismissed
    and the appellant's human rights claim is also dismissed.

Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the  Upper  Tribunal                                         Date
30th April 2017


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal
