
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13244/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9th July 2012,                             |On 27th September 2013       |
|12th February,                                |                             |
|21st May, and                                 |                             |
|7th August, 2013                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                ozgur babahan
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Lagunju of Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
                     (09.07.2012)
     Ms E Boateng of Counsel instructed by How & Co        (12.02.2013,
                  21.5.2013 and on 07.08.2013)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, a Home Office Presenting Officer
                       (9.07.2012)
     Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer (12.2.2013,
                  21.05.2013 and on 07.08.2013)



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, Mr Ozgur Babahan, is a citizen of Turkey  who  was  born
    on 22nd February, 1991.  He entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on
    8th May, 2007 and claimed asylum on 10th May, 2007.

2.   He appeals the decision of the  respondent,  taken  on  18th  November,
    2011, to remove the appellant as an illegal entrant.

3.   The appellant  claims  to  have  left  Turkey  on  2nd  May,  2007  and
    travelled across Europe  in  a  lorry,  entering  the  United  Kingdom,
    clandestinely, in the early hours of 8th May, 2007.

The Basis of the Appellant's Claim to Asylum

4.   The appellant made his claim to asylum on the basis  of  both  his  own
    actual and perceived political involvement in Turkey which, he  claims,
    has caused him to be detained and tortured  and  also  because  of  the
    involvement of his family members in political activity in Turkey which
    has led to a large number of them having been  granted  asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The appellant appealed the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State and his appeal was heard at Newport on 6th January,  2012,  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Powell.

5.   The appellant claimed that he  had  been  arrested  on  13th  February,
    2007, and taken to the anti-Terrorist Headquarters in Istanbul on Vatan
    Street where he was interrogated and,  he  claims,  was  tortured,  but
    released after two days.  The judge recorded this evidence in paragraph
    29 of his determination, but  Judge  Powell  found  that  although  the
    appellant was detained by the authorities in 2007 for  fly-posting,  he
    was  not  tortured.   He  found  that   the   appellant   is   Kurdish.
    Unfortunately, the judge failed to give  reasons  for  his  finding  at
    paragraph 85 of his determination, that the appellant was not tortured.
     He also made adverse credibility findings based upon the  evidence  of
    the appellant and, having rejected that  evidence,  then  proceeded  to
    reject  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  witnesses,   rather   than
    considering the evidence in the round.  He accepted that the  appellant
    was related to a number of individuals sharing the appellant's name who
    have been recognised as refugees, but failed to assess the risk to  the
    appellant as a relative of recognised refugees, despite having referred
    to  the  appellant  as  having  "significant  family  connections  with
    separatist organisations".  It was for these reasons that on 9th  July,
    2012, I, sitting with First Tier Tribunal Judge  JKH  Rintoul,  (as  he
    then was) set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

The Hearing on 12th February, 2013

6.   At the hearing on 12th February, 2013, the  appellant  and  interpreter
    both confirmed that  they  understood  each  other  and  the  appellant
    confirmed his full names, his address and his date of  birth.   Counsel
    referred the appellant to a statement appearing in his bundle at  pages
    10 and 11.  The appellant recalled the  statement  and  identified  his
    signature at the end of his statement.  Counsel confirmed that  it  was
    her intention to ask the appellant to adopt the statement.   I  pointed
    out, however, that it  did  not  bear  any  signed  endorsement  by  an
    interpreter confirming that before having been signed by the appellant,
    it was read to him in his own language and that he was happy  with  the
    contents.  I explained to Counsel that it might be that if, when  later
    answering  questions  the  appellant  contradicted  something  in  that
    statement, that I might believe that the appellant was not telling  the
    truth.  Unfortunately, I could not be certain  that  the  statement  in
    front of me had actually been read to the  appellant  so  that  he  had
    approved the contents.  I suggested that it would be unfair for  me  to
    allow him to adopt the contents of the statement if it  were  an  early
    draft and for those reasons I was not prepared to allow  him  to  adopt
    it.  The appellant was then referred  to  the  statement  appearing  at
    pages P3 to P9 in the bundle.  He identified his signature at  the  end
    of it and confirmed that he wished to adopt it.

7.   I gave the appellant a warning.  I explained that he was entirely  free
    to adopt, as part of his evidence before me, any  document  he  wished,
    but that he should only do so if he was  entirely  satisfied  that  the
    contents  were  completely  true  and  accurate  in  all  respects.   I
    explained that in the event that he later contradicted something in his
    statement then, that might cause me to believe that he was not  telling
    the truth.  I explained that if he gave me reason to  believe  that  he
    was not telling the truth then there was a danger that he might  damage
    his appeal.  I emphasised that he should only adopt the statement if he
    was completely satisfied as to  the  contents  of  the  document.   The
    appellant confirmed that he understood the warning.  He told me that he
    wished to adopt the statement.  For completeness  I  set  out,  in  the
    Appendix to this determination, that statement appearing in pages 3  to
    9 of the appellant's bundle.  It was  dated  21st  December,  2011  and
    written in response to the letter of  refusal  from  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department..


8.   The appellant told me that he was born in  Hosgeldi,  in  the  town  of
    Bulanik in the province of Mus.  It is  in  eastern  Anotolia  and  the
    ethnic make-up of the population is Kurdish.  People  are  involved  in
    agriculture and raising animals.  People have left wing views and  they
    struggle for their Kurdish freedom.  He is a Kurdish Muslim.

9.   The appellant's father  is  Firik  Babahan  and  his  mother  is  Yubar
    Babahan.  His father died in December 2003.  He has three siblings  and
    they are living in Turkey.  His brothers' names are Mehmet,  Yusuf  and
    Nurla.  He has three brothers and  he  also  have  three  sisters;  the
    sisters are Nurcan, Mejla and Nazar.

10.  The appellant explained that his family members have difficulties  with
    the authorities, because they are a Kurdish family and because they are
    political, defending our rights.  Family members are harassed  by  both
    the gendarmes and by special teams.

11.  He said that he recalled that when he  was  young,  the  special  teams
    raided the houses and searched them many times.  They searched the food
    stocks; if there was too much food in people's houses then most  people
    were accused of supporting the PKK.

12.  His father's sister joined the PKK and  because  of  that,  the  family
    came to the attention of the authorities and they were  harassed  more.
    The authorities knew that his  father's  sister  had  joined  the  PKK,
    because the government checked on who was coming and who was going from
    the village and  there  were  informers  living  nearby  informing  the
    government about what was happening in the area.  The authorities  knew
    that she joined the PKK.

13.  The appellant started primary school education in 1996  or  1997.   His
    school was in the village where he  lived.   In  the  village  all  the
    teachers were Turkish.  While the appellant was at school his  teachers
    treated him badly because he and other Kurdish children were unable  to
    speak the language of the teachers.  They treated them  badly  for  not
    learning their language.

14.  The appellant told me that he had been arrested.

15.  Once he was arrested in  the  village  and  once  he  was  arrested  in
    Istanbul.  He was arrested in the village on 23rd March, 2003.  He  had
    been playing outside by the house and an old  man  approached  his  and
    gave him  a  magazine.   He  asked  the  appellant  to  distribute  the
    magazines to people's homes in the village.  The appellant did not know
    this man and did not think he was from the village because he had never
    seen him before.

16.  People in the village the appellant comes from are all related  to  one
    another.  This man gave the appellant  ten  or  so  magazines  and  the
    appellant gave them to a few houses.  He  said  that  he  put  them  in
    letterboxes and as he was doing this suddenly noticed  gendarmes  in  a
    jeep surrounding him on the side of the road.  He left the magazines at
    the door of the houses  or  put  them  through  the  letterboxes.   The
    gendarmes arrived  fifteen  minutes  or  so  after  the  appellant  had
    distributed the magazines and they put him into their jeep.  There were
    six jeeps, but two of them stopped and arrested him.  He was  taken  to
    Erentepe gendarmerie and was 11 years old when this happened.

17.  He was held for four days and the day after his  arrest  he  was  asked
    questions.  They asked where he obtained the magazines from and he told
    them that they were given to him by an old man.  They  said,  "No,  you
    are lying".  They suggested to him that the PKK had given them to  him.
    They asked him if the PKK came to his home and he said  that  they  did
    not.  Again they accused him of lying and they started beating him.

18.  They kept accusing the appellant of being  a  PKK  terrorist  and  when
    they questioned him they slapped him.  They kicked  him  on  his  knees
    with their boots and they held his ears and twisted them and  told  him
    to speak up.  They poured cold water over him  and  told  me  that  his
    family were all terrorists too.  They gave him something which made him
    feel, "very shaky".  He said he thought that they gave him an  electric
    shock, because they poured water over him.  He didn't know if he had an
    electric shock.  They had a machine which, when  it  touched  his  body
    made him shaky and gave an unbearable pain.  He thought it  would  kill
    him.  They threw water at his face from containers and  they  gave  him
    very little food.

19.  When he was beaten up the appellant was in a small dark  room  and  was
    held in that room for the four days that they kept him.  There  was  no
    heating and it was cold.  He had no  change  of  clothes  and  was  not
    allowed to see or speak to anyone.  He was afraid and says that he  was
    treated very badly.

20.  The appellant confirmed that he understood the interpreter and  had  no
    difficulty with her translation.

21.  The appellant said that his health  was  very  bad,  because  of  being
    beaten and given electric shocks.  He had "hit" marks on his body.   He
    was tortured and could not open his eyes.  He was finished and he could
    not move.  He could not do anything.

22.  The appellant told me that he  did  not  know  that  the  magazine  was
    illegal.  The PKK did not come to the appellant's home.  He was  not  a
    terrorist, he was only a Kurd.  They told him that he was a terrorist.

23.  His father was very ill and after four days his mother  came  and  they
    let the appellant go, but they said that they would keep an eye on him.
     They took his fingerprints.  They called his mother and told her  that
    if he did anything like this again they would kill him,  they  insulted
    my mother in front of me and he was then released.

24.  He was not left alone.  The police came to the  home  and  checked  the
    food stocks.  They checked to see if the family had too much  food  and
    were storing food for the terrorists.  After his arrest, they  searched
    his house but they did not search other houses  in  the  village.   Two
    days after my release they again searched his home.

25.  After release the Police focused on the appellant and they came to  see
    if he had joined the PKK.  They  especially  came  to  the  appellant's
    house to find evidence against him, he said.   Before  his  arrest  the
    authorities came and searched all the houses in the  village.   No  one
    knew when they were coming.  Sometimes they came  in  the  morning  and
    sometimes the evening of the same day.  It  was  not  predictable  what
    time of day or night they would come, or what they were  going  to  do.
    Sometimes they came twice a day and sometimes they came once every  two
    days.  The appellant knew when other houses in the village  were  being
    searched because the appellant could see  what  was  happening  in  the
    village.

26.  After his release from detention he knew that the authorities  did  not
    go to other houses so often, because they only came to his house.  When
    they came they said that they had come to check on his house because he
    had possession of magazines and they wanted to find out who  gave  them
    to him.  After they left, the neighbours came to the appellant's family
    and told them that they had not been searched that day.

27.  Between the date  appellant's  release  and  his  father's  death,  the
    gendarmes came to his house many times; he cannot say how  many  times.
    It would be probably 50 times  between  March  2009  and  December,  he
    thought.  They also visited other houses in the village  a  few  times.
    They attended other houses in the village more after my arrest.   After
    my release he heard about visits to other houses.

28.  At that stage I adjourned the proceedings for ten minutes to  give  the
    interpreter a break.

29.  On resuming the hearing, the appellant told me that  his  family  moved
    following his father's death.  They moved to his paternal uncle's place
    in  Istanbul.   They  moved,  because  after  his  father's  death  the
    authorities harassed him and his mother could not go on living there on
    her own, so it was decided that they would move to his  uncle's  place.
    They  moved  to  Kirackoy  in  Esemyurt  in  Buyukcekmece  district  in
    Istanbul.  It was an area populated by Kurdish people.   The  uncle  he
    stayed with is called Filit Babahan.  He had two  other  uncles  nearby
    who are both paternal uncles.  Both were involved in politics and  were
    members of DEHAP.  DEHAP no longer exists and was closed  down  by  the
    government.  DTP, Democratic Toplum Partici has now taken over.

30.  The appellant said he became involved with the DTP at the beginning  of
    2006.  He went to their party building.  It  was  a  legal  party,  but
    later it was closed down by the Government.  He  went  to  it,  because
    Kurds met there and he wanted  to  hear  the  discussions.   They  were
    political discussions.  Sometimes he would go two or even three times a
    week to listen to their discussions.

31.  When  he  and  the  family  moved  to  Istanbul,  he  went  to  school.
    Sometimes he distributed leaflets and posters and sometimes he attended
    protest demonstrations.  He  attended  every  event  organised  by  the
    party.  He did not belong to the party, because he was not old  enough.
    He handed out leaflets to passers-by and sometimes he put them  through
    front doors.  He put up posters on the walls.  The DTP defended Kurdish
    people's rights and their language.

32.  The meetings were illegal, he told me.  If a poster had anything to  do
    with Kurdish people's freedom, or if a meeting was organised to protest
    about anything against cruelty for Kurdish people, the  government  did
    not allow such material to be distributed or put on the wall.  He  knew
    the government would not like him doing it.

33.  He attended  demonstrations  organised  by  DTP  many  times.   He  was
    beaten, but managed to get away, but during one of them he  was  caught
    on 13th February, 2007.

34.  Many times he was beaten, but he managed to get away from  the  Police.
    They, the police, were attacking people and interrogating people.

35.  The appellant attended  demonstrations  from  2006  and  he  remembered
    particularly one on 16th August, 2007, when he went with his friend  to
    an area called Gaziosmanpasa.  There, the  demonstrations  were  taking
    place and the police attacked the crowd.  The demonstration  was  held,
    because the police and the PKK were having  violent  struggles  against
    one another.  Their politics were violent against Kurdish people.   The
    appellant and others demonstrated against the bloodshed by the  Kurdish
    people.

36.  The  appellant  attended  the  demonstration  with  three  friends  and
    shouted slogans.  They wanted peace but had to  escape  as  the  police
    attacked the crowd.  It was an illegal demonstration.  They ran home to
    Serken and in Serken's home, his friend told him that  the  police  had
    photographed them.  When the appellant knew  this  he  was  frightened,
    because if he was caught again he thought that he would be killed.  The
    friends suggested that they should separate.  His  friends  were  older
    than him and one of them arranged transportation in a lorry which  took
    them to Iran.  The appellant stayed at Serken's  house  for  about  two
    weeks before travelling.  He did not return to his own  home.   He  did
    not make contact with his own family.  He left for Iran on 31st August,
    2006.  He arrived in Iran on 1st September, 2006  in  the  evening.   A
    smuggler took them to a hotel where they remained for  seven  days  and
    then they left Iran when the smuggler  returned  with  a  passport  and
    tickets.  The passport was written in Arabic.  The smuggler  said  that
    after the appellant passed the control point he would take the passport
    back from him.  He said that the appellant  was  going  to  Croatia  by
    plane.  He did not know where this was.  The agent took  the  appellant
    to the airport.  The smuggler was left behind.  The appellant  and  his
    friends gave the passports to the  agent's  colleague.   They  flew  to
    another place and realised that they were  in  Austrian,  not  Croatia.
    They went to passport control and the official stopped  them  and  they
    were arrested.  This was on 7th September, 2006.   The  appellant  gave
    the Austrian police a false name, because, he told me, he thought  that
    if he gave them his own name he would be sent back to Turkey.   He  was
    kept for four days and then put in a detention  centre.   He  spoke  to
    somebody in Turkish and explained that he feared for his life.  At  the
    detention centre he was given an ID card and was examined by a  doctor.
    There were many policemen there and he was frightened and worried.   He
    missed his family.  He told his friend that  he  wanted  to  return  to
    Turkey.  He told the authorities in Austria that he feared for his life
    and told them  why.   He  returned  to  Turkey  from  Austria  on  19th
    September, 2006.

37.  Because of the lateness of the hour,  the  matter  was  then  adjourned
    until 18th March, 2013, at 1:45pm.

The Hearing on 21st May, 2013

38.  The matter next came for hearing before me on 23rd May, 2013  when  the
    appellant was again represented by Ms Lagunju and the respondent by  Mr
    Melvin.   I  explained  to  both  representatives  that  after  a  long
    adjournment I would normally  read  aloud  my  record  of  the  earlier
    proceedings to ensure both representatives agreed it  was  a  true  and
    accurate copy.  Both representatives told me that they did not wish  me
    to do this and were content to rely on my Record of Procedings.

39.  I reminded the  representatives  that  on  the  previous  occasion  the
    matter was adjourned for lack of court time and that the appellant  had
    been giving his evidence.  Counsel told me  that  she  still  had  some
    further questions for the appellant.

40.  I ensured that the appellant  and  interpreter  understood  each  other
    and, in answer to further questions from  his  Counsel,  the  appellant
    told me that after he left Austria he travelled for six days in a lorry
    and arrived in Turkey.  A friend in Austria had spoken  to  the  driver
    who helped the appellant.  He left with his three friends with whom  he
    had gone to Austria.  They were all older than him.  They had organised
    the lorry trip to Austria and had spoken to the lorry  driver  who  had
    agreed to take them back to Turkey.  The appellant said that he did not
    decide to return to Turkey but he could not stand  it  in  Austria  any
    longer and was afraid that something would happen to him.  He had never
    left his family before and was missing them.  The lorry driver left him
    somewhere in Istanbul at night time and the appellant asked a passer-by
    where he was.

41.  When he went back home his mother asked him where he had  been  and  he
    told her.  He asked his mother if the police had been to the  home  and
    she said that they had not.  He told her that he had been taped  during
    a demonstration and asked if the police had been asking for  him.   She
    said that they had not been looking for the appellant but they had been
    asking about his paternal uncle.

42.  The appellant returned to school but at  school  the  teachers  treated
    him badly because he was a Kurd.  The appellant again visited DTP party
    premises and again attended their meetings and demonstrations.

43.  Sometimes he attended meetings at the  DTP  offices  twice  a  day  and
    sometimes just once a week.  When he went there twice a day it was  for
    meetings.  He used to go to the offices in the morning and  would  then
    learn about a meeting later in the day.  Sometimes he  did  not  go  to
    school.

44.  The appellant told me that he took part in protests organised  by  DTP.
    Often  the  Turkish  police  would  attack  the  protests  to  disperse
    participants.

45.  On 13 February 2007 the appellant and  friends  of  his  were  inviting
    people to take part in an event condemning the capture of  Ocalan.   He
    was distributing posters and handing out leaflets.  Party officials had
    given him the leaflets and the posters which he used to flypost.

46.  The police caught him in possession of posters and  materials  on  13th
    February, in the Kirackoy area of Istanbul.   This  was  a  gendarmerie
    area.  It was gendarmes who arrested him and then handed him to  police
    officers.  The police took him  to  the  anti-terror  branch  in  Vatan
    Street, Istanbul.  As they took him in he was blindfolded in a vehicle.
     It was when he was released he realised where he had  been  held.   At
    the time he did not know where he was.  He was taken into  a  room  and
    questioned.  He was asked where he obtained the  posters  and  leaflets
    from and told them that they came from the DTP.  At the time there  was
    only one person  asking  many  questions.   The  man  then  struck  the
    appellant and told him to tell the truth and asked him why he had  been
    distributing leaflets.  The appellant  explained  that  Kurdish  people
    were not terrorists.  The conflict  was  escalating  at  the  time  and
    Ocalan's aim was to put an end to that.   The  party  was  calling  for
    Ocalan to be freed.

47.  The appellant was unable to see but he could hear three voices and  his
    three inquisitors beat him up.  They accused him of being  a  terrorist
    and was told that they knew all about him.  He was also told that  they
    knew all about his uncle.  His inquisitors kept  asking  him  questions
    and each time he gave them an answer he was hit.  They accused  him  of
    lying and they  squeezed  his  "private  parts".   They  subjected  the
    appellant to falaka.  They made him lie on the floor and tied something
    to his legs and arms.  He did not know what they had used but they then
    beat the soles of his feet.  They were asked him questions at the time.
     He was beaten on the soles of his feet  and  on  his  shins.   He  was
    punched and slapped.

48.  Occasionally they took a break and left  and  then  they  would  return
    later.  The appellant lost  all  idea  of  time.   They  made  him  sit
    somewhere and gave him electric shocks.

49.  It hurt him a great deal when they squeezed his private  parts  and  on
    one occasion he fainted.  His captors threw water  on  his  face.   The
    appellant was asked on  two  occasions  where  he  was  given  electric
    shocks.  The appellant did not answer on the first occasion but gave  a
    long rambling answer which bore no relation to the question.  When  the
    question was put again he said that he had no idea where the shocks had
    been administered but remembered his hands being strapped  to  a  chair
    with something.  He felt pain throughout his body.

50.  The appellant said  he  was  asked  many  questions  and  the  more  he
    answered the more they insisted that  terrorists  were  coming  to  his
    home.  He told them that they were not and they accused him  of  lying.
    They said that they knew his family and that they were all involved  in
    political activities.  He was told that the PKK came to  his  home  and
    that he should confess.   He  did  not  admit  anything.   He  did  not
    disclose anything about his political views.

51.  The police knew that he obtained the leaflets from the DTP  because  he
    told them so.  The  appellant  was  asked  how  long  he  was  held  in
    captivity and replied that he did not know.  When his Counsel  put  the
    question to him again he confirmed that he was held for two  days.   It
    was on his release that he realised he had been held in the anti-terror
    branch.  On releasing him the police had said "our eyes will be on  you
    at all times.  You are not to change address.  Our investigations  will
    continue, we will gather more information about you."

52.  On his release he went to stay with his relative, Ahmet Demir  and  did
    not go home.  He went to his relative's home because his own  home  was
    quite a distance away and he thought that the police might  come  after
    him.

53.  He was in a terrible state when he  arrived  at  his  relative's  home.
    His relative looked after him and after two days called a doctor.   The
    doctor was called because the appellant's feet were swollen and he  was
    depressed.  The doctor  gave  him  some  cream,  some  painkillers  and
    something to calm him down.  The appellant became more and more  afraid
    that the police might come after him.  After the  appellant  had  taken
    his medication the bruises had disappeared.  He did not go out  of  the
    house because he was frightened that he might be captured by the police
    who might have been able to obtain more information about him.

54.  The appellant did not contact any family members.  He left Turkey on  2
    May 2007.  He decided to leave because his relative told  him  that  he
    had spoken to the appellant's uncle and  that  the  police  were  still
    looking for him.  The appellant became more scared.  He was  told  that
    the police had gone to his home and asked the appellant's whereabouts.

55.  His relative told the appellant that the appellant's  uncle  was  going
    to speak to the appellant in the evening.  On that day his  uncle  took
    him and at night he was  placed  inside  a  lorry.   The  lorry  driver
    allowed him out only at night time to use a lavatory.   He  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom six days later on 8th May, 2007.

56.  The appellant confirmed that he has six siblings.  On  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom he went to  live  with  his  uncle,  Orhan.   Orhan  has
    children.  They all like the appellant.  The appellant was treated very
    well.  He now lives with a friend.  He stopped living  with  his  uncle
    some two years ago.  The son of his father's paternal uncle  is  called
    Mehmet Selin Babahan.  He is currently in the United  Kingdom  and  the
    appellant speaks on the telephone  to  him  from  time  to  time.   The
    appellant does not see him very often because he lives a long way  from
    here but tries to see him when he visits  London.   Selin  left  Turkey
    because he was under state pressure and because of his support for  the
    Kurdish cause and the party.  He had to move to Cyprus and  experienced
    similar problems to the appellant in Cyprus so he came  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

57.  Cahit Babahan is  the  appellant's  paternal  uncle.   He  has  made  a
    statement in support of the appellant but is not here to give  evidence
    today.  He could not make it but he has attended previous hearings.  He
    claimed asylum in the United Kingdom.

58.  The appellant was referred to the documents at T1 in  the  Home  Office
    bundle and said that  he  had  been  on  six  or  seven  demonstrations
    organised by the Kurdish community.  He had been on one  this  year  to
    celebrate Nevroz.

59.  Apart from two uncles, the appellant has lots  of  other  relatives  in
    the United Kingdom.  All of them are here for political reasons.   Some
    who came in the 1990s took advantage of, "this law".  Some of them were
    granted asylum status under this law and others got it under asylum.

60.  The appellant has fifteen family members in the United Kingdom  and  he
    believed that seven or eight of them had been  granted  asylum.   Selin
    Babahan,  Yeter  Babahan,  Kamiran  Babahan,  Erhan  Babahan,   Celinil
    Babahan, Cahit Babahan, Sahin Babahan and Hasan Babahan have  all  been
    granted asylum.  They are all from the same village  as  the  appellant
    and were forced to move to Istanbul or to Cyprus as a result  of  state
    pressure and difficulties they had.

61.  The appellant confirmed that he was named in some of  the  articles  at
    B1 in the respondent's bundle.

62.  The appellant's  paternal  uncle  found  the  articles  at  B1  on  the
    internet.  He is Cahit.

63.  The appellant said that he spoke to his  mother  on  the  telephone  on
    Wednesday last week.  He speaks to her one or twice a month but  he  is
    careful what he says because he is in fear that the  phone  is  tapped.
    The police had been to his home.  The appellant's mother is too  afraid
    to speak on the telephone  in  case  the  phones  are  tapped  but  the
    appellant's uncle had spoken to the appellant's mother  and  his  uncle
    had told him.

64.  Selin came to the United Kingdom recently and  he  told  the  appellant
    that the police had been to his home.  He has been granted asylum.

65.  The appellant spent his time by visiting and  spending  time  with  his
    relatives and visiting places with his friend.  He also plays  football
    and would like to study but is not allowed to do so.  Were he to return
    to Turkey he would come to the attention  of  the  authorities  at  the
    airport and would be handed over to the police.  He would be  detained,
    tortured and might be killed.  He would be taken into the Turkish  army
    and the military will be made aware of his Kurdish background.  In  his
    village three relatives of the appellant's have actually been  murdered
    while doing their military service.

66.  The appellant said that he did not wish to undertake  military  service
    in Turkey because he would be made to kill Kurds.  He  would,  however,
    agree to undertake military service in the United Kingdom  were  it  to
    become compulsory.  He told me that he has a conscientious objection to
    military service and would not like to kill Kurds.

67.  At that stage it became apparent that the hearing may  not  finish  and
    may need to be adjourned again part-heard.  The appellant told me  that
    he did not wish the hearing to be adjourned and would like to carry on.
     I agreed to adjourn for five minutes at the request of the  Presenting
    Officer although the interpreter had earlier declined a break.

Cross-examination

68.  The appellant confirmed that he has six siblings and his mother  living
    in Turkey and that he had at  least  30  cousins  living  in  Istanbul.
    These were all paternal cousins.  Some of them were very young but  the
    older ones certainly are suffering because of their Kurdish background.
     Selim came to the United Kingdom in 2010.  The appellant's brother  is
    nearly 18 and is himself having problems.

69.  The appellant confirmed that he had no  arrest  warrants  or  summonses
    from his family members or for himself.  He knows that he is wanted  in
    turkey but arrest warrants were not produced.  The  authorities  behave
    in an arbitrary fashion in arresting anybody when they want to.  He was
    not a member of any Kurdish organisation because of his age.  The party
    did have a youth branch but it was only for those aged over  18  years.
    The party simply asked people  to  go  and  help  with  flyposting  and
    distributing leaflets which was legal.  Whole families used  to  attend
    their meetings and so he was  not  stopped  from  attending.   What  he
    distributed was illegal.  He did not think at the time  that  he  would
    get into trouble by having  the  documents.   The  leaflets  themselves
    refer to the demonstration which was  planned  for  15  February.   The
    demonstrations by the Kurdish population were attacked  by  the  police
    and also photographed.  The party was legal at the time in  Turkey  but
    the appellant said he did not tell the police the name  of  the  party.
    They kept saying that it was the terrorists who gave him the  document.



70.  Shortly before he went to Austria the appellant was at a  demonstration
    which he was told was filed.  He was with three  friends  and  he  went
    with them to Iran.  He left in the middle of the night and arrived  the
    next day at night time.  He travelled for just under 24 hours.  He  had
    not paid any money to his friends who had arranged  the  trip  and  had
    also arranged for the trip back to Turkey later.  The appellant had not
    paid any money.  He returned to Turkey because he could not bear  being
    away.

71.  On his return the appellant continued his  activities  because  he  did
    not think the leaflets were illegal.  The appellant said that he  would
    not have done anything illegal.  He did not remember how  many  of  his
    friends were arrested but believed that there were five arrested at the
    same time as him.  The appellant did not know what happened to them.

72.   After  return  from  Austria  the   appellant   attended   a   further
    demonstration.  He had not mentioned this because he was not asked.  He
    had never said that he was definitely  recorded  whilst  he  was  at  a
    demonstration.

73.  The appellant's mother received a visit  from  the  police  during  the
    time that he was in Austria.  They did not necessarily come in  respect
    of the appellant but his mother told the appellant that they  came  and
    carried out  searches.   The  appellant  attended  demonstrations  even
    though the police had been to his house because, as a Kurd, it was  his
    right to take part in the demonstrations that Kurdish people  attended.



74.  The appellant said he did not know how many  terrorist  branches  there
    were in Istanbul.  He knew that Selim had claimed asylum  and  had  had
    contact with him since he came to the United Kingdom.  Salim lives near
    Cahit in Fishguard.  The appellant confirmed  that  he  had  spoken  to
    Salim about his asylum claim and he remembers Salim telling him that he
    went to the same anti-terror branch building but everyone  arrested  on
    terror charges would mostly be taken there, because it is  the  central
    anti-terrorist branch.

75.  During the appellant's interrogation after his  second  arrest  he  was
    not aware of police interrogating anyone else at the same time.  He was
    asked to sign a confession but he refused.  He was not asked to  be  an
    informer.

76.  The interrogators knew how old the  appellant  was  but  they  did  not
    care.  They did not inform him family of his arrest and in fact  family
    members had called the police who denied  that  the  appellant  was  in
    detention.  The appellant's family did not know where he was.   He  was
    not released on bail but when he was released he  was  told  that  they
    would "have their eyes on me".  The authorities did  not  tell  anybody
    when he was being released.  The appellant caught a minibus from a  bus
    stop near the anti-terrorist branch and went to his  relative's  house.
    He was able to walk because  the  bus  stop  was  close  to  the  anti-
    terrorist building and it was only a short journey  to  his  relative's
    house.

77.  The appellant did not seek medical treatment because he  believed  that
    a doctor might contact the police.  He said that if a  doctor  saw  him
    and the appellant had told the doctor that he had been beaten  up  then
    he might feel obliged to contact the police about  it.   The  appellant
    would then get into trouble with the police for daring to complain.

78.  The doctor who did come and  treat  him  was  a  private  doctor.   The
    appellant thought that his relative had spoken to them.  The  appellant
    did not know whether he had tried to call the doctor sooner.

79.  The appellant  confirmed  he  attended  demonstrations  in  the  United
    Kingdom for Navroz.  He did not know where it had taken  place  but  it
    was  in  London.   The  appellant  had  been  sent  leaflets  which  he
    distributed to people in Wales.  The appellant denied that he had  paid
    money for the letter which appears at T1 of the respondent's bundle.

80.  Re-examined the appellant said that he is taking  medication  given  to
    him by his uncle but not taking any medication given to him by his  GP.
    The friends who he went to Austria with were in their 20s,  he  thought
    about 25.  They had not asked him for any money.

81.  In answer to questions put by me,  the  appellant  confirmed  that  his
    general medical practitioner had not seen the psychiatric report  which
    had been submitted by  his  solicitors  and  neither  had  his  general
    medical practitioner given him any  medication  or  suggested  he  have
    counselling.  He confirmed that he was allowed to  attend  meetings  of
    DTP because families attended the meetings and so he was  just  another
    child at the meeting.

82.  I asked the appellant why he believed that were he to be returned  now,
    some five years after he had left, he  would  be  of  interest  to  the
    Turkish authorities because they had not  encountered  him  during  the
    last five years and would have had no reason at all to believe that  he
    had been politically active.  He told me that the reason he feared  the
    authorities was because they believe that the appellant has joined  the
    PKK.

83.  Unfortunately because of lack of hearing time it was  not  possible  to
    continue and conclude the hearing.  I did suggest to Counsel  that  she
    might like to return in the afternoon, when I  would  take  submissions
    after having dealt with the afternoon's list, but she told me that that
    was not convenient to her and that  she  had  a  prior  appointment;  I
    therefore adjourned to a date to be fixed.

The Hearing on 7th August, 2013

84.  I heard submissions from Mr Melvin and Ms Lagunju.

85.  Mr Melvin reminded me that the appellant had absconded  after  entering
    the United Kingdom and only came to the attention of the authorities in
    July, 2009.  He was eventually  interviewed  in  November,  2011.   The
    delay in interviewing him was the responsibility of  the  Secretary  of
    State and no reason had been given.

86.  Mr Melvin relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter and  invited  me  to
    make adverse findings as to the appellant's credibility.  He  asked  me
    to make adverse findings in respect of the appellant's  previous  claim
    in  2006  which  he  made  in  Austria.   This,  submitted  Mr  Melvin,
    demonstrated the appellant's ability to deceive.  The appellant  denied
    having claimed in Austria and gave false details.  Mr Melvin  suggested
    that the appellant had not been truthful as to how he had travelled  to
    Austria.  He claimed that he travelled from Istanbul  to  Tehran  in  a
    lorry leaving one evening and arriving the next morning.  During cross-
    examination he claimed that  he  had  actually  arrived  the  following
    evening.  It was, suggested Mr Melvin implausible that he had travelled
    from Istanbul to Iran in a lorry and completed the journey in 24 hours,
    let alone twelve hours.

87.  Mr Melvin also suggested that the appellant's  explanation  as  to  his
    ability to be able to return  after  having  made  a  claim  by  simply
    obtaining a passage on a lorry was also implausible.  The appellant has
    not explained how it was that he was  able  to  fund  such  a  journey.
    Neither was it credible, submitted Mr Melvin, that the appellant  would
    immediately restart his political activities on return to Turkey.   The
    appellant was vague as to why he would take such a risk having fled the
    country, gone to Austria and then return to Turkey.

88.  In any event, submitted Mr Melvin, the appellant did choose  to  return
    voluntarily to Turkey and, in the circumstances, the appellant's arrest
    in 2003 and the events of 2006 could not be said to have given rise  to
    a genuine fear of persecution.  The appellant  would  simply  not  have
    returned to Turkey, whether he was  feeling  homesick  or  not,  if  he
    thought that he would have been at risk.

89.  So far as 2007 is concerned it is accepted that  he  was  arrested  for
    flyposting.  However, the appellant on his  own  account  was  released
    without charge.  Had the authorities seriously thought that  he  was  a
    separatist then, submitted Mr Melvin, greater restrictions  would  have
    been placed on him.  As to the appellant's torture claim, his  evidence
    is not credible.  It was inconsistent.  At paragraph 27 of his  witness
    statement and in answer to  question  115  during  the  course  of  his
    interview, the appellant  claimed  that  wires  were  attached  to  his
    fingers and yet he failed to confirm this in giving evidence.

90.  Despite the appellant's claimed torture,  on  his  release  instead  of
    going home he said he caught a bus and went to stay  with  a  relative.
    He claimed that he had no contact with his family for three months.  No
    credible explanation has been given as to  why  he  did  not  make  any
    contact with his family.  Mr Melvin suggested  that  there  would  have
    been no reason why his family could not have  travelled  to  the  place
    where he was being detained and collect him.

91.  The appellant claims that a doctor gave him creams and  pills  for  his
    trauma but he asked me to note that there  was  no  corroboration  even
    though they could reasonably be expected to  have  been  obtained.   He
    relied on TK (Burundi) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2009] EWCA Civ 40.

92.  The appellant claimed to be in contact with his mother who  refused  to
    tell him over the  telephone  if  the  police  had  visited  her  home.
    However, the appellant's paternal uncle has apparently  told  him  that
    the police have visited his home and claims that he  learnt  this  from
    the appellant's mother.  That is a contradiction which  undermines  the
    appellant's credibility, submitted Mr Melvin.

93.  As to the doctor who treated the appellant, no reason is given  why  it
    took two days for the doctor to be called.  A psychiatric report is now
    relied upon but it should be noted that  the  appellant  was  not  seen
    until five years after his arrival.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant has received the treatment recommended by the doctor.

94.  There is a letter from the Kurdish Cultural Centre but that is  all  it
    is, a letter.  No one has  attended  from  that  organisation  to  give
    evidence  and  be  cross-examined  and  the  appellant's  own  evidence
    actually contradicted their claims.  He claimed that  he  had  attended
    demonstrations.  At his interview at questions 132 to 136  his  answers
    are contradicted by the letter from the Kurdish Cultural Centre.

95.   Mr  Melvin  suggested  that  if  the  appellant  was  claiming  to  be
    politically active in the United Kingdom there would be  no  reason  at
    all for him not to have mentioned this during his asylum interview.

96.  There is, in the  appellant's  bundle,  a  witness  statement  from  an
    uncle.  It is signed and dated and that uncle may  well  have  attended
    earlier hearings but he did not give oral evidence and  tender  himself
    for  cross-examination.   Little  weight  should  be  placed  on   such
    statements.

97.  Mr Melvin drew my attention to  the  determination  of  Upper  Tribunal
    Grubb in the case of Sahin Babahan, the appellant's cousin.  Mr  Melvin
    asked me to note the similarities in the two claims.

98.  Mr Melvin asked me to note that there was no evidence  from  the  party
    who, it is claimed, gave him the leaflets that he distributed  and  yet
    they could easily have been obtained.

99.  As to the appellant's Article 8 claim, he does have family  members  in
    the United Kingdom but there cannot be said to  be  a  family  life  in
    existence between him and his family members, given that  there  is  no
    given which could possibly satisfy the test in NA v Aratnam Kugathas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  So  far
    as private life is concerned, the appellant had given evidence that  he
    lives with a friend and sees family members  occasionally.   He  claims
    that he was not able to work or study.  He says  that  he  occasionally
    plays football and attends occasional demonstrations but he  has  given
    no evidence of any significant private life that  he  enjoys.   He  has
    been in the United Kingdom for six years but the Secretary  of  State's
    decision is entirely proportionate.

100. It is accepted that the appellant was  detained  with  five  others  in
    2007, but not what he claims happened to him, given the ease with which
    he was released.

101. Mr Melvin confirmed that IK (Returnees, Records, IFA) Turkey CG  [2004]
    UKIAT 00312 was the current country guidance.  He submitted that  since
    there was no conviction or charge on return when questioned there would
    be no record of the appellant.  He invited me to dismiss the appeal.

102. Counsel  confirmed  that  pages  25  to  the  end  of  the  appellant's
    subjective bundle did in fact contain objective background evidence.

103. She reminded me that the appellant's claim was  his  imputed  political
    opinion and the belief that he had assisted the DTP.  At the  time  the
    DTP was a legal party and there were DTP  members  of  parliament.   It
    never actually became illegal in Turkey but closed down in 2009.

104. The appellant has claimed to  have  been  active  in  politics  in  the
    United Kingdom, in that he has  attended  demonstrations  and  that  is
    supported by the evidence from the Kurdish Cultural Centre.   His  fear
    is because of his politically active family.  Five family members  have
    themselves been recognised as refugees in the United Kingdom and  there
    are other family members who have been  granted  leave  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant claimed that his family is well-known in Turkey
    by the authorities.   He  claims  to  have  been  detained  on  several
    occasions.  The first was in 2003 and the second in 2006.  He fled from
    Turkey but returned from Austria when he was homesick.  On  his  return
    he again became involved in politics and was  detained  in  2007.   The
    documents at pages 16  to  25  of  the  appellant's  subjective  bundle
    contain newspaper articles recording his arrest.

105. So far as the medical report is concerned, Counsel  suggested  that  it
    was irrelevant that the appellant  had  not  received  treatment  since
    being diagnosed with PTSD, despite the fact  that  the  author  of  the
    report recommended that he should receive treatment.

106. Evidence contained within the respondent's  bundle  shows  that  minors
    are detained and tortured in Turkey.  She said that it was a fact  that
    Turkish detainees are always tortured but was not able to  substantiate
    that claim by drawing my attention to any objective evidence.

107. Counsel referred me to IK and suggested that the appellant met  six  of
    the risk categories and, depending on the  credibility  findings  made,
    possibly several more.

108. On the appellant's return to Turkey  he  will,  submitted  Counsel,  be
    questioned.  The type of questions  put  to  the  appellant  are  those
    referred to at paragraph 84 of  IK  based  on  the  Country  of  Origin
    Information Report.  The appellant cannot be expected to lie during his
    questioning and he will therefore be forced  to  confirm  that  he  was
    detained by the anti-terror branch.  Once he does that he  will  be  at
    risk, she submitted.

109. I asked Mr Melvin if it was accepted that the appellant had  been  held
    by the anti-terror branch on his arrest in 2007.  He told me  that  the
    arrest was accepted, but it was not accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    been arrested at the anti-terror branch.

110. I pointed out to Mr Melvin that the evidence heard  by  the  judge  was
    that the appellant had been detained  at  the  anti-terror  branch  and
    although the judge had not  made  a  finding  on  precisely  where  the
    appellant had been detained, he  did  accept  that  detention  and,  by
    implication, the claim that the appellant had been detained by the anti-
    terror branch.  Mr Melvin told me that he did not accept that.

111. Finally, Counsel reminded me that the appellant had been consistent  in
    his account and told me that he relied on Article 8.  He  has  been  in
    the United Kingdom for six years and the delay in the case was  not  of
    his making.  During that time he has established his life in the United
    Kingdom and it would be disproportionate, she submitted, to remove him.

112. I reserved my determination.

The Law

113. In asylum appeals the burden of proof is on the appellant to show  that
    returning him to Turkey will expose him to a real risk  of  persecution
    for one of the five grounds recognised by the 1951 Refugee  Convention,
    or to a breach of his protected human rights.  The question of  whether
    a person has a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason
    has to be looked at in the round, in the  light  of  all  the  relevant
    circumstances and judged against the situation as at the  time  of  the
    appeal.  In human rights appeals, if it is established that there  will
    be an interference with the appellant's human rights, and the  relevant
    Article permits, then it is for the respondent to  establish  that  the
    interference is justified.

114. The standard of proof  in  asylum  appeals,  as  regards  to  both  the
    likelihood of persecution and the  establishment  of  past  and  future
    risks is a real risk.  In Kacaj v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (01/TH/0634*) it was held by the former  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal that the standard of proof in human rights appeals is the same
    as that in asylum appeals.

Background Evidence

115. In order to place the appellant's account  into  context  and  also  to
    enable me to properly assess the  risk  facing  the  appellant  I  have
    considered all the background evidence submitted to me.  The  appellant
    submitted two bundles;  the  first  is  headed  "appellant's  objective
    bundle of documents" and the second, "appellant's subjective bundle  of
    documents".  Counsel agreed that pages 25 onwards  in  the  appellant's
    subjective bundle were actually objective background documents.

116.  I  confirm  that  I  have  read  and  considered  all  the  background
    information in the appellant's bundle and  that  contained  within  the
    respondent's bundle.  I accept that despite international  pressure  on
    the government of Turkey given its desire to  join  the  EU,  the  most
    appalling human rights abuses still continue in that  country  both  at
    the hands of the military and/or enforcement officials.  The failure to
    bring prompt impartial and effective investigations into allegations of
    human rights violations means that there is little effective deterrence
    against torture.  I noted that the  constitutional  court  ordered  the
    closure of the country's main pro-Kurdish party the DTP  and  described
    it as having become, "a focus of  actions  against  the  unity  of  the
    nation, citing its links to the rebel Kurdistan Workers' Party.  I also
    noted the detention in 2009 of members of DTP by Turkish  police.   The
    US State Department Country Report 2009 claimed that  during  2009  the
    police routinely  detained  demonstrators,  including  several  hundred
    members of the former  DTP  and  its  successor  party  the  Peace  and
    Democracy  Party,  on  various  occasions.   They  were  said  to  have
    continued to detain and harass members of human  rights  organisations,
    media personnel and human rights  monitors.   It  also  suggested  that
    throughout the year the police  and  judiciary  increased  pressure  on
    members of the pro-Kurdish former DTP and BDP.

117. The Independent reported in August, 2010 that the  Turkish  police  had
    imprisoned some 840 Kurdish  political  activists  since  April,  2009,
    mainly from the leftist and  pro-Kurdish  Peace  and  Democracy  Party.
    Many were said to have been in custody awaiting trial  for  a  year  or
    more.

118. In December, 2011 the New York Times  reported  that  some  38  people,
    many of them journalists, were arrested by police in dawn raids  across
    Turkey as part of an investigation into a network accused of being  the
    political wing of an outlawed  Kurdish  separatist  rebel  group.   The
    arrests including prominent journalists,  intellectuals  and  academics
    who had expressed general support for  the  rights  of  Kurds  who  are
    described as being a long oppressed minority.

119. The New York Times also  reported  that  Turkey  has  already  some  67
    reporters in prison.

120. I noted that there was no background evidence placed  before  me  which
    gave me any reason to believe that the circumstances which  would  face
    this appellant on return to Turkey were anything other  than  described
    in IK, the current country guidance case dealing with Turkey.

121. In particular I noted paragraphs 79 to 87 of IK.

Medical Report

122. I confirm that I have read and considered the medical  report  prepared
    by Dr J Hajioff dated 4th January, 2012.

123. In referring to the report, Mr Melvin told me  that  First-tier  Judges
    and the respondent were familiar with reports from  Dr  Hajioff.  Quite
    what he was suggesting I do not know; I pointed out to Mr Melvin that I
    did not believe that I had  ever  previously  seen  a  report  by  this
    doctor.  I noted,  however,  that  the  author  of  the  report  is  a
    consultant psychiatrist and also a Home  Office  visiting  psychiatrist
    approved under Section 12(2) of the 1983 Mental Health Act.

124. I believe that Dr Hajioff's report deserves  careful  consideration  by
    me.   I  note  that  he  describes  the  appellant's  previous  claimed
    experience and expresses the opinion that the  appellant  is  suffering
    from chronic PTSD and also displays symptoms of depression.

125. I was concerned to note that despite  this  diagnosis  and  despite  Dr
    Hajioff's  suggestion,  there  was  no  evidence  before  me  that  the
    appellant had been prescribed any antidepressant medication or had been
    receiving psychological treatment, such as individual  counselling  and
    support.
126. I hope that those representing the appellant will impress upon him  the
    importance  of  receiving  effective  and  appropriate  medication  and
    treatment.

Consideration of the Evidence and Findings of Fact

127. I  then  considered  the  appellant's  evidence  in  the  light  of  my
    consideration of the background evidence  and  the  psychiatric  report
    prepared by Dr Hajioff. In reaching my findings I have  borne  in  mind
    that the events  described  by  the  appellant  are  all  events  which
    occurred while he was a minor.  As a result, I have made what I believe
    to be a proper allowance, given his immaturity  at  the  time  and  the
    passage of time which has occurred since.

128. I first reminded myself of the findings of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Powell.  Judge Powell recorded, at paragraph 29 of  the  determination,
    the following:-

         "The appellant resumed his activities for the  DTP  after  a  short
         while.  On 13th February, 2007, the appellant said he was  detained
         by the authorities and taken to the anti-Terrorist Headquarters  on
         Vatan Street.  He was interrogated and tortured.  After two days he
         was released pending further investigation.  He  was  not  charged.
         He was not granted bail or made  the  subject  of  conditions.   No
         mention was made of his earlier detention or the filming in 2006."

129. The judge's findings start at paragraph 72 of his determination and  at
    paragraph 79 the appellant said this:-

         "The appellant's account of being detained in  2007  is  plausible.
         The appellant was detained because he  was  engaged  in  flyposting
         with others.   They  were  all  detained.   However,  there  is  no
         evidence that the  authorities  associated  the  appellant  with  a
         history of previous involvement with DTP or HADEP."

130. At paragraph 86 the judge said this:-

         "I am also not satisfied that the appellant has provided a credible
         account of the circumstances  in  which  he  was  detained  by  the
         authorities in 2007.  His  unconditional  release  is  inconsistent
         with the appellant's claim that he was  tortured  or  viewed  as  a
         separatist or that the authorities regarded him as being likely  to
         join the PKK."

131. The judge then said, at paragraph 89:-

         "Overall, despite my view of the appellant's  credibility,  I  find
         that he was detained by the authorities in 2007 for flyposting  but
         I do not find that he was tortured.  I find that  he  was  arrested
         without condition or restriction although it would not surprise  me
         if the authorities gave  him  a  telling  off,  as  the  Presenting
         Officer suggested.  However, I do not find that the  appellant  was
         regarded as  a  separatist  or  that  the  authorities  showed  any
         interest in him after he was released."

    The judge made other findings and  then,  at  paragraph  92  found  the
    following:-


         "The appellant has not  been  arrested  but  I  find  that  he  was
         detained possibly on three occasions but the detentions in 2003 and
         2006 were not significant and did not lead to  the  creation  of  a
         record or perception that  he  was  involved  in  separatism.   The
         appellant's detention in 2007 was informal and did not involve  the
         use of torture and is likely to have resulted  in  an  admonishment
         rather than the creation of a record likely to be held on the  GBTS
         system" (my emphasis).

132. At paragraph 93 the judge repeats the finding  he  has  made  that  the
    appellant's detention in 2007 was for a short  period  consistent  with
    him  having  been  detained  with  others  for  flyposting,  having  no
    political profile and being admonished  by  the  authorities  prior  to
    release.

133. However, nowhere in the determination does the judge make  any  finding
    as to where the appellant was detained.  I pointed  out  to  Mr  Melvin
    that it appeared that the judge had accepted the evidence before him as
    set out in paragraph 29 of the determination, namely that the appellant
    was detained  by  the  authorities  and  taken  to  the  anti-Terrorist
    Headquarters on Vatan Street.

134. Mr Melvin told me that it was accepted  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
    that the appellant was detained in 2007, but not that he  was  retained
    at the anti-Terrorist Headquarters.

135. I noted that at the appellant's screening interview conducted  on  10th
    May, 2007, the appellant had claimed that he was  taken  to  the  anti-
    terrorist branch where he was tortured, beaten up  and  given  electric
    shocks.  It is  clear  to  me  that  Judge  Powell  accepted  that  the
    appellant had been detained at the anti-Terrorist Headquarters.   Judge
    Powell makes it very clear that he did not accept the account of  being
    tortured but I believe that what he has said at paragraph 79, 92 and 93
    entitle me to accept that the judge did find  that  the  appellant  had
    been held at the anti-terrorist branch.

136. Given that the appellant has already been found to have  been  detained
    by the anti-terrorist branch in Turkey, I believe that my  findings  of
    fact are largely rendered irrelevant, given what I say below about  the
    risk to the appellant on his return.  Nonetheless, it is incumbent upon
    me to make findings on the evidence that has been presented and  I now
    do so:-

    (a)  I am satisfied that the appellant is a citizen of Turkey, born  in
         Hosgeldi in the town of Bulanik in the province of Mus.   I  accept
         that he is a Kurdish Muslim and that his father died  in  December,
         2003.


    (b)  I accept that the appellant has six siblings  and  that  over  the
         years members of his family have encountered difficulties with  the
         Turkish  authorities  because  of  their  Kurdish  background   and
         politics.


    (c)  I accept that five members of the  appellant's  family  have  been
         granted asylum in the United Kingdom and  that  one  of  them,  his
         cousin Sahin, gave a very similar account of experiences in  Turkey
         to the appellant.  I accept  that  the  appellant's  paternal  aunt
         joined the PKK and, as a  result,  the  family  have  come  to  the
         attention of the authorities.


    (d)  I do not accept that the appellant was treated badly at school  by
         his teachers purely because he spoke Kurdish.  Understandably,  the
         teachers would have urged the appellant, along with other  children
         at the school, to learn to speak Turkish.  I accept that he  might
         very well have found it difficult to speak Turkish and as a  result
         may have believed that he was being picked on by his teachers.  The
         appellant gave no explanation as to what he meant by  his  teachers
         having treated him "badly" and I believe that what he is  referring
         to is simply his teachers'  annoyance  with  him  at  not  properly
         applying himself and learning the language.


    (e)  The appellant claims that his first arrest was at the age of 12 in
         March, 2003.  He claims that he was held for four days  and  beaten
         and kicked.  He claims not to know whether he  was  given  electric
         shocks, but describes being touched by a machine  which,  he  said,
         "made me shaky and gave me unbearable pain".  I did not believe the
         appellant.  I am afraid I do not believe that gendarmes  in  Turkey
         would spend four days interrogating a 12 year old boy who had  been
         distributing magazines in the village.  I accept that he  may  well
         have been arrested and questioned, but I did not believe  that  the
         gendarmes would expend so much time and energy in investigating the
         appellant's activities as the appellant claimed, simply because the
         appellant had distributed magazines to people's homes.   I  believe
         that it was much more likely  that  having  heard  the  appellant's
         explanation they would have devoted their energies  to  questioning
         other people in the village in order to identify the  old  man  who
         had approached the appellant.  In any event, I did not believe that
         this event in any way contributed to the appellant's  claimed  fear
         of persecution.  He  subsequently  left  Turkey  and  travelled  to
         Austria.  I did not believe, even  making  what  I  believe  to  be
         generous allowance for the appellant's age, that if he had  reached
         a place of safety after fleeing in fear  of  persecution  he  would
         have returned after a matter of a  week  or  so,  even  if  he  was
         suffering from homesickness.


    (f)  The appellant appeared to be in  some  doubt  about  subjected  to
         electric shocks when he was held by the anti-terrorist  department.
         Had he been subjected to electric shocks  in  2003,  I  believe  he
         would have  remembered,  particularly  since  he  claimed  to  have
         suffered electric shocks in 2007.


    (g)  I accept that, given the location of the appellant's home,  it  is
         more likely than not that the police did occasionally come checking
         people in the appellant's village in an attempt  to  learn  of  PKK
         activity.  I accept  also  that  the  police  may  very  well  have
         attended at the appellant's home and checked  food  stocks.   I  am
         also prepared to accept that given that as a 12 year  old  boy  the
         appellant had received and distributed magazines around the village
         they may well have paid closer attention to the  appellant's  home,
         but I believe that the appellant has exaggerated this aspect of his
         claim.  He believed that the police had gone to his home, "probably
         50 times" between March,  2009  and  December,  2009.   I did  not
         believe the appellant.  I did not believe that the  authorities  in
         Turkey hunting for PKK separatists would devote so  much  time  and
         energy in searching the appellant's house.  To  have  searched  the
         appellant's home so many times in such a short  period  would  have
         used  considerable  man-hours  and  I  did  not  think   that   the
         appellant's was credible; I believe that  he  has  exaggerated  his
         claim.


    (h)  I believe and accept that at some stage the appellant moved to  an
         area of Istanbul where his uncle, Filit lived and where  two  other
         paternal uncles also had their homes.  I am prepared to accept that
         his uncles  may  well  have  been  politically  active  in  parties
         sympathetic to the Kurdish cause.  However, I did not believe  that
         the events that occurred leading up to the appellant's departure on
         31st  August,  2006  contributed  to  the   appellant's   fear   of
         persecution in Turkey.  I was invited by Mr Melvin to make adverse
         findings in respect of his journey from Istanbul to Tehran,  but  I
         do not know what the distance is between Istanbul and Tehran and no
         evidence has been adduced as to how long it would take a  lorry  to
         travel  between  those  two  cities.   As  it  is,  the   appellant
         eventually made his  way  to  Austria,  where  he  arrived  on  7th
         September, 2006.  I do not believe that the  reason  the  appellant
         gave a false name  to  the  Austrian  authorities  was  because  he
         thought that if he gave his own name he would be sent back.   That,
         with respect, makes little sense.  The appellant had no  reason  to
         believe that the Austrian  authorities  would  have  heard  of  the
         appellant's family name before his arrival.  That he should give  a
         false name does, I believe undermine his credibility,  but  to  his
         credit, he was honest in admitting  that  he  gave  a  false  name.
         However, the fact that the appellant did return to Turkey  on  19th
         September, 2006 suggested to me that nothing which had occurred  in
         Turkey up to the time he left had anything at all to  do  with  his
         eventual departure and claim for asylum.  I fully  accept  that  at
         the time he would only have been 15 years of age and undoubtedly he
         would have missed his friends, family and surroundings but even  so
         I did not believe he would have returned voluntarily if he had been
         in genuine fear of the Turkish authorities.

Credibility

137. I have explained my  reasons  for  finding  parts  of  the  appellant's
    account not to  be  credible  and  other  parts  of  it  to  have  been
    exaggerated.  In making these findings I have borne very much in  mind
    the appellant's age at the  date  when  the  events  he  was  recalling
    occurred and the gap in time since the events occurred.   I  have  made
    what I regard to be full allowance for his immaturity.

Risk to the Appellant on Return to Turkey

138. As I have indicated above,  no  background  evidence  has  been  placed
    before me which gives me any reason to believe that I cannot rely still
    on what the Tribunal said at paragraphs 79 to 87 of IK.  For  the  sake
    of completeness I set out those paragraphs below:-
   1. The procedure facing returnees at Istanbul  Airport  (which  is  where
      returnees are sent by the UK Government) is that on arrival  a  person
      must present himself to an immigration control booth  staffed  by  the
      border police. There is a computer terminal  at  each  booth  and  the
      details of each person are keyed in by the border policeman  from  the
      travel documents. Dependant on the view taken by the border policeman,
      the returnee will either be allowed to proceed  through  the  terminal
      without further ado, or will be  transferred  to  the  police  station
      attached to the Airport for further questioning, which will  typically
      take between 6 to 9 hours. Our view of the present evidence, and  this
      reflects the long established jurisprudence of the Tribunal,  is  that
      there is no real risk  during  this  period  of  questioning  of  ill-
      treatment  crossing  the  high  threshold   required   to   constitute
      persecution or a breach of Article  3.  However  if  as  a  result  of
      information  derived  from  such  questioning  or  from  any   further
      enquiries undertaken by them, the police decide to transfer a returnee
      for further enquiries by the anti-terror police or possibly by MIT, it
      will be during this third phase of the process that  the  prospect  of
      material ill-treatment arises. The CIPU report  at  6.242  states  the
      risk in these terms.
      "At the anti-terrorist unit of the police, the suspect being subjected
      to torture or mistreatment cannot be excluded".
   1. That torture "cannot be excluded" is not the same as "real risk",  but
      we shall consider this issue later. At all  events,  the  question  of
      whether and why a returnee will be stopped in the  first  instance  at
      the immigration booth and sent for more detailed  questioning  at  the
      airport  police  station  is  potentially  significant  and  must   be
      answered.
   1. If a returnee is a draft evader he will be stopped at the  immigration
      booth when the GBTS reveals this information. He will  be  transferred
      to the airport police station and the military  will  be  informed  so
      that he can  be  collected  by  them.  It  is  again  well-established
      jurisprudence  that  draft  evaders  as  such  will  not  qualify  for
      international protection as a consequence of their  treatment  on  and
      after return.
   1. As to other returnees, we conclude there is  no  good  reason  on  the
      evidence before us, in answering this general question to depart  from
      the general thrust of the conclusions of the Tribunal in paragraph  42
      of A (Turkey), which we have already quoted. Thus  if  a  returnee  is
      travelling on a one-way  emergency  travel  document  (and  no  failed
      asylum seeker will be returned to Turkey  by  the  British  government
      without appropriate travel documentation), or if there  is  no  border
      control record of a legal departure  from  Turkey,  then  there  is  a
      reasonable likelihood that he will be identifiable as a failed  asylum
      seeker and could be sent to the airport  police  station  for  further
      investigation. This is so stated in the CIPU report at 6.242. It  does
      not automatically follow that this would happen. For example it may be
      that when the emergency travel documents were issued  by  the  Turkish
      Embassy in London, some preliminary enquiries would have been made and
      the Turkish authorities would be satisfied that  the  returnee  is  no
      interest to them. However there is a real risk of transfer.
   1. Additionally,  even  when  the  returnee  is  travelling  on  his  own
      legitimate passport with a proper Turkish exit stamp, if there  is  an
      entry  on  the  databases  available  at  the  passport  booth,  which
      comprises the  GBTS  and  the  border  control  information,  that  is
      sufficiently significant to warrant further inquiries, there is  again
      a reasonable likelihood that the returnee will be transferred for such
      further enquiries to the airport  police  station.  Again  it  is  not
      automatic. We note in this context the specific example quoted  to  us
      by Mr Kanat of the expatriate Turk from Dsseldorf returning  in  2003
      for a holiday in Turkey, whose record at the immigration control booth
      showed a detention on 21 March 1991 because of  Newroz  activities  in
      Elazig. In that case, he was waved through without being referred  for
      further questioning. We consider that the mere fact of some such entry
      on the database will not necessarily incur further questioning  unless
      it is considered significant.
      If a person faces non-routine investigation what should he be expected
      to say when questioned and  what  further  information  is  reasonably
      likely to be accessed in this process?
   1. The CIPU Report at 6.242 describes the nature of  the  questioning  at
      the airport police station as mostly involving:
      "Establishment or checking personal details;  reasons  and  period  of
      exit from Turkey; reason for the asylum application; reasons  for  any
      refusal of the asylum application; any criminal record and past record
      at home and abroad including  drug  offences;  possible  contact  with
      illegal organisations abroad. However, if there are no suspicions,  as
      a rule after an average of 6 to 9 hours they are released."
   1. Clearly further information  may  arise  from  the  questioning  of  a
      returnee by the police in  the  airport  police  station.  Mr  Grieves
      submitted that  a  person  should  not  be  expected  to  lie  to  the
      authorities during questioning  in  order  to  avoid  persecution.  Ms
      Giovannetti in her written reply stated the Home  Office  position  as
      follows.
      "The Secretary of  State  accepts  that  an  individual  detained  and
      transferred to the airport police station would  be  interrogated  and
      that it is reasonably likely that further checks would be carried out.
      However, the nature and extent of such  interrogation  and  checks  is
      likely to be related to the reason that the  individual  was  stopped.
      So, for example, a person who does not have valid documents is  likely
      to be questioned in order to establish his identity. An individual who
      is thought to have left on false documents is likely to be  questioned
      about how and from whom he obtained them.
      The Secretary of State does not suggest (and never has suggested) that
      Adjudicators should simply proceed on the basis  that  individual  can
      lie about his background and circumstances. The right approach  is  to
      assess what questions are likely to be asked  of  the  individual  and
      what his responses are likely to be. "
   1. We agree with the approach described by Ms Giovannetti. It will be for
      an Adjudicator in each case to assess what questions are likely to  be
      asked and how a returnee would respond without being required to  lie.
      The examples given by Ms Giovannetti above are  examples  only.  Where
      and whether the questioning  goes  beyond  the  ambit  of  questioning
      described above, depends upon the circumstances of each case.
   1. We have already dealt with  the  separate  question  of  what  further
      information is reasonably likely to be accessed by the police  at  the
      airport  police  station  when  considering   the   accessibility   of
      information. As we have said, the evidence before us does not  suggest
      in our view that any additional information system  will  be  directly
      available at the police station beyond the GBTS and the border control
      records. We consider however that if  unresolved  doubts  remain  from
      questioning  the  returnee  it  is  reasonably  likely  that   further
      enquiries will be made as appropriate in the circumstances and any new
      information arising as a result will be assessed on its merits.
139. Given the finding of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  and  my  conclusion
    that he appears to have accepted that the appellant was detained by the
    anti-terror branch, I believe that the appellant will be transferred to
    the police station attached to the  airport  for  further  questioning.
    When questioned he cannot be expected to lie  and  if  he  answers  the
    questions asked of him honestly, this is likely to reveal that  he  has
    been of previous interest to the anti-terror branch.   I  believe  that
    there is a very real and serious risk  that  such  further  questioning
    will result in the appellant being transferred for further  questioning
    and inquiries by the anti-terror police.   I  believe  that  given  the
    appellant's family profile and the fact that he has previously been the
    subject of interest by the anti-terror branch, that  there  must  be  a
    real and significant risk that the appellant will be  perceived  to  be
    involved in what the authorities regard as being  separatist  terrorist
    activities and at risk of serious harm.

140. The making  of  the  decision  by  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Powell
    involved the making of an error on  a  point  of  law.   I  remake  the
    decision myself. I have concluded, therefore, that there is a very real
    and serious risk that if the appellant is  returned  to  Turkey  he  is
    likely to face persecutory harm for a  Refugee  Convention  reason.   I
    allow his asylum appeal.







Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                  Appendix

   The appendix referred to in Paragraph 7 of the attached determination.

         "1.  With regard to paragraph 13, Medeni Babahan, Raife Babahan and
             Ali Haydar Babahan are my relatives and had  to  flee  due  to
             persecution they suffered due to their ethnicity and political
             opinion.  They suffered problems in Turkey like me.  They also
             claimed asylum.
         2.   With  regard  to  paragraph  14,  Orhan  Babahan  is  also  my
             relative.  He  is  still  involved  in  pro-Kurdish  political
             activities in the UK.  My family and relatives are from a very
             political background.   I  have  provided  evidence  of  Cahit
             Babahan, Mehmet Selim Babahan, Yatar Babahan, Kamuran  Babahan
             and Erhan Babahan.  The Home Office have accepted now  that  I
             am related to a family member that is  pro-Kurdish.   Even  my
             surname itself is likely to raise concerns  with  the  Turkish
             authorities because my family and relatives are well known  to
             the Turkish authorities to be politically active fighting  for
             Kurdish rights.


         3.   With regard to paragraph 24, I have given a  truthful  account
             of my first detention.  Even the Secretary  of  State  accepts
             that reports confirm that children in detention have  suffered
             torture similar to how I have explained my experiences  in  my
             witness statement.  However, the Secretary of State goes on to
             state I haven't  provided  any  evidence  to  substantiate  my
             claimed detention or torture.  My detention was in the village
             and I  do  not  have  any  documents  confirming  that  I  was
             detained.  However,  the  authorities  did  not  hand  me  any
             documents confirming this.


         4.   With regard to  paragraph  26-27,  I  have  given  a  truthful
             account of what I have  suffered  and  provided  documents  in
             support where I could.  There is not much more  I  can  do  to
             state my case.


         5.   With regard to paragraph 30, there were  small  demonstrations
             everywhere on 16th August, 2006, not just in  Gaziosman  Pasa.
             Not all events were recorded.  I was there and  witnessed  the
             demonstration.


         6.   With regard to paragraph 33, I was very young when I  went  to
             Austria.  I was interrogated at the  airport  and  I  informed
             them that I was  afraid  to  return  to  Turkey.   However,  I
             believe I did not go through  a  formal  process  of  claiming
             asylum as  I  have  here.   I  had  one  conversation  via  an
             interpreter  over  the  telephone.   I  did  not  receive  any
             documentation  or  anything  to  suggest   a   formal   asylum
             application was being considered.  I was only given a card  to
             enter and exit the detention camp.


         7.   With regard to paragraph 34, I gave the Austrian officials the
             wrong name and destroyed the ticket because I  was  instructed
             to do so by my friends with whom I was travelling with  [sic].
             I relied on them as they were the elders and I was very  young
             at the  time.   I  did  not  want  to  lie  but  followed  the
             instructions of my friends.


         8.   With regard to paragraph 36, I was missing my family  so  much
             and  was  not  used  to  living  without  my   family.    More
             importantly I was being harassed by the Austrian police almost
             every day.  I was treated like dirt and thought I should  risk
             returning home rather than suffer anymore in Austria.


         9.   With regard to paragraph 37, in February 2007, I was both  fly
             posting and distributing leaflets.  We were in a group sharing
             the tasks.


         10.  With regard to paragraph 38, I have provided an  article  from
             Info-Turk and a bulletin from the Human Rights Foundation.  If
             you visit the sister organisation, Human  Rights  Association,
             you will find the  same  article.   I  will  provide  this  in
             evidence with translation.  You can find the  article  on  the
             following web address:


                     http://www.ihd.org.tr/raporlar-mainmenu-86/yk-raporlar-
             mainmenu-103.jtml.


             If you go to the 2007  annual  report,  on  page  254,  second
             paragraph, you will find the article  confirming  that  I  was
             detained on 13th February, 2007 in Istanbul.  It can  also  be
             found at: http://www.info-turk.be/342.htm.


         11.  With regard to paragraph  39,  the  article  from  FIRAT  News
             Agency is  genuine.   Furthermore,  I  wish  to  clarify  that
             Kirackoy is an area of Esenyurt which is  in  Istanbul.   Yeni
             Mahalle  is  a  neighbourhood  of  Kirackoy.   This  area  was
             operated by  gendarmes  at  the  time.   Now  the  police  are
             operating  there  instead  of  gendarmes.   I  have   provided
             evidence of this also.


         12.  I was detained for 2 days and released on 15th February  2007.
             The newspaper article was  published  on  16th  February.   My
             family were concerned about me.   I  suffered  psychologically
             due to  this  detention.   I  still  suffer  from  nightmares,
             insomnia and depression.  Contacting the newspapers was not my
             family's first priority.


         13.  With regard to paragraph  41,  the  law  is  not  followed  in
             Turkey.  My mother was not  given  news  about  my  detention.
             There is a law in Turkey that torture is prohibited but as  is
             clear from the evidence, the law is clearly not followed.


         14.  With regard to paragraphs 42-44, as I stated above the correct
             procedure is not followed by the authorities.  Furthermore,  I
             was not subjected to the official procedure so I did not  have
             a solicitor.


         15.  With regard to paragraph 46, the  police  searched  the  house
             only once but they interrogated my mother for two and  a  half
             months.  The authorities are still coming to my mother's house
             and asking questions about my whereabouts.


         16.   With  regards  to  paragraphs  50-53,  I  was  released  from
             detention only on condition.  My mother is still  being  asked
             about  my  whereabouts.   Therefore,  it  is  clear  that  the
             authorities would be interested in me.  Due to  my  background
             they believe that  I  have  joined  the  PKK.   They  know  my
             relatives have joined the PKK and some have been killed  while
             fighting for the PKK.


         17.  With regard to paragraphs 54-57, I would be  killed  before  I
             even reach military service.  Even if I survive  my  detention
             on return, I would be persecuted during my  military  service.
             Three relatives have been killed during military service,  the
             most recent being Ercan Yesilkaya,  who  was  killed  in  July
             2010.  I have provided evidence  of  this.   This  shows  that
             someone from my background would be at  risk  during  military
             service.  However, due to my previous political activities and
             detentions, the risk to me would be extremely dangerous.   The
             authorities are still harassing my mother to find out about my
             whereabouts.


         18.   Due  to  recent  events  the  tension  between  the   Turkish
             authorities  and  PKK  has  increased   significantly.    Many
             operations are  being  conducted  by  the  authorities.   Many
             supporters  of   Kurdish   legal   parties,   solicitors   and
             journalists have been detained.  This would also increase  the
             risk significantly to me.


         19.  With regard to paragraphs 66-74, since I have come to the  UK,
             I have lived mostly with uncle, Orhan Babahan, and his  family
             as a minor.  I came to the  UK  when  I  was  very  young  and
             extremely afraid.  Fortunately, my uncles  have  looked  after
             me.  I feel like they are now my family.  My uncles are  still
             supporting me financially.  As I have stated above, I suffered
             from psychological problems due  to  my  last  detention.   My
             uncles and their families have helped me get better.  However,
             since being refused by the Home Office, knowing that  I  could
             be sent back to Turkey has made my condition worse again.


         20.  With regard to my failure to report in June 2007, the  Howe  &
             Co letter dated 29 June 2007 is correct because I received  my
             IS96 late.  My solicitor asked for another IS96  to  be  sent.
             However, I didn't receive any  IS96.   This  is  what  I  have
             stated   in   the   additional   statement.    There   is   no
             contradiction.  I have been honest  throughout  and  tried  to
             comply with all conditions given to me by the Home Office.   I
             should not be unfairly punished due to no fault of my own.


         21.  I have explained the many factors which clearly show the risk
             I would face if I were returned to Turkey.  My family and
             relatives are aware of what the Turkish authorities are
             capable of.  I kindly request my life be saved by allowing me
             to  remain in the UK."
