
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13273/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd August 2016                   |On 6th September 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M A
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clark, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms V Easty, Counsel instructed by Messrs Sultan
Lloyd Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



 1. The Secretary of State challenged the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Graham promulgated on 19th May 2016 whereby he purported to allow
    an appeal "to the limited extent that the matter is  referred  back  to
    the Secretary of State for a lawful decision to be made".

 2. The background to the appeal was that the appellant is a minor born  on
    28th January 2001 and a citizen of Egypt who claimed that at the age of
    12 his parents passed away and thereafter his maternal uncle  sent  him
    to the UK.  When he first came to the UK the appellant claimed he was a
    Syrian national.  The appellant thereafter  claimed  that  he  was,  in
    fact, from Egypt and he gave a variety of explanations as to why he was
    claiming asylum.  He left Egypt in the summer of 2014 and travelled via
    Italy and France arriving in the UK on 23rd  August  2014  and  claimed
    asylum on the following day.  He was the subject of an  age  assessment
    by the Northamptonshire Social Services on 3rd March 2015  and  he  was
    adjudged to be 14 years of age and born on 28th January 2001.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham noted that the appellant had  appealed
    against the decision to refuse to grant him asylum under paragraph 336,
    humanitarian protection and protection under  the  European  Convention
    for the Protection of Human  Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms.   That
    appeal was under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002.

 4. The judge made limited findings and noted the key  point  made  by  the
    Home Office at paragraph 27 was that the  appellant  had  an  uncle  in
    Egypt who took responsibility for his care following his father's death
    and that the Secretary of State did not  accept  that  the  appellant's
    claim that he had lost contact with the uncle in Egypt.  The  Secretary
    of State therefore found there were adequate  reception  facilities  in
    place for the appellant to return there safely. The judge had  this  to
    say at paragraph 28:

         "I am referred to the Home Office Guidelines  at  17.7  UASC  Leave
         which states the UK Border Agency has a policy commitment  that  no
         unaccompanied child will be removed from the United Kingdom  unless
         the  Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that  safe  and  adequate
         reception arrangements are in place in the  country  to  which  the
         child is to be removed.  The guidelines refer to the best interests
         and  duty  under  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship   and
         Immigration Act 2009 (at 17.8) and state: The availability of  safe
         and adequate reception arrangements is only one factor to  consider
         when deciding whether a person should be  granted  UASC  leave.   A
         full account needs to be given to the following:

           . The best interests of the child must be taken into account  as
             a primary consideration in the decision; and

           . The duty to have regard to the need to safeguard  and  promote
             the welfare of the child in accordance with Section 55 and the
             statutory guidance that accompanies it ("Every child  matters"
             - change for children).

         The 1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) is the  main
         legal instrument on the protection of children.   While  the  UNCRC
         neither offers a precise definition or explicitly  outlines  common
         factors of the best interests of the child, it stipulates that:

           . The best interests must be taken into  account  as  a  primary
             consideration  for  all  other  actions  affecting   children,
             whether undertaken by  a  public  or  private  social  welfare
             institution, courts  of  law,  administrative  authorities  or
             legislative bodies."

 5. The judge also noted paragraphs 33, 34, 35, 36 and 37:

         "33. Importantly for this appeal, at 17.9 headed  Outright  Refusal
             the guidelines state that a decision to refuse  outright  must
             follow a detailed consideration of the above factors including
             how best interests under Section 55 duty  has  been  assessed.
             The assessment of these  factors  must  be  reflected  in  the
             decision  letter  and  the  decision  approved  by  a   Senior
             Caseworker.

         34.  In the present case the Appellant was aged only fourteen years
             at the time of the interview and he was asked  to  talk  about
             this situation in Egypt when he was thirteen years of age.   I
             am satisfied that any inconsistencies regarding  the  date  he
             last had content with his uncle in Egypt  must  be  considered
             whilst taking account of the Appellant's age.  Such factors as
             how the questions were asked; whether they were asked in rapid
             succession, etc. should be  considered.   The  fact  that  the
             Appellant  was  accompanied  by  a   representative   of   the
             Appellant's  legal  firm  and  that  the  Appellant   or   the
             representative did not complain about  the  interview  at  the
             time does not detract  from  these  factors  which  should  be
             considered.

         35.  Regarding the Respondent's decision not to grant discretionary
             leave I am satisfied that the Respondent has not made  contact
             with the Appellant's uncle  in  Egypt  and  therefore  I  have
             referred to the Home Office guidance at  17.8  which  lists  a
             number of factors which the Respondent ought to  take  account
             of before making an outright refusal of discretionary leave.

         36.  The Appellant has been in the United Kingdom for two years, is
             in education here and age  wise  he  is  nearing  the  end  of
             adolescence and therefore  at  an  important  stage.   He  has
             integrated into life in the United Kingdom and removing him to
             Egypt at this time would amount to a serious disruption in his
             life.  I am satisfied that the case worker for  the  Secretary
             of State has not considered the correct test  before  reaching
             an outright refusal decision in this case.

         37.  I have concluded that the Respondent's  decision  was  not  in
             accordance with  the  law.   It  suffered  from  a  defect  in
             procedure.  The effect of this determination  in  relation  to
             this  element  of  the  Secretary  of  State's   decision   is
             accordingly that the decision is quashed and  the  application
             remains outstanding awaiting a lawful decision."

 6. The nub of this is that the judge was satisfied that the respondent had
    not made contact with the appellant's uncle  in  Egypt  and  the  judge
    noted the number of factors that should have been  taken  into  account
    before making an outright refusal of discretionary leave.   The  judge,
    as a consequence, allowed the matter to the limited extent that it  was
    returned to the Secretary of State for a decision to be made.

 7. The challenge by the Secretary of State was  made  on  the  basis  that
    under the latest  version  of  Section  86  of  the  2002  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act the Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    simply required to determine an appeal.  Section 86  must  be  read  in
    conjunction with Section 84 such that  a  judge  could  only  determine
    those matters which are able to be raised that is to say that the judge
    could only allow the appeal if the  removal  would  breach  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention, breached the United
    Kingdom's obligations in relation to persons eligible for  humanitarian
    protection or was unlawful under Section 6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998.

 8. In this case the judge simply did not engage with the permitted grounds
    and made a finding that was not open to him  under  the  new  statutory
    framework.

Conclusions

 9. It is correct to say that indeed the permission to appeal grant  states
    that the decision was dated 13th November 2015 and it was arguable that
    the Tribunal exceeded its  jurisdiction  in  purporting  to  allow  the
    appeal on the ground that it was not in accordance with the law.

10. Section 86 with the rubric 'Determination of appeal' reads as follows

    (1)  This section applies on an appeal under section 82(1)

    (2)  the Tribunal must determine

         (a)  any matter raised as a ground of appeal..., and

         (b)  any matter with Section 85 requires it to consider

11. The grounds of appeal are set out in Section 84,  and,  even  with  the
    consideration of Section 85 are limited to  those  which  constitute  a
    ground as listed in Section 84.   The grounds in Section 84  relate  to
    the removal of the appellant from the  UK  in  breach  of  the  Refugee
    Convention,  removal  in  breach  of   obligations   in   relation   to
    humanitarian protection and whether removal is unlawful under Section 6
    of the Human Rights Act 1998.  Gone  is  the  ground  of  appeal  under
    Section 84(1)(f) that the decision is not in accordance with the law.

12. Ms Easty made a valiant  attempt  to  persuade  me  that  the  decision
    contained no error of law. I was referred to the various  decisions  of
    Katsonga ("Slip Rules"; FtT's general powers)  [2016]  UKUT  228  (IAC)
    which confirmed that following the repeal  by  the  2014  Act  of  sub-
    Section (3) to (6) of  Section  86  of  the  2002  Act  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeared to have no duty or  power  to  allow  or  dismiss  an
    appeal.

13. That said Ms Easty submitted  that  the  decision  of  Greenwood  No  2
    confirmed that although remittal to the Secretary of State was not  one
    of the disposal powers now available to the First-tier  Tribunal  those
    powers were threefold, first to allow the appeal, second to dismiss the
    appeal or thirdly to make a decision to the effect whereof is that  the
    Secretary of State either must or may make a fresh decision.

14. I note Ms Easty's submission was that the decision of  the  judge  fell
    within the third category.  If I was not with her she requested that  I
    remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.  Ms Easty stated that what
    was important was the effect of the judge's decision and the judge  did
    in effect make a factual finding to the effect that the  appellant  was
    not in contact with his uncle.  She urged me to follow Greenwood  No  2
    (paragraph 398 considered) [2015] UKUT 00629 and effectively find  that
    the decision fell into the category whereby the Secretary of State must
    make a new decision.

15. Mr Clark, by contrast, was clear that the judge had made  no  effective
    findings in relation to the matter under appeal.

16. For the purposes of this decision it is worth repeating paragraph 17 of
    Greenwood No 1 which pondered on the new Section 86 of the  Nationality
    and Asylum Act in relation to the determination of appeal and had  this
    to say:

         "I think it is in general doubtful whether the First-tier  Tribunal
         has jurisdiction to remit a matter to a decision-maker.  It  has  a
         power to allow or dismiss an appeal; and if allowing an  appeal  it
         has power to give directions, with which  the  Secretary  of  State
         must comply.  It does not formally have  the  power  to  quash  the
         decision under appeal, but it is well understood that a decision of
         the Tribunal to the effect that the decision was not in  accordance
         with the law prevents the decision-maker  from  relying  on  it  or
         acting on it so that it is to that extent of no effect.   In  those
         circumstances, if  the  decision  is  one  which  results  from  an
         application  made  by  an  individual  the  position  is  that  the
         application is outstanding awaiting a lawful decision.  No remittal
         is necessary.  ..."

    At paragraph 18:

         "If on the other hand the decision is one which results not from an
         application but from the  Secretary  of  State's  own  motion  (for
         example   deportation,   removal,   curtailment)   the   Tribunal's
         determination that the decision was an unlawful one  simply  leaves
         the matter open as it was before  ...  it  is  not  the  Tribunal's
         function to suggest that such action ought to be reinitiated."

17. As noted in the subsequent decision of Greenwood No 2 at the headnote

         (iii)    Remittal to the Secretary of  State  is  not  one  of  the
         disposal powers available to the Ftt which are threefold, to  allow
         the appeal to dismiss the appeal or to make a decision  the  effect
         whereof is that the Secretary of State either must or  may  make  a
         fresh decision.

    At paragraph 21, the President considered that the option to  allow  an
    appeal and simultaneously to make directions in order to give effective
    decision as per Section 87 of the 2002 Act had been repealed  and  thus
    Greenwood No 1 needed to be read with that adjustment.   The  President
    stated at [21] of Greenwood No 2

         "We consider it clear that prior to the most  recent  amendment  of
         section 86, the FtT, in determining statutory appeals, had two main
         choices viz to allow or dismiss the  appeal.  A  third  and  fourth
         option were also available. The third option was to allow an appeal
         and, simultaneously, to make directions in order to give effect  to
         its decision, per section 87 of the 2002 Act as  amended.  However,
         this has been repealed  by  paragraph  37  of  Schedule  9  to  the
         Immigration Act 2014, effective from 20 October 2014. Thus [17]  of
         Greenwood (Automatic Deportation: Order of Events) [2014] UKUT  342
         (IAC) , which predated this statutory  development,  must  be  read
         with this adjustment. The fourth possible outcome of an  appeal  to
         the FtT, as Greenwood noted, was the following. If  the  effect  of
         the Tribunal's decision was to conclude that the  decision  of  the
         Secretary of State under appeal was unlawful and the  Tribunal  did
         not substitute another decision:

         (a)   if  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  involved  a
             determination of an application made by the litigant, a lawful
             decision remains to be made by the Secretary of State - and it
             is preferable that the FtT say so clearly;

         (b)  alternatively, if the challenge in the appeal was to  an  "own
             motion" decision of the Secretary of  State,  it  would  be  a
             matter for the Secretary of State to decide whether a  further
             decision should be made in the wake of the FtT's decision.

         This is, in effect, a declaratory decision."

18. It would seem that there is a third option which  would  appear  to  be
    that the Tribunal must make a decision

         "the effect whereof is that the Secretary of State either  must  or
         may make a fresh decision where  the  Tribunal's  decision  was  to
         conclude that the decision of the Secretary of State  under  appeal
         was unlawful".

    Despite Ms Easty's valiant attempts to persuade me otherwise,  that  is
    not the language in or the effect of the decision promulgated by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Graham.  At paragraph 37  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge concluded that

         "The respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.   It
         suffered from a defect in procedure".

    That may be permissible, however, he then went on to state

         "The effect of this determination in relation to  this  element  of
         the Secretary of State's decision is accordingly that the  decision
         is quashed and  the  application  remains  outstanding  awaiting  a
         lawful decision".

    The judge then at paragraph 38 recorded that in effect

         "The appeal was allowed to the limited extent that  the  matter  is
         returned to the Secretary of State for a decision to be made".

19. To all intents and purposes this is quashing the decision and remitting
    the matter  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  is  contrary  to  the
    provisions as illustrated in Greenwood No 2.  That is a material  error
    of law.   Further,  the  judge  should  have  made  findings  and  then
    determined the issue in accordance with Section 86 of  the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

20. The judge records at [27] that

         'The Home Office rely on the Appellant's evidence that  he  has  an
         uncle in Egypt who took responsibility for his care  following  his
         parents'  death.  The  Secretary  of  State  does  not  accept  the
         Appellant's claim that he has lost contact with the uncle in  Egypt
         and therefore finds that there are adequate reception  arrangements
         in place for the Appellant to return safely to Egypt'.

    The decision then concentrates on the duty under  S55  of  the  Borders
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the departure of the Secretary
    of State from her policy but in relation to the key question of contact
    with the uncle there are effectively none  or  very  limited  findings.
    The judge records at [35]

         'I am satisfied that the respondent has not made contact  with  the
         Appellant's uncle in Egypt'.

21. There are no findings about the  credibility  or  plausibility  of  the
    appellant losing or regaining contact with the uncle.  I  am  therefore
    mindful of the very  limited  fact-findings  that  were  undertaken  in
    relation to this decision and I am persuaded  that  the  matter  should
    indeed be returned to the Tribunal of the First-tier in  order  that  a
    determination of the full facts in relation to the matters under appeal
    are fully considered and established.  This would be required  even  in
    order to follow the third option described in Greenwood No 2.

22. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
