
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13081/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th August 2016                  |On 08th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                               MUSTAFA SAMADI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wilford, Counsel, for Tuckers, Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan whose age was disputed at the
    date of the first-tier hearing.  He appealed against  the  decision  of
    the Respondent dated 4th November 2015 refusing his asylum  claim,  his
    claim on humanitarian protection issues, his human rights claim and his
    claim under the Immigration Rules.  His appeal was heard  by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Veloso on 22nd March 2016 and was dismissed  on
    all issues, in a decision promulgated on 8th April 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ransley on 1st  June  2016.
    An application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    lodged and permission was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  on
    20th July 2016.  The permission states that the First-tier  Judge  gave
    many reasons for not believing the Appellant.  One of the  reasons  was
    the failure of the Appellant to provide supporting evidence on a  point
    of contention.  The  permission  states  that  findings  based  on  the
    absence of evidence need  particular  care  but  are  not  unlawful  in
    principle and other credibility reasons were given but  if  a  lack  of
    supporting evidence is the main reason for disbelieving someone it  may
    be that the finding as a whole is suspect.  The permission states  that
    the Upper Tribunal Judge is  satisfied  that  the  grounds  raised  are
    arguable and he states that when the decision is considered as a  whole
    and with the benefit of submissions from both sides, these grounds  may
    be found to be sound.  The Upper  Tribunal  Judge  stated  that  he  is
    satisfied that the grounds merit a hearing.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response on file from the Respondent.   She  submits
    that  the  Judge  of   the   First-tier   Tribunal   directed   herself
    appropriately and was entitled to come to the conclusion she did on the
    evidence before her.  The response states that the reasoning  given  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge was lawful  and  the  judge  was  drawing
    negative inferences from the lack  of  detail  in  the  evidence.   The
    response states that clear findings were made on the entire  claim  and
    reasons were given which were open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

The Hearing

 4. I was handed written submissions by the Presenting Officer.

 5. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the evidence of Mr  [M]  which
    corroborated the Appellant's claim that he would be at risk in his home
    area of Afghanistan, was treated  incorrectly  by  the  judge.   I  was
    referred to paragraphs 38 and 39 of the decision  which  refer  to  his
    oral evidence and paragraph 44 of the decision  which  is  the  judge's
    treatment of his evidence.   Mr  [M]'s  evidence  is  that  he  visited
    Afghanistan in 2015 and at that time was told by  his  uncle  that  the
    Appellant would face problems in his home area  from  Lieutenant  Nabi,
    who is the Appellant's uncle.  Counsel submitted that at  paragraph  39
    of the decision the judge states that the Appellant made no mention  of
    Mr [M] in his witness statement, nor was he asked about Mr [M] when  he
    was giving his oral evidence and he was not asked about  his  knowledge
    of the conversation Mr [M] had had with his uncle in the village.   The
    judge finds  Mr  [M]'s  evidence  to  lack  credibility.   The  grounds
    challenge the dismissal  of  this  evidence,  finding  that  irrelevant
    considerations have been taken into account.  The grounds state that it
    was irrational for the judge to treat this evidence in the way she did.
     Counsel submitted that this challenge is on the basis of fairness.

 6. I was referred to the Respondent's written submissions at paragraph  8,
    which state that the judge found that in spite of the fact that Mr  [M]
    returned from Afghanistan in May 2015 and visited the Appellant,  there
    was no  mention  of  Mr  [M]'s  evidence  in  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement and this lacked  credibility.  The  judge  found  that  this,
    combined with the fact that Counsel on behalf of the Appellant, did not
    seek to clarify Mr  [M]'s  conversation  with  the  Appellant  in  oral
    evidence, again indicated a lack  of  credibility.   Counsel  submitted
    that the judge has made an assumption  here,  being  that  Mr  [M],  on
    return to the United Kingdom, immediately went  to  see  the  Appellant
    with this information.  He submitted that there is no evidence  to  say
    when they met prior to  the  hearing.   He  submitted  that  there  was
    therefore no evidential basis on which the judge could  have  concluded
    that Mr [M] and the Appellant met as soon as Mr  [M]  returned  to  the
    United Kingdom, a year before the hearing.

 7. Counsel submitted that Mr [M]'s evidence goes to the core of the claim.
     He submitted that it is not sufficient to say that the judge conducted
    an appropriate assessment of the other evidence before her.   Mr  [M]'s
    statement corroborated the core of the account.  He submitted that  the
    judge could have raised the points she now doubts at the hearing,  with
    the Appellant and Mr [M] who gave evidence.  He submitted that had that
    been done and the judge had then found Mr [M] not to be  credible,  the
    situation would have been different.   He  submitted  that  this  is  a
    material error because of the relevance  of  Mr  [M]'s  evidence.   The
    judge has denied the Appellant an opportunity to  fully  put  his  case
    forward.

 8. I was asked to set aside the decision and remit the appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that he is  relying  on  his  Rule  24
    response dated 1st August 2016 and his written submissions.

10. He submitted that Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins granted  permission  but
    stated that the point raised is a moot  point.   Judge  Perkins  agrees
    that the judge has assessed all the facts including Mr  [M]'s  evidence
    and has made reference to Mr [M]'s letter which was  dated  ten  months
    after he had been to Afghanistan and five days before the  hearing  and
    notes that the  Appellant  makes  no  mention  of  it  in  his  witness
    statement.  He submitted that if Mr [M] and the Appellant are from  the
    same village, on return to the United Kingdom Mr [M]  would  have  told
    the Appellant what he had  been  told  and  the  Appellant  would  have
    referred to it in his witness statement.  He submitted that it is up to
    the Appellant to make his case and it is not credible that Mr [M] would
    have waited a lengthy period before giving information relevant to this
    appeal to the Appellant.  He submitted that in these  circumstances  it
    was open for the judge to reach the decision she did.

11. The Presenting Officer referred to the many problems  which  the  judge
    had with the evidence at the hearing.  At paragraph 41 of the  decision
    she considers all the evidence.  She refers to inconsistencies  in  the
    Appellant's evidence which the Appellant failed to explain.  The  judge
    pointed out that the Appellant adopted the contents  of  the  documents
    and then contradicted them in his oral evidence.  The judge gave little
    weight to the Appellant's ID document as it showed an issue date  after
    the Appellant had  left  Afghanistan  and  she  found  that  the  other
    witnesses,  including  the  Appellant's  sister,   gave   contradictory
    evidence.

12. The Presenting Officer submitted that proper reasons were given by  the
    judge in her decision and there was no unfairness.  He  submitted  that
    the Appellant was not denied an opportunity to address the points which
    the judge found to be lacking in credibility and it  was  open  to  the
    judge to make the  findings  she  did  about  Mr  [M]'s  evidence.   He
    submitted that even if her attitude relating to that issue is an error,
    it is not a material error.

13. I was asked to uphold the First-tier Judge's  decision  dismissing  the
    appeal.

14. Counsel submitted that it was irrational for the judge  to  make  these
    findings on Mr [M]'s evidence.  He submitted  that  the  timing  of  Mr
    [M]'s statement and its length were obvious credibility points  so  the
    judge should have asked for an explanation and it was unfair  that  the
    Appellant and Mr [M] were not given an opportunity to explain.

15. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  made  clear  findings  about  Mr  [M]'s
    evidence and the fact that the Appellant did not mention Mr [M]'s  trip
    to Afghanistan or his conversation with his uncle in his statement.  At
    paragraph 44 she states that she did not find Mr [M]'s  evidence  about
    his conversation with his uncle to be credible.  It is  true  that  the
    judge could have asked the Appellant and Mr [M] about this  matter  but
    she stated in paragraph 44 that if his evidence did indeed  go  to  the
    core of the Appellant's case why was there  only  a  four  line  letter
    typed a week before the hearing from him? Why, if he was such a crucial
    witness  did  the  appellant's  representative  not  ask  him  and  the
    appellant about this issue?

16. The judge refers at paragraphs 40 to 43  to  other  matters  which  she
    found to lack credibility.  She explains why she did not give weight to
    the ID document and she  points  out  the  inconsistencies  in  various
    statements and the substantive interview.  At paragraph  42  she  finds
    that these inconsistencies go to the core of the Appellant's claim  and
    she refers to the dates given by the Appellant being  inconsistent  and
    his  sister  giving  contradictory  evidence  to  that  given  by   the
    Appellant.

17. The  judge  has  found  there  to  be  many  credibility  issues.   The
    credibility issue about  Mr  [M]'s  meeting  with  his  uncle  and  the
    Appellant not mentioning this in his statement is  only  one  of  them.
    The judge has given clear reasons for  all  her  credibility  findings.
    Her findings about Mr [M]'s evidence do not form a  material  error  of
    law.

Notice of Decision

18. There is no material error of law in Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Veloso's decision promulgated on 8th April 2016 and her  decision  must
    stand.

19. No anonymity direction has been made.

Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray
