
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13404/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2 August 2016                          |On 9th  August, 2016              |
|Signed and sent for                       |                                  |
|Promulgation on 3rd August, 2016.         |                                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                     C K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Toal, Counsel, instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon who was born on [  ]  1972.   He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent, taken on  27th  March,
    2013, to give directions  for  his  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom
    following refusal of his claim for asylum.

2.   His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham at  Birmingham
    on 1st April, 2016.  In the respect of the appellant's asylum claim  he
    relied on and submitted to the judge a medical report from Dr Charmaine
    Goldwin and a psychological report from Dr Rachel Thomas,  a  chartered
    consultant  clinical  psychologist.   The  judge  considered  the  oral
    evidence she had heard together with the two medical reports to which I
    have referred and a further medical report in the form of a letter from
    a Dr Mishra of the Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health NHS Foundation
    Trust.  She  found  the  appellant  not  to  be  credible.   The  judge
    dismissed the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds,  dismissed  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian grounds and dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

3.   Dissatisfied with the judge's decision he appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and on 3rd June, 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   In  granting  permission,
    Judge Fisher said this:-

         "2.  The grounds seeking permission are lengthy, extending to  some
             five pages.  Space  prevents  me  from  repeating  them  here.
             However, in essence they assert that the judge failed to apply
             to correct standard of proof, especially when considering  the
             medical evidence.  They include a claim that she rejected  the
             credibility of the appellant's account on the basis of factors
             which were irrelevant  to  that  exercise.  The  grounds  also
             assert that the judge misdirected herself as to the effect  of
             the country guidance, having regard  to  the  expert  evidence
             before her, and that she erred in finding that  the  appellant
             would not be at risk  on  return  because  he  had  signed  an
             agreement  with  the  authorities  because  that  amounted  to
             concealing his true opinions.

         3.    In  paragraph  10  of  her  decision,  the  judge   correctly
             identified  the  burden  and  standard  of  proof.   Arguably,
             however, she did not apply it when observing that the  medical
             conclusions fell short  of  being  diagnostic,  and  when  she
             rejected evidence in paragraph 46 of her decision on the basis
             that  it  was  'unlikely'.   It  is  also  arguable  that,  by
             rejecting the appellant's account because he could not produce
             the agreement which he signed, when there was no evidence that
             he had been given a  copy  of  it,  she  applied  too  high  a
             standard of proof."

4.   At the hearing before me, Mr Toal asserted that the  judge  had  failed
    properly to consider the medical evidence before her in the round  with
    all the other evidence before making findings of fact.   In  particular
    she failed to properly consider the medical evidence of Dr Goldwin.  At
    paragraph 44 of the determination the judge  notes  that  the  injuries
    were not considered by the doctor to be diagnostic.  That was an error.
     Criticism is made wrongly by the judge of the fact that the  appellant
    was not told until some years after his father's death, when his cousin
    told him, that his father had been poisoned.  The judge did not find it
    credible that the appellant would not have considered  the  possibility
    of foul play in respect of his father's death  sooner.  However,  until
    the appellant had been told by his cousin  that  his  father  had  been
    poisoned, there was no reason for him to have believed that  there  had
    been foul play. The judge also noted  that  there  were  no  suspicions
    raised by the SDF which the judge thought unlikely,  if  there  were  a
    number of deaths involving high ranking SDF  officials  whilst  holding
    high  office.   The  difficulty  with  that   finding   is   that   the
    circumstances of the individual's deaths were not known and it was  not
    until his cousin told him of his father's being poisoned  that  he  had
    reason to suspect any foul play.

5.   Mr Toal asked me to note that at paragraph 45, the judge accepted  that
    the medical report is capable of being supportive  of  the  appellant's
    account that he was tortured, but in  reality  the  medical  report  is
    compelling evidence of that torture and the judge was obliged to make a
    proper assessment of the evidential weight of the medical report, which
    she failed to do.  The judge failed properly to consider the report  of
    Dr Goldwin and failed also to consider the report of Dr  Thomas,  which
    substantially corroborates the report of Dr Goldwin in respect  of  the
    appellant's PTSD.  The judge says in paragraph 46 that she finds  these
    conclusions to be surprising  given  that  the  appellant  remained  in
    Cameroon between 2008 and 2011.  However, it was improper for the judge
    to discount the expert evidence and unlawful for her to go  behind  the
    reports.

6.   Mr Jarvis suggested that the judge was required to have careful  regard
    to the reports, but it was not necessary for the judge to enter into  a
    dialogue between the medical report and the judge's reasoned  findings.
    The judge says in terms that the scarring in part of the medical report
    of Dr Goldwin is capable of supporting the appellant's claim, but  that
    the judge has to consider it along with the remaining evidence.

7.   The judge noted that scarring was  "highly  consistent"  but  that,  Mr
    Jarvis sought to remind me, is in the mid-range category of consistency
    findings open to the doctor to make under the  Istanbul  Protocol.   In
    short, the judge was entitled to find that she did and did not err.

8.   Both representatives agreed that were I  to  find  that  there  was  an
    error of law, the most appropriate course of action would  be  for  the
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing  afresh
    before a judge other than Judge Graham.

9.   Having carefully read the reports of Dr Goldwin  and  of  Dr  Thomas  I
    believe that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Graham  has  erred  in  failing
    properly to take account of the evidence before her.

10.  I do not believe that the judge's finding  that  it  was  not  credible
    that the appellant would not have considered the  possibility  of  foul
    play in respect of his father's death sooner than he did, was  open  to
    the judge to make, given that it was not until 2002 that the  appellant
    says his cousin told him that his father had been poisoned.  Similarly,
    I do not believe that the finding in the first sentence of paragraph 46
    was one which was open  to  the  judge  to  make.  She  criticises  the
    appellant for not recalling the doctor's name when asked at  interview,
    but takes no account of the fact that the appellant had been  suffering
    from PTSD and as Dr Thomas said at paragraphs 69 and 70:-

          "69.    [the appellant] currently finding it  extremely  difficult
         to concentrate on his studies in college and said that  fortunately
         his tutor is very understanding and patient with him.  He  reported
         finding it very difficult to focus on his  work  and  that  he  was
         always forgetting things he has learned.

         70.  [the appellant] also described general forgetting, such as  if
         he has an appointment.  He said that, in his circumstances, that he
         has to ask a  friend  to  remind  him  of  the  appointment  as  he
         otherwise always forgets."

11.  Also in paragraph 46, the judge, unfairly in my view,  makes  criticism
    of the appellant for being unable to submit a  copy  of  the  agreement
    which he says he signed in Cameroon.  However, the  appellant  says  in
    his statement at page 76 of the  appellant's  bundle  (paragraph  111),
    that he was not given a copy of the agreement,  suggesting  again  that
    perhaps the judge has failed to consider  the  evidence  placed  before
    her. The judge says at paragraph 46 that she does not find any part  of
    the appellant's account relating to  the  agreement  he  signed  to  be
    credible, but when one considers the reasons given by  her  for  making
    such a finding, they are, in my view, wholly inadequate.

12.  At paragraph 55, having already said that she did not  find  that  part
    of the appellant's account relating to him having signed  an  agreement
    in 2008 to be credible, the judge went on at paragraph 55 to say:-

         "I am  therefore  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  would  face
         persecution or serious harm if returned to Cameroon.  There  is  no
         satisfactory evidence that the  authorities  ever  had  an  adverse
         interest in the appellant, but even if I am wrong on this  point  I
         do not accept that the authorities in  Cameroon  authorities  [sic]
         would have resumed an adverse interest in the appellant  since  the
         agreement he says he made in 2008. It follows, I am  satisfied  the
         appellant can safely return to  his home area in Cameron  where  he
         has a large number of siblings and extended family members who  can
         provide a viable support system. I therefore  dismiss  this  asylum
         appeal."

13.  The judge made that finding notwithstanding her  earlier  finding  that
    she did not find the appellant's evidence relating to the agreement  to
    be credible.

14.  In the circumstances, I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge has erred in law by failing to properly consider the  appellant's
    evidence.  Both representatives were agreed that in the  event  that  I
    found an error of law and set  aside  the  determination  it  would  be
    necessary for me to remit the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    hearing afresh before a judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Graham.

15.  Accordingly, I set aside the determination of Judge  Graham  and  remit
    the appeal for hearing before a First-tier Judge other than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Graham.  A French Cameroon speaking interpreter will  be
    required at the hearing for which I  would  respectfully  suggest  that
    three hours should be allowed.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



Anonymity

    The  First-tier  Tribunal  made   an   anonymity   direction.   Neither
    representative asked me to vary or amend that direction which  remains.
    No report of these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify
    the appellant or any  member  of  the  appellant's  family  life.  This
    direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure
    to comply with this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Fee Award

    No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

