
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/13844/2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 22 May 2013                                |On 3 July 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE C MAILER

                                   Between

                          MR ABDUL MALEK BENYOUCEF

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Naik, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Algeria born on  21  November  1961.   He
    left Algeria on 10 October 1993 and travelled to Pakistan.  He  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on or around 21 July 1994.  He claimed asylum  on
    29 July 1994.  On 13 September 1999 a letter was sent to him  regarding
    the backlog process.

2.   His wife Lynda Mecheti entered the United Kingdom  illegally  2000/2001
    and claimed as his dependant.  The couple have two  children  who  were
    born in the UK; Safie, born on 25 February 2003 and is  10  years  old,
    and Youcef, born on 26 December 2005 and is 7  years  old.   Youcef  is
    dependent on the appellant's claim.  Safie, who was also  dependent  on
    the appellant's claim was on 26 April  2013  registered  as  a  British
    citizen.

3.   On 22 August 2005 the appellant submitted an application under the  ILR
    exercise.  This was refused  on  30  November  2006.   The  appellant's
    asylum claim was finally considered and refused  on  8  April  2008,  a
    delay of almost fourteen years.  The  respondent  made  a  decision  to
    remove the appellant and the dependants on 6 June  2008.  The  decision
    was served on the appellant on 21 October 2009, a further delay  of  16
    months. The appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  decision  was
    dismissed by  Immigration  Judge  Head  in  a  determination  dated  17
    February 2010 on  asylum,  Article  ECHR  and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

4.   On 22 April 2010 the appellant was granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    Immigration Judge's decision.  Senior Immigration Judge Warr said  that
    the very lengthy delay  in  this  case  may  arguably  require  further
    consideration in the context of Article 8.  All the grounds  of  appeal
    may be argued but it was this point principally on which permission  to
    appeal was granted.

5.   The appellant's appeal came  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Eshun  and
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington.  For  the  reasons  set  out  in
    their decision dated 30 August 2012,  the  Upper  Tribunal  found  that
    there was an error of law and the decision was set aside.

6.   The reasons of the Upper Tribunal are set out below:-

         "11. In this instance the Appellant had been in the United  Kingdom
             for 14 years prior to a decision being  taken  on  his  asylum
             claim. The only justification given by the Respondent for  the
             delay was that it had advised the  Appellant's  solicitors  of
             the  progress  of  the  case.  Weight  in  relation   to   the
             Appellant's  private  life  was  assessed  by  the  First-tier
             Tribunal Judge in terms that there was no evidence before  her
             to show that the  Appellant  and  his  wife  had  commitments,
             responsibilities or ties either in their  immediate  community
             or in the  wider  community.   It  was  however  part  of  the
             evidence presented that both the children were at primary  and
             nursery school respectively. Further his  criminal  conviction
             had been taken into account by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
             but  no  certificate  in  relation  to  the  length   of   the
             Appellant's conviction was produced by the Respondent.

         12.  There was no reference to  EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008]  UKHL  41
             where the House of Lords considered the matter  of  delay  and
             decided that weight be given to both the importance of  family
             life and to the need for firm and  fair  immigration  control.
             However, delay in determining an application  may  affect  the
             weight given to immigration  control  in  that  the  applicant
             might develop closer personal ties and a tentative quality  of
             a  relationship  would  be  diminished  as  time  elapsed  and
             enforcement did not take  place.   Delay  could  diminish  the
             weight to be accorded to the requirements  of  firm  and  fair
             immigration control if it resulted from a dysfunctional system
             which yielded unpredictable, inconsistent and unfair outcomes.



         13.  We consider that the appropriate balancing exercise  regarding
             whether  interference  was  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end to be  sought,  had  not  been  undertaken  as  the
             relevant factors and the weight given to those factors had not
             been duly considered.

         14.  Secondly, at the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
             determination  Section  55  of  the  Borders  Citizenship  and
             Immigration Act 2009 was in force.   This  confirms  that  the
             welfare of the children must be safeguarded and promoted.   We
             accept that Section 55 was not in force at  the  date  of  the
             Respondent's decision and we accept that the  Judge  did  give
             some consideration to the children's interests at paragraph 48
             of her determination.  We also note that ZH (Tanzania) expands
             the concept of the consideration of the welfare of  the  child
             by expounding the best interests principle and was  determined
             in February 2011.  Indeed the UN Convention of the  Rights  of
             the Children was ratified by the United Kingdom government  in
             1991. However, there was little exploration of the welfare  of
             the children and the consideration in relation to the children
             was given insufficient weight and priority.

         15.  The Judge made an adverse finding of credibility  against  the
             Appellant.  However it was not clear what  factors  the  Judge
             accepted in relation to the Appellant.  She appeared to reject
             his account and chronology of his detentions,  time  spent  in
             hiding, summonses, his arrest warrant, and the death  sentence
             but with regards to his profession as a teacher, his  time  in
             Pakistan, his work for the Islamic Charity and his time  spent
             out of Algeria there did not appear to be clear findings. With
             this in mind it is not altogether apparent  what  profile  the
             Appellant is considered by the Judge  to  have  and  thus  the
             assessment under AF and the comparison with the  Appellant  in
             AF was not made  based  on  clear  findings.   The  assessment
             therefore did not meet the requirement of identifying the risk
             factors that are relevant in AF and applicable at present.

         16.  For the reasons above we found that there was an error of  law
             and we proceeded to set aside the decision."


7.   The appellant's case came before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Craig  on  26
    February 2013.  During the course of the hearing, Mr Melvin  on  behalf
    of the respondent informed the Tribunal that it was very likely  indeed
    that the appellant  and  his  family  would  be  granted  a  period  of
    discretionary leave.  On behalf of the appellant, Miss Naik of  Counsel
    reserved  the  appellant's  position  pending  negotiations  with   the
    respondent as to the period of  leave  which  would  be  granted.   The
    appeal came before me for mention on 19 April  2013.   Mr  Melvin  said
    that the appellant and his family would be granted leave to remain  for
    two and a half years in line with the discretionary leave policy.  Miss
    Naik and the appellant were not happy with the period  of  leave  as  a
    result of which Mr Melvin withdrew the offer  of  discretionary  leave.
    The appellant's appeal on asylum and Article 8 grounds was  listed  for
    hearing on 22 May 2013.

8.   Both parties submitted skeleton arguments in support of their case.

9.   At the hearing the Tribunal indicated  to  Mr  Melvin,  in  particular,
    that we were of the view that the appellant had strong grounds on which
    we could allow  his  Article  8  appeal  despite  Mr  Melvin's  written
    submissions to the contrary.  Mr Melvin acknowledged that his Article 8
    argument was not a strong one.  He submitted that the  evidence  seemed
    to suggest that the appellant was not living  with  his  wife  and  two
    children although they had all appeared in court today.   We  took  the
    view that even if he was separated from his wife, on his  own  account,
    he did have a very strong Article 8 claim particularly in view  of  the
    fact that the Secretary of State had taken  almost  fourteen  years  to
    decide his asylum application.  This  went  against  the  principle  of
    legitimate immigration control.  In those fourteen years  and  to  date
    the appellant has established a strong family and private life  in  the
    UK.  Not only that he now has a daughter who is a British national  and
    cannot be removed from the UK.  Therefore no useful  purpose  would  be
    served in separating the family.

10.  We also indicated to Counsel that our view was that the  appellant  did
    not have a strong asylum claim.  There were two reasons for  our  view;
    the fist was the lapse of time  since  the  appellant  first  made  his
    application for asylum; and secondly, in her skeleton  argument  of  20
    pages, only two pages had been devoted to the appellant's asylum  claim
    as  an  alternative  argument.   We  allowed  Counsel  time   to   take
    instructions  from  the  appellant  and  her  instructing   solicitors.
    Counsel then informed the Court that the appellant wished  to  withdraw
    part of his case, that is,  the  asylum  claim;  he  was  pursuing  his
    Article 8 claim.

11.   We  accepted  the  withdrawal  of  the  appellant's  asylum  case   in
    accordance with Rule 17 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

Article 8 ECHR

12.  As the respondent made her decision on 6 June 2008, we  find  that  the
    new Immigration Rules which incorporated Article 8 into the Immigration
    Rules and which came into force on 9 July 2012  do  not  apply  to  the
    appellant's case.  We note however that at paragraph 46 of her skeleton
    argument, Counsel submitted that the appellant would fall within one of
    the defined exceptions.  This is where the applicant has a genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a child who is under the  age  of
    18; is in the UK; is a British citizen of has lived continuously in the
    UK for at least 7 years immediately preceding the date  of  application
    and it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  UK.
    Furthermore the new rules provide for the grant of leave on  the  basis
    of private life where an applicant is under the age of 18 and has lived
    in  the  UK  for  at  least  7  years  (discounting   any   period   of
    imprisonment).

13.  Counsel's argument is flawed for two reasons; the  first  is  that  the
    children were both born after the date of the  appellant's  application
    for asylum and, secondly, the appellant is not under the age of 18,  he
    is 52.  Neither child has made an application to remain  in  their  own
    right.  We find that the appellant does not  fall  within  any  of  the
    exceptions under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

14.  In any event we find that the appellant does not  fall  within  any  of
    the exceptions under paragraph 276 ADE of the  Immigration  Rules.   He
    has not lived continuously in the UK for at  least  twenty  years.   He
    also has a conviction for which he served 4 months in prison.

15.  We now consider the appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the  ECHR  in
    the context of the Razgar principles.

16.  We find that the appellant, his wife and two children have  established
    family and private life in the UK.  The appellant has been  in  the  UK
    since 21 July 1994, a period of almost nineteen years.  The  respondent
    did not decide his asylum claim for another eighteen  years,  which  is
    extraordinary.  The respondent has not provided an explanation for  the
    delay.  The appellant's wife entered the UK in 2001, albeit  illegally,
    and has been in the UK for about twelve years.  Their two children were
    born in the UK.  In a report by Dr Bell, which  is  dated  22  February
    2013, we learned that the appellant about three months  ago  had  moved
    back in with his wife  and  children.   The  appellant,  his  wife  and
    children attended the hearing today.  As far as we are concerned,  they
    are a family unit.  Even if he is separated from his wife from time  to
    time for whatever reason, we find that this does not affect his Article
    8 appeal.   The appellant has been in the UK long enough and  the  fact
    that he is back with his children shows that  there  is  a  family  and
    private life which is worth protecting and which engages Article 8(1).

17.  We find that the decision of the respondent  will  interfere  with  the
    appellant's established family and private life.  The interference will
    lead to grave consequences.

18.  The respondent's extraordinary delay of fourteen years before  deciding
    the appellant's asylum claim indicates to us that  the  respondent  was
    not mindful of the need to maintain immigration control in this case.

19.  We now consider proportionality.

20.  The appellant has been in the UK  for  nineteen  years,  his  wife  for
    twelve years and his two children were born in the UK.  The daughter is
    now a British national.  His son is 7 years old.  The appellant  has  a
    conviction for  possession  of  a  false  document  which  he  admitted
    obtaining in order to seek employment.  He was convicted on  20  August
    2002 and served a period of four months.  As of now we  find  that  his
    sentence may have become spent.

21.  We take into account that during the appellant's time in the UK he  has
    been diagnosed with various adverse health conditions, tuberculosis and
    HIV for which he is receiving treatment.

22.  The  appellant's  daughter  Safie  is  a  British  citizen  and  cannot
    reasonably be expected to relocate to Algeria. She  is  doing  well  at
    school.  Youcef was born in the UK and  is  7  years  old.   He  is  in
    primary school and having lived here all his life we find  that  it  is
    not reasonable to expect him to relocate to Algeria.  We rely on  Renee
    Cohen, the Independent Social Worker's opinion that the  children  have
    lived all their lives in the UK and it would be utterly  against  their
    best  interests  to  be  uprooted  from  their  settled   lives.    The
    appellant's wife has been in the UK for twelve years.  She is the carer
    of their British born daughter and son and  it  is  not  reasonable  to
    expect her  to  relocate  to  Algeria  with  the  appellant.  The  best
    interests of the children we find lies with both parents.

23.  We find that the delay in deciding the appellant's  asylum  application
    has had a detrimental effect on the appellant.  He has been  unable  to
    work and provide for  his  family.   This  has  led  to  the  appellant
    becoming depressed and feeling that there is nothing to live  for.   In
    his interview with Dr Bell he said that his wife gets fed up  with  him
    and he understands this because he feels life is too difficult for her.
     On the other hand he knows his wife would never leave him but he links
    this to her religious convictions rather than her  love  for  him.   Dr
    Bell says that the appellant  continues  to  suffer  from  feelings  of
    despair, nihilistic ideations, pervasive feelings of guilt, self  blame
    and particularly shame and believes that his life is not worth  living.
    There is suicidal ideation, although he  has  never  acted  upon  this.
    Whilst we do not find that his diagnosis reaches the high threshold  of
    Article 3, it does fall to be considered  as  part  of  his  Article  8
    appeal.  We find on this evidence that the appellant's removal from the
    UK would adversely affect his mental condition.

24.  The appellant told Dr Bell that he sees friends only  rarely  and  that
    he is very socially isolated.  Occasionally friends visit him  but  not
    regularly.  He has a circle of Algerian friends but  they  have  become
    rather distanced from him, although they remain  important  to  him  in
    some ways.




25.  On the totality of the evidence before us we  find  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate to remove the appellant and his  dependants  from  the
    United Kingdom.

26.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.










Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

