
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13384/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 September 2016                 |On 27 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     GS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Jegarajah of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge L. K. Gibbs, promulgated on 26 May 2016,  in  which  she
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  refusal  to
    grant asylum.


 2. We make an anonymity direction, continuing that made in the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


         "The appellant's history  of  ill-treatment  was  accepted  by  the
         respondent.  It is arguable that the FTTJ erred in failing to  take
         account of the appellant's credibility in that regard and proceeded
         on a mistake of fact concerning the detention and reporting of  the
         appellant's father."


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.  We  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives.


Submissions


 5. Ms Jegarajah stated that she  was  confining  her  submissions  to  the
    ground  of  appeal  relating  to  the  error  of  fact  regarding   the
    requirement of the Appellant's father to  report  to  the  authorities.
    She made no submissions in relation to the ground set out in  paragraph
    [6], and stated that she did not want to pursue  the  ground  regarding
    failure to engage with the psychiatric report (paragraph [7]).


 6. She submitted that the judge had made a clear error of  fact  regarding
    the requirement of the Appellant's father to report.  In paragraph [19]
    the judge had made a straightforward assertion of  fact  when  she  had
    stated that the Appellant had not attributed his  father's  requirement
    to report to the authorities' interest in the Appellant until his  oral
    evidence at  the  hearing.   This  was  wrong.   We  were  referred  to
    paragraph [5] of the reasons for refusal letter.   It  was  clear  that
    this had always been the basis of the Appellant's claim, even when  the
    Respondent had summarised his case.  We were referred to paragraph [31]
    of the Appellant's witness statement where the Appellant had  addressed
    this point.  Regarding the significance of the Appellant not mentioning
    this to the clinicians, the Appellant did not need to show that he  had
    told them, as he had clearly stated prior to this that his  father  had
    to report because of him.


 7. In relation to the materiality of this error,  a  large  chunk  of  the
    Appellant's claim had  been  accepted  by  the  Respondent.   The  risk
    assessment had been carried out on the basis  that  the  Appellant  had
    been released after showing the authorities where the weapons were, and
    therefore, as far as the authorities were concerned, his job was  done.
    She submitted that it was open  to  another  judge  to  find  that  the
    authorities wanted to undertake a further  investigation.   Given  that
    the Appellant had said that he had known  where  weapons  were  hidden,
    there was every reason for the authorities to want to go back to him.


 8. The reason why his father  was  reporting  was  a  relevant  factor  in
    deciding risk on return.  It was a straightforward error of fact  which
    went to a fundamental issue.


 9. Mr. Clarke relied on the Rule 24 response.  He referred to Q334 of  the
    asylum interview, and submitted that this was  sufficiently  vague  for
    the judge to find that the oral evidence given at the  hearing  was  an
    evolution of this vague evidence.  There was no more than an  inference
    in the answer to Q334 that the reason that the Appellant's  father  had
    to sign on was because of the Appellant.   He  submitted  that  it  was
    clear that the evidence had evolved between the  asylum  interview  and
    the oral evidence given at the hearing.  It was  significant  that  the
    Appellant had not mentioned this to Dr. Persaud.


10. In relation to materiality, he submitted that the judge  had  correctly
    found that an ongoing interest in the Appellant was  inconsistent  with
    the country guidance [18].  LTTE links alone were insufficient to  show
    a risk on return.  It was open to the judge to make the  findings  that
    she had and it was critical that the Appellant had not  told  mentioned
    his father's reporting to Dr Persaud.

11. In response Ms Jegarajah submitted that there  was  a  clear  error  of
    fact.  It had always formed part of the Appellant's initial claim  that
    his father had to report because of him.   He  had  provided  the  most
    detailed evidence that he could in his statement.  The  error  of  fact
    was significant and undermined the risk assessment.

12. We reserved our decision which we set out below with reasons.

Decision and Reasons

13. Paragraph [19] of the decision states:

         "Although I place weight on the fact that the respondent has  found
         the core of the appellant's claim to be true, with regards  to  his
         claim regarding his father I find that he has not provided detailed
         evidence, and it was only in his oral evidence that  he  attributed
         his father's reporting requirement to the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
         trying to find him (the appellant).  I also  consider  that  it  is
         significant that the appellant did not mention this development  to
         either  Dr  Martin  or  Dr  Persaud,  and  consider  that  this  is
         particularly relevant regarding Dr Persaud's report given that  the
         appellant discussed with him why he is afraid of returning  to  Sri
         Lanka.  In my view it is reasonable to expect that,  if  true,  the
         appellant would  have  raised  this  issue  in  his  mental  health
         examination and his failure to do so undermines the credibility  of
         this aspect of his claim."

14. At Q334 of his asylum interview the Appellant was asked to explain  why
    the authorities would still be interested in him seeing  as  two  years
    had passed since his detention in 2012.  He replied:

         "Because I came out because a bribe was paid.  My father is signing
         on in Kirochi.  He told me over the phone.  They have asked him  to
         sign on until I surrender."

15. We find that at his asylum interview the Appellant clearly  linked  his
    father's  requirement  to  report  with  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities'
    interest  in  the  Appellant  himself.   Further,  we  find  that   the
    Respondent accepted that this was the basis of his claim.  In paragraph
    [5] of the reasons for  refusal  letter,  summarising  the  Appellant's
    claim and future fear,  it states:

         "While you have been in the UK, your father has been ordered by the
         Sri Lankan army to report to the Kilinochchi military base  once  a
         month until you return to Sri Lanka and report to the army."

16. Further, in paragraph [45] of the  reasons  for  refusal  letter,  when
    dealing with the Appellant's detention  by  the  Sri  Lankan  army,  it
    states:

         "It is noted that you claimed that your father has been ordered  to
         report to the Sri Lankan army base at Kilinochchi every month while
         you have been in the UK, as a means of forcing you to return to Sri
         Lanka to report to the military."

17. In his witness statement, the Appellant states:

         "The Sri Lankan army admits they have stop list of LTTE members and
         supporters.  Regularly these people are stopped upon return to  Sri
         Lanka.  Many do not have the chance to have a trial and the  reason
         that my father was ordered to report was because  I  consider  that
         they must have had some new information about me and that is why my
         father was targeted (paras 45-46 rfrl), and the  Home  Office  have
         unreasonably rejected my account of being of  adverse  interest  to
         the authorities and of my father being ordered to report (paras 47-
         49 rfrl)." [31]

18. We find that it is clear from this evidence,  including  evidence  from
    the Respondent, that the Appellant's claim was that his father had been
    ordered to report until the Appellant himself returned  to  Sri  Lanka.
    We find that he did not raise it for the first time in  oral  evidence.
    We therefore find that, when the judge states that it was only  in  the
    Appellant's oral evidence that he  attributed  his  father's  reporting
    requirement to the Sri Lankan authorities trying to find the  Appellant
    himself, the judge has made an error of fact [19].  She has  failed  to
    take into account the asylum interview and the witness statement.   She
    has also failed to acknowledge that the Respondent accepted  that  this
    was the basis of the Appellant's claim.  We find that it was always the
    Appellant's claim that his father had been asked to report  because  of
    him.

19. Given that he had raised this at his asylum interview, and  given  that
    it been accepted by the Respondent, we find  that  whether  or  not  he
    mentioned this to Dr. Persaud is not relevant to the issue  of  whether
    the judge has made an error of law when she stated that  he  raised  it
    for the first time in oral evidence.

20. We find that this error of fact  led  the  judge  to  make  an  adverse
    credibility finding [19].  Paragraph [20] states:

         "Therefore, although the core of the Appellant's claim is accepted,
         I find that his claim that his father has been targeted by the  Sri
         Lankan authorities because of him, and that this is evidence of the
         ongoing interest, is not reliable evidence."

21. Given that the Appellant had always linked his father's requirement  to
    report with the Sri Lankan authorities having an interest  in  him,  we
    find that the Appellant had been consistent  about  this  part  of  his
    claim, and had not embellished his claim at the hearing.  This goes  to
    the question of credibility.  The Respondent had accepted the  core  of
    the Appellant's claim, which is acknowledged by the  judge  [19].   She
    finds that  his  claim  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  are  still
    interested in him is  not  credible  due  to  her  adverse  credibility
    finding made as a result of an error of fact.

22. Whether or  not  the  authorities  have  an  ongoing  interest  in  the
    Appellant is material to the issue of risk on return.  Given  that  the
    Respondent had accepted the core of the Appellant's  claim,  and  given
    that the judge made an error of fact in relation to the evidence  about
    the Sri Lankan authorities' ongoing interest in him, we find  that  the
    error is material.

23. We have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February 2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, and having regard to  the
    overriding objective, we find that it is appropriate to remit this case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision


24. The decision involves the making of a material error of law and we  set
    it aside.


25. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 27 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

