
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13082/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16th January 2017                     |On 1st February 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy of Counsel instructed by S Satha &
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  I continue
    that direction as follows:

    DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY -  RULE  14  OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE
    (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant.  This direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties.  Any failure to comply with this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Background

 2. On 9th November 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal E  B  Grant  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Broe who dismissed the appeal  on  all  grounds
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse  asylum,  humanitarian
    and human rights protection to the appellant, an adult citizen  of  Sri
    Lanka.

 3. Judge Grant noted that the grounds alleged that  the  First-tier  Judge
    had erred by failing to make findings on evidence before  the  Tribunal
    including a detailed letter from the appellant's uncle who had  secured
    his release from detention and from the  appellant's  mother.   It  was
    also alleged that the judge  had  failed  to  understand  the  evidence
    placed before the  Tribunal,  gave  inadequate  reasons  for  rejecting
    medical evidence and failed to make findings  about  a  second  claimed
    detention.  Further it  was  alleged  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    properly assess risk on return having regard to the imprisonment of the
    appellant's  uncle.   Judge  Grant  thought  all  these  grounds   were
    arguable.

 4. The respondent submitted a response under Rule 24 on 30th November 2016
    suggesting that the First-tier Judge had directed himself appropriately
    and given adequate reasons for rejecting certain evidence. However,  Mr
    Bates conceded that the decision did not show that the judge had regard
    to the letters from the appellant's uncle and mother  or  that  he  had
    made findings in respect of the claimed detentions of the appellant and
    his uncle. He further conceded that that these were errors on  material
    matters.

Error on a Point of Law

 5. Having regard to the concessions made by  Mr  Bates  and  after  I  had
    considered the matter for  a  few  moments,  I  announced  that  I  was
    satisfied that the decision showed errors on points of  law  such  that
    the decision should be set aside and heard  afresh  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 6. I reached the above conclusion noting that,  in  the  findings  of  the
    First-tier Judge from paragraph 34 onwards of the decision,  the  judge
    reaches no conclusions about the claimed periods of detention  for  the
    appellant and his uncle nor is there any mention of the  correspondence
    from the appellant's uncle and mother. This  is  despite  reaching  the
    negative credibility finding  in  paragraph  45.   As  to  the  medical
    evidence relating to scarring, the  judge  also  failed  to  take  into
    consideration that  the  report  by  Mr  Izquierdo-Martin  specifically
    rejected possible alternatives to the scarring found to  be  "typical".
    Finally, in considering risk on  return,  the  judge  appears  to  have
    overlooked the respondent's acknowledgment that the  appellant  had  an
    uncle who had  been  sentenced  to  200  years'  imprisonment  for  his
    involvement in a bombing when considering the risk factors set  out  in
    GJ and Others (Post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT
    00319 (IAC).

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal therefore shows material errors
    on points of law and is set aside.  The appeal is to  be  heard  afresh
    before the First-tier Tribunal where the evidence will be heard  again.
    On this basis the remittal to the First-tier Tribunal accords with  the
    provisions of paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement  for  the  First-
    tier and Upper Tribunal by the Senior President of Tribunals dated 25th
    September 2012.

DIRECTIONS

 8. The re-hearing of the appeal will take place at the Birmingham  Hearing
    Centre.

 9. The hearing should not take place before Judge Broe.

10. A Tamil interpreter will be required for the re-hearing  and  the  time
    estimate for that hearing is three hours.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

